Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Source of mass 2 Gluon energy 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Quantum chromodynamics binding energy 3 languages العربية עברית Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Energy that binds quarks into hadrons Quantum chromodynamics binding energy ( QCD binding energy ), gluon binding energy or chromodynamic binding energy is the energy binding quarks together into hadrons . It is the energy of the field of the strong force , which is mediated by gluons .

Motion-energy and interaction-energy contribute most of the hadron's mass.

[ 1 ] Source of mass [ edit ] Most of the mass of hadrons is actually QCD binding energy, through mass–energy equivalence . This phenomenon is related to chiral symmetry breaking . In the case of nucleons — protons and neutrons — QCD binding energy forms about 99% of the nucleon's mass.

The kinetic energy of the hadron's constituents, moving at near the speed of light , contributes greatly to the hadron mass; [ 1 ] otherwise most of the rest is actual QCD binding energy, which emerges in a complex way from the potential-like terms in the QCD Lagrangian .

For protons, the sum of the rest masses of the three valence quarks (two up quarks and one down quark ) is approximately 9.4 MeV/ c 2 , while the proton's total mass is about 938.3 MeV/ c 2 . In the standard model, this "quark current mass" can nominally be attributed to the Higgs interaction . For neutrons, the sum of the rest masses of the three valence quarks (two down quarks and one up quark) is approximately 11.9 MeV/ c 2 , while the neutron's total mass is about 939.6 MeV/ c 2 . Considering that nearly all of the atom 's mass is concentrated in the nucleons, this means that about 99% of the mass of everyday matter ( baryonic matter ) is, in fact, chromodynamic binding energy.

Gluon energy [ edit ] While gluons are massless , they still possess energy — chromodynamic binding energy. In this way, they are similar to photons , which are also massless particles carrying energy — photon energy . The amount of energy per single gluon, or "gluon energy", cannot be directly measured, though a distribution can by inferred from deep inelastic scattering (DIS) experiments (see ref [4] for an old but still valid introduction.) Unlike photon energy, which is quantifiable, described by the Planck–Einstein relation and depends on a single variable (the photon's frequency ), no simple formula exists for the quantity of energy carried by each gluon. While the effects of a single photon can be observed, single gluons have not been observed outside of a hadron. A hadron is in totality [ 2 ] composed of gluons, valence quarks, sea quarks and other virtual particles .

The gluon content of a hadron can be inferred from DIS measurements. Again, not all of the QCD binding energy is gluon interaction energy, but rather, some of it comes from the kinetic energy of the hadron's constituents.

[ 3 ] Currently, the total QCD binding energy per hadron can be estimated through a combination of the factors mentioned. In the future, studies into quark–gluon plasma will better complement the DIS studies and improve our understanding of the situation.

See also [ edit ] Gluon Quark Current quark and constituent quark Hadron Strong force Quantum chromodynamics Chiral symmetry breaking Photon energy Invariant mass and relativistic mass Binding energy References [ edit ] ^ a b Strassler, Matt (15 April 2013).

"Protons and Neutrons: The Massive Pandemonium in Matter" .

Of Particular Significance . Retrieved 30 May 2016 .

^ Cho, Adrian (2 April 2010).

"Mass of the Common Quark Finally Nailed Down" .

Science Magazine .

AAAS . Retrieved 30 May 2016 .

^ Decomposition of the proton mass (Lattice QCD) °  Halzen, Francis and Martin, John, "Quarks and Leptons:An Introductory Course in Modem Particle Physics", John Wiley & Sons (1984).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quantum_chromodynamics_binding_energy&oldid=1241731762 " Categories : Physical quantities Hadrons Quantum chromodynamics Binding energy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 August 2024, at 21:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quantum chromodynamics binding energy 3 languages Add topic

