Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples of Frankish buildings 2 Imperial styles Toggle Imperial styles subsection 2.1 Carolingian art 2.2 Ottonian art 3 Regional styles Toggle Regional styles subsection 3.1 British Isles 3.2 Croatia 3.3 France 3.4 Italy 3.5 Spain and Portugal 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pre-Romanesque art and architecture 28 languages Aragonés Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Hrvatski Italiano Latina Nederlands Nordfriisk Occitan Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art style of Europe between the fall of Rome and the 11th century This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pre-Romanesque art and architecture" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The royal palace, later church, of Santa María del Naranco , an example of Asturian architecture of the Ramirense period The interior of the Church of São Pedro da Lourosa in Lourosa, Portugal Church of St. Margaret of Antioch, Kopčany in Kopčany , Slovakia, 9th–10th centuries The pre-Romanesque period in European art spans the years from the emergence of the Merovingian kingdom around 500 AD (or from the Carolingian Renaissance in the late-8th century) to the beginning of the Romanesque period in the 11th century. While the term is typically used in English to refer primarily to architecture and monumental sculpture , this article will briefly cover all the arts of the period.

The primary theme during this period is the introduction and absorption of classical Mediterranean and Early Christian forms with Germanic ones, which fostered innovative new results. This in turn led to the rise of Romanesque art in the 11th century. In the outline of Medieval art pre-Romanesque was preceded by what is commonly called the Migration Period art of the "barbarian" peoples: Hiberno-Saxon in the British Isles and predominantly Merovingian on the Continent.

In most of western Europe, the Roman architectural tradition survived the collapse of the Roman empire . The Franks of the Merovingian polity continued to build large stone buildings like monastery churches and palaces.

The unification of the Frankish kingdom under Clovis I ( r.

481–511 ) and his successors corresponded with a period of building churches, and especially monastery churches, as these were now the power-houses of the Merovingian church. Two-hundred monasteries existed south of the Loire when St Columbanus , an Irish missionary, arrived in Europe in 585.  Only 100 years later, by the end of the 7th century, over 400 monasteries flourished in the Merovingian kingdom alone.

[ 1 ] The building plans often continued the Roman basilica tradition.

Many Merovingian plans have been reconstructed from archaeology. The description in Bishop Gregory of Tours ' History of the Franks of the basilica of Saint-Martin, built at Tours by Saint Perpetuus (bishop 460–490) at the beginning of the period and at the time on the edge of Frankish territory, gives cause to regret the disappearance of this building, one of the most beautiful Merovingian churches, which Bishop Gregory states had 120 marble columns, towers at the east end, and several mosaics: "Saint-Martin displayed the vertical emphasis, and the combination of block-units forming a complex internal space and the correspondingly rich external silhouette, which were to be the hallmarks of the Romanesque".

[ 2 ] The Merovingian dynasty gave way to the Carolingian dynasty in 752 AD, which led to Carolingian architecture from 780 to 900, and to Ottonian architecture in East Francia (the Holy Roman Empire ) from the mid-10th century until the mid-11th century. These successive Frankish dynasties were large contributors to Romanesque architecture .

Baptistery of Aix Cathedral , built by the Merovingians , AD 500 Examples of Frankish buildings [ edit ] Merovingian , Carolingian and Ottonian Digital reconstruction of Ingelheim Imperial Palace , c. 790 St. Michael's Church in Hildesheim , Germany, 1031 Reconstruction of Charlemagne 's palace in Aachen , Germany, 800 Baptistère de Riez built in the 4th, 5th and 7th centuries Fréjus Cathedral circa 450 AD Crypt of Saint-Laurent Grenoble circa 500 Aix Cathedral circa 500, baptistery built by the Merovingians Baptistère Saint-Jean 507 Baptistère de Venasque circa 500 Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés circa 540 Radegonde de Poitiers Tomb of St. Radegunda 587 Jouarre Abbey 630, Merovingian crypt Kloster Reichenau 724 Benedictine Convent of Saint John , Müstair 780 Granusturm 788, 20-meter-tall tower in Aarchen Lorsch Abbey , gateway, (c. 800) Palatine Chapel in Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle) (792–805) Imperial Palace, Ingelheim 800 Oratory of Bishop Theodulf of Orleans in Germigny-des-Prés 806 St. Ursmar 's Collegiate church, in Lobbes , Belgium (819–823) St. Michael, Fulda , rotunda and crypt (822) Einhard's Basilica , Steinbach (827) Saint Justinus' church, Frankfurt-Höchst (830) Hildesheim Cathedral , original build (872) Schloss Broich 883–884, Carolingian fortress Broich Castle, Muelheim on the Ruhr (884) Abbey of Corvey (885) St. George, Oberzell in Reichenau Island (888) St. Georg (Reichenau-Oberzell) 900 St. Johannis (Mainz) 910 Church of St Philibert, Tournus 950 St. Cyriakus, Gernrode 969 Ottonian and Holy Roman Empire Mainz Cathedral begun 991 and 994 and retains some structure of this period.

St. Michael's Church Hildesheim, 1031 Imperial styles [ edit ] Carolingian art [ edit ] Main articles: Carolingian art and Carolingian architecture Saint Mark, from the so-called Ebbo Gospels , a piece of Carolingian illustration Carolingian art is the roughly 120-year period from about 780 to 900, during Charlemagne 's and his immediate heirs' rule, popularly known as the Carolingian Renaissance . Although brief, it was very influential; northern European kings promoted classical Mediterranean Roman art forms for the first time, while also creating innovative new forms such as naturalistic figure line drawings that would have lasting influence. Carolingian churches generally are basilican , like the Early Christian churches of Rome, and commonly incorporated westworks , which is arguably the precedent for the western facades of later medieval cathedrals. An original westwork survives today at the Abbey of Corvey , built in 885. After a rather chaotic interval following the Carolingian period, the new Ottonian dynasty revived Imperial art from about 950, building on and further developing Carolingian style in Ottonian art .

Ottonian art [ edit ] Main articles: Ottonian art and Ottonian architecture Germanic pre-Romanesque art during the 120-year period from 936 to 1056 is commonly called Ottonian art after the three Saxon emperors named Otto ( Otto I , Otto II , and Otto III ) who ruled the Holy Roman Empire from 936 to 1001.

After the decline of the Carolingian Empire, the Holy Roman Empire was re-established under the Saxon (Ottonian) dynasty. From this emerged a renewed faith in the idea of Empire and a reformed Church, creating a period of heightened cultural and artistic fervour. It was in this atmosphere that masterpieces were created that fused the traditions from which Ottonian artists derived their inspiration: models of Late Antique, Carolingian, and Byzantine origin.

Much Ottonian art reflected the dynasty's desire to establish visually a link to the Christian rulers of Late Antiquity, such as Constantine , Theoderich, and Justinian as well as to their Carolingian predecessors, particularly Charlemagne .

Ottonian monasteries produced some of the most magnificent medieval illuminated manuscripts. They were a major art form of the time, and monasteries received direct sponsorship from emperors and bishops, having the best in equipment and talent available.

Regional styles [ edit ] British Isles [ edit ] Main articles: Anglo-Saxon art and Anglo-Saxon architecture The Benedictional of Saint Aethelwold , an Anglo-Saxon illuminated manuscript Prior to King Alfred the dominant art style in England was the Hiberno-Saxon culture, producing in Insular art the fusion of Anglo-Saxon and Celtic techniques and motifs, which had largely ceased in Ireland and Northern England with the Viking invasions. The period from the time of King Alfred (885) is known as the Anglo-Saxon period proper, with the revival of English culture after the end of the Viking raids, to the early 12th century, when Romanesque art became the new movement. Anglo-Saxon art is mainly known today through illuminated manuscripts and metalwork.

Croatia [ edit ] Main article: Croatian Pre-Romanesque art and architecture Church of St Donatus in Zadar , Croatia, 9th century.

[ 3 ] Monumental pluteus (98 x 183) from the church of St. Nediljica, Zadar, mid-11th century, showing " Massacre of the Innocents ", " Flight into Egypt ", " Baptism ".

[ 4 ] In the 7th century the Croats , with other Slavs and Avars , came from Eastern Europe to the region where they live today. The first Croatian churches were built as royal sanctuaries, and the influence of Roman art was strongest in Dalmatia where urbanization was thickest. Gradually that influence was neglected and certain simplifications and alterations of inherited forms, and even creation of original buildings, appeared.

[ 3 ] All of them (a dozen large ones and hundreds of small ones) were built in various type forms, [ 3 ] with roughly cut stone bounded with a thick layer of mortar on the outside. Large churches are longitudinal with one or three naves like Church of Holy Salvation ( Croatian : Crkva Sv. Spasa ) at the spring of the river Cetina , built in the 9th century, along with the Church of the Holy Cross, Nin in Nin . The largest and most complicated central based church from the 9th century is dedicated to Saint Donatus in Zadar .

[ 3 ] Altar rails and windows of those churches were highly decorated with transparent shallow string-like ornament that is called pleter (meaning to weed) because the strings were threaded and rethreaded through itself. Motifs of those reliefs were taken from Roman art; sometimes figures from the Bible appeared alongside this decoration, like pluteus relief in Holy Nedjeljica in Zadar, and then they were subdued by their pattern. This also happened to engravings in early Croatian script – Glagolitic . Soon, the Glagolitic writings were replaced with Latin on altar rails and architraves of old-Croatian churches.

[ 3 ] From the Crown Church of King Zvonimir (so called Hollow Church in Solin ) comes the altar board with figure of Croatian King on the throne with Carolingian crown, servant by his side and subject bowed to the king.

[ 3 ] By joining the Hungarian crown in the twelfth century, Croatia lost its full independence, but it did not lose its ties with the south and the west, and instead this ensured the beginning of a new era of Central European cultural influence.

France [ edit ] After the demise of the Carolingian Empire, France split into a number of feuding provinces, so that lacking any organized Imperial patronage, French art of the 10th and 11th centuries became localised around the large monasteries, and lacked the sophistication of a court-directed style.

Multiple regional styles developed based on the chance availability of Carolingian manuscripts (as models to draw from), and the availability of itinerant artists. The monastery of Saint Bertin became an important centre under its abbot Odbert (986–1007) who created a new style based on Anglo-Saxon and Carolingian forms. The nearby abbey of Saint Vaast created a number of works. In southwestern France at the monastery of Saint Martial in Limoges a number of manuscripts were produced around year 1000, as were produced in Albi , Figeac and Saint-Sever-de-Rustan in Gascony . In Paris there developed a style at the abbey of Saint Germain-des-Prés . In Normandy a new style developed from 975 onward.

Italy [ edit ] See also: Lombard Romanesque Southern Italy benefited from the presence and cross-fertilization of the Byzantines, the Arabs, and the Normans, while the north was mostly controlled first by the Carolingians. The Normans in Sicily chose to commission Byzantine workshops to decorate their churches such as Monreale and Cefalù Cathedrals where full iconographic programmes of mosaics have survived. Important frescos and illuminated manuscripts were produced.

Spain and Portugal [ edit ] Main article: Iberian pre-Romanesque art and architecture Santiago de Peñalba , an example of mozarabic iberian art The first form of Pre-Romanesque in Spain and Portugal was the Visigothic art , that brought the horse-shoe arches to the latter Moorish architecture and developed jewellery.

After the Moorish occupation, Pre-Romanesque art was first reduced to the Kingdom of Asturias , the only Christian realm in the area at the time which reached high levels of artistic depuration. (See Asturian art ). The Christians who lived in Moorish territory, the Mozarabs , created their own architectural and illumination style, Mozarabic art .

The best preserved Visigothic monument in Portugal is the Saint Frutuoso Chapel in Braga .

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pre-Romanesque architecture .

Asturian architecture References [ edit ] ^ "History of Art:Barbarian Art" .

^ V.I. Atroshenko and Judith Collins, The Origins of the Romanesque (Lund Humphries, London) 1985, p. 48.

ISBN 0-85331-487-X ^ a b c d e f Ivančević, Radovan (1999). "The Pre-Romanesque in Croatia - A question of interpretation". In Ivan Supičić (ed.).

Croatia in the Early Middle Ages: A Cultural Survey . London, Zagreb: Philip Wilson Publishers, AGM & HAZU . pp.

417– 444.

ISBN 0856674990 .

^ Petricioli, Ivo (1999). "Sculpture from the 8th to the 12th century". In Ivan Supičić (ed.).

Croatia in the Early Middle Ages: A Cultural Survey . London, Zagreb: Philip Wilson Publishers, AGM & HAZU . pp.

475– 492.

ISBN 0856674990 .

Joachim E. Gaehde (1989). "Pre-Romanesque Art".

Dictionary of the Middle Ages .

ISBN 0-684-18276-9 Jacques Fontaine (1995) L'art pré-roman hispanique , Nuit des temps, Editions zodiaque ISBN 2-7369-0215-7 External links [ edit ] El Portal del Arte Románico Visigothic, Mozarabe and Romanesque art in Spain.

v t e History of architecture Architectural timeline History of construction BCE Neolithic Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian Aegean Minoan Mycenaean Etruscan Classical Ancient Greek Ancient Roman Herodian Pre-Islamic Persian Achaemenid 1st millennium Sasanian Byzantine East Slavic Kievan Rus' Muscovite Islamic Umayyad Moorish Abbasid Fatimid Islamic Persian Medieval Scandinavian Pre-Romanesque Carolingian 1000–1500 Romanesque Galician Ottonian Norman Indian Hoysala Vijayanagara Western Chalukya Islamic Great Seljuk Anatolian Seljuk architecture Mamluk Timurid Ottoman Indo-Islamic Romano-Gothic Gothic Sondergotik Venetian Mudéjar Incan Aztec Renaissance Plateresque 1500–1750 Manueline Palladian Spanish Colonial Portuguese Colonial Mughal Sikh French Provincial 1750–1900 Baroque Andean Czech Dutch English French Italian Maltese Petrine Elizabethan Naryshkin Portuguese Siberian Ukrainian Industrial British Revivalism Byzantine Russo-Byzantine Serbo-Byzantine Colonial Egyptian Gothic Mayan Mediterranean Mission Monumentalism Baroque Rococo Neoclassical Moorish Mughal Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Pueblo Queen Anne Britain America and Australia Renaissance Romanesque Romanian Russian Spanish Colonial Territorial Tudor Venetian Gothic Revival Art Nouveau Jugendstil Liberty style Modern Style Modernisme Ukrainian Swiss chalet Carpenter Gothic 1900–1950 Rationalism Mycenaean Modern Prairie School Expressionism Cubism De Stijl Bauhaus Constructivism New Objectivity Streamline Moderne Totalitarianism Imperial Crown Rationalist-Fascist Nazi Stalinist International style Functionalism Futurism Organicism Art Deco Stripped Classicism Postconstructivism PWA Moderne Googie Mid-century modern 1950–2000 Brutalism Structuralism New Khmer Postmodern Blobitecture High-tech Arcology Critical regionalism Neo-futurism Art Deco Revival 2000–present Neo-Chinese Deconstructivism Neomodern New Classical Contemporary Regional Chinese Colonial Indian Dravidian Hindu Japanese Korean Mesoamerican Maya Newari Portuguese Russian Spanish Somali v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Spain Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐5h7kk
Cached time: 20250814220917
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.543 seconds
Real time usage: 0.732 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1574/1000000
Revision size: 16742/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 160729/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1620/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 47104/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.330/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23136330/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  530.309      1 -total
 20.73%  109.922      5 Template:Navbox
 17.46%   92.592      1 Template:Reflist
 16.90%   89.645      1 Template:Langx
 16.89%   89.571      1 Template:Archhistory
 12.05%   63.882      1 Template:Cite_web
 11.11%   58.906      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.55%   55.954      1 Template:Short_description
 10.42%   55.276      1 Template:Ambox
  9.55%   50.648      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2146686:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220917 and revision id 1299557157. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pre-Romanesque_art_and_architecture&oldid=1299557157 " Categories : Pre-Romanesque architecture in Spain Medieval architecture Medieval art Architectural history Romanesque architecture Western art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Croatian-language text Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 03:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pre-Romanesque art and architecture 28 languages Add topic

