Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Ancient era 2.2 Middle Ages 2.3 Modern era 3 Branches of engineering 4 Interdisciplinary engineering 5 Practice 6 Methodology Toggle Methodology subsection 6.1 Problem solving 6.2 Computer use 7 Social context Toggle Social context subsection 7.1 Code of ethics 8 Relationships with other disciplines Toggle Relationships with other disciplines subsection 8.1 Science 8.2 Medicine and biology 8.3 Art 8.4 Business 8.5 Other fields 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Engineering 167 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Tshivenda ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Jaku Iban ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Applied science and research For other uses, see Engineering (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Engineering" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The steam engine , the major driver in the Industrial Revolution , underscores the importance of engineering in modern history. This beam engine is on display in the Technical University of Madrid .

Engineering History Outline Glossary A–L M–Z Category Portal v t e Engineering is the practice of using natural science , mathematics , and the engineering design process [ 1 ] to solve problems within technology , increase efficiency and productivity , and improve systems . Modern engineering comprises many subfields which include designing and improving infrastructure , machinery , vehicles , electronics , materials , and energy systems .

[ 2 ] The discipline of engineering encompasses a broad range of more specialized fields of engineering , each with a more specific emphasis for applications of mathematics and science . See glossary of engineering .

The word engineering is derived from the Latin ingenium .

[ 3 ] Definition The American Engineers' Council for Professional Development (the predecessor of the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology aka ABET) [ 4 ] has defined "engineering" as: The creative application of scientific principles to design or develop structures, machines, apparatus, or manufacturing processes, or works utilizing them singly or in combination; or to construct or operate the same with full cognizance of their design; or to forecast their behavior under specific operating conditions; all as respects an intended function , economics of operation and safety to life and property.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History Main article: History of engineering Relief map of the Citadel of Lille , designed in 1668 by Vauban , the foremost military engineer of his age Engineering has existed since ancient times, when humans devised inventions such as the wedge , lever , wheel and pulley , etc.

The term engineering is derived from the word engineer , which itself dates back to the 14th century when an engine'er (literally, one who builds or operates a siege engine ) referred to "a constructor of military engines".

[ 7 ] In this context, now obsolete, an "engine" referred to a military machine, i.e.

, a mechanical contraption used in war (for example, a catapult ). Notable examples of the obsolete usage which have survived to the present day are military engineering corps, e.g.

, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers .

The word "engine" itself is of even older origin, ultimately deriving from the Latin ingenium ( c.

1250 ), meaning "innate quality, especially mental power, hence a clever invention." [ 8 ] Later, as the design of civilian structures, such as bridges and buildings, matured as a technical discipline, the term civil engineering [ 6 ] entered the lexicon as a way to distinguish between those specializing in the construction of such non-military projects and those involved in the discipline of military engineering .

Ancient era The Ancient Romans built aqueducts to bring a steady supply of clean and fresh water to cities and towns in the empire.

The pyramids in ancient Egypt , ziggurats of Mesopotamia , the Acropolis and Parthenon in Greece , the Roman aqueducts , Via Appia and Colosseum , Teotihuacán , and the Brihadeeswarar Temple of Thanjavur , among many others, stand as a testament to the ingenuity and skill of ancient civil and military engineers. Other monuments, no longer standing, such as the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and the Pharos of Alexandria , were important engineering achievements of their time and were considered among the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World .

The six classic simple machines were known in the ancient Near East . The wedge and the inclined plane (ramp) were known since prehistoric times.

[ 9 ] The wheel , along with the wheel and axle mechanism, was invented in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) during the 5th millennium BC.

[ 10 ] The lever mechanism first appeared around 5,000 years ago in the Near East , where it was used in a simple balance scale , [ 11 ] and to move large objects in ancient Egyptian technology .

[ 12 ] The lever was also used in the shadoof water-lifting device, the first crane machine, which appeared in Mesopotamia c.

3000 BC , [ 11 ] and then in ancient Egyptian technology c.

2000 BC .

[ 13 ] The earliest evidence of pulleys date back to Mesopotamia in the early 2nd millennium BC, [ 14 ] and ancient Egypt during the Twelfth Dynasty (1991–1802 BC).

[ 15 ] The screw , the last of the simple machines to be invented, [ 16 ] first appeared in Mesopotamia during the Neo-Assyrian period (911–609) BC.

[ 14 ] The Egyptian pyramids were built using three of the six simple machines, the inclined plane, the wedge, and the lever, to create structures like the Great Pyramid of Giza .

[ 17 ] The earliest civil engineer known by name is Imhotep .

[ 6 ] As one of the officials of the Pharaoh , Djosèr , he probably designed and supervised the construction of the Pyramid of Djoser (the Step Pyramid ) at Saqqara in Egypt around 2630–2611 BC.

[ 18 ] The earliest practical water-powered machines, the water wheel and watermill , first appeared in the Persian Empire , in what are now Iraq and Iran, by the early 4th century BC.

[ 19 ] Kush developed the Sakia during the 4th century BC, which relied on animal power instead of human energy.

[ 20 ] Hafirs were developed as a type of reservoir in Kush to store and contain water as well as boost irrigation.

[ 21 ] Sappers were employed to build causeways during military campaigns.

[ 22 ] Kushite ancestors built speos during the Bronze Age between 3700 and 3250 BC.

[ 23 ] Bloomeries and blast furnaces were also created during the 7th centuries BC in Kush.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Ancient Greece developed machines in both civilian and military domains. The Antikythera mechanism , an early known mechanical analog computer , [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and the mechanical inventions of Archimedes , are examples of Greek mechanical engineering. Some of Archimedes' inventions, as well as the Antikythera mechanism, required sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing or epicyclic gearing , two key principles in machine theory that helped design the gear trains of the Industrial Revolution, and are widely used in fields such as robotics and automotive engineering .

[ 30 ] Ancient Chinese, Greek, Roman and Hunnic armies employed military machines and inventions such as artillery which was developed by the Greeks around the 4th century BC, [ 31 ] the trireme , the ballista and the catapult , the trebuchet by Chinese circa 6th-5th century BCE.

[ 32 ] Middle Ages The earliest practical wind-powered machines, the windmill and wind pump , first appeared in the Muslim world during the Islamic Golden Age , in what are now Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, by the 9th century AD.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] The earliest practical steam-powered machine was a steam jack driven by a steam turbine , described in 1551 by Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf in Ottoman Egypt .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The cotton gin was invented in India by the 6th century AD, [ 39 ] and the spinning wheel was invented in the Islamic world by the early 11th century, [ 40 ] both of which were fundamental to the growth of the cotton industry . The spinning wheel was also a precursor to the spinning jenny , which was a key development during the early Industrial Revolution in the 18th century.

[ 41 ] The earliest programmable machines were developed in the Muslim world. A music sequencer , a programmable musical instrument , was the earliest type of programmable machine. The first music sequencer was an automated flute player invented by the Banu Musa brothers, described in their Book of Ingenious Devices , in the 9th century.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] In 1206, Al-Jazari invented programmable automata / robots . He described four automaton musicians, including drummers operated by a programmable drum machine , where they could be made to play different rhythms and different drum patterns.

[ 44 ] A water-powered mine hoist used for raising ore, Germany, c.

1556 Before the development of modern engineering, mathematics was used by artisans and craftsmen, such as millwrights , clockmakers , instrument makers and surveyors. Aside from these professions, universities were not believed to have had much practical significance to technology.

[ 45 ] : 32 A standard reference for the state of mechanical arts during the Renaissance is given in the mining engineering treatise De re metallica (1556), which also contains sections on geology, mining, and chemistry.

De re metallica was the standard chemistry reference for the next 180 years.

[ 45 ] Modern era The application of the steam engine allowed coke to be substituted for charcoal in iron making, lowering the cost of iron, which provided engineers with a new material for building bridges. This bridge was made of cast iron , which was soon displaced by less brittle wrought iron as a structural material.

The science of classical mechanics , sometimes called Newtonian mechanics, formed the scientific basis of much of modern engineering.

[ 45 ] With the rise of engineering as a profession in the 18th century, the term became more narrowly applied to fields in which mathematics and science were applied to these ends. Similarly, in addition to military and civil engineering, the fields then known as the mechanic arts became incorporated into engineering.

Canal building was an important engineering work during the early phases of the Industrial Revolution .

[ 46 ] John Smeaton was the first self-proclaimed civil engineer and is often regarded as the "father" of civil engineering. He was an English civil engineer responsible for the design of bridges , canals, harbors , and lighthouses . He was also a capable mechanical engineer and an eminent physicist . Using a model water wheel, Smeaton conducted experiments for seven years, determining ways to increase efficiency.

[ 47 ] : 127 Smeaton introduced iron axles and gears to water wheels.

[ 45 ] : 69 Smeaton also made mechanical improvements to the Newcomen steam engine . Smeaton designed the third Eddystone Lighthouse (1755–59) where he pioneered the use of ' hydraulic lime ' (a form of mortar which will set under water) and developed a technique involving dovetailed blocks of granite in the building of the lighthouse. He is important in the history, rediscovery of, and development of modern cement , because he identified the compositional requirements needed to obtain "hydraulicity" in lime; work which led ultimately to the invention of Portland cement .

Applied science led to the development of the steam engine. The sequence of events began with the invention of the barometer and the measurement of atmospheric pressure by Evangelista Torricelli in 1643, demonstration of the force of atmospheric pressure by Otto von Guericke using the Magdeburg hemispheres in 1656, laboratory experiments by Denis Papin , who built experimental model steam engines and demonstrated the use of a piston , which he published in 1707.

Edward Somerset, 2nd Marquess of Worcester published a book of 100 inventions containing a method for raising waters similar to a coffee percolator .

Samuel Morland , a mathematician and inventor who worked on pumps , left notes at the Vauxhall Ordinance Office on a steam pump design that Thomas Savery read. In 1698 Savery built a steam pump called "The Miner's Friend". It employed both vacuum and pressure.

[ 48 ] Iron merchant Thomas Newcomen , who built the first commercial piston steam engine in 1712, was not known to have any scientific training.

[ 47 ] : 32 Jumbo Jet The application of steam-powered cast iron blowing cylinders for providing pressurized air for blast furnaces lead to a large increase in iron production in the late 18th century. The higher furnace temperatures made possible with steam-powered blast allowed for the use of more lime in blast furnaces , which enabled the transition from charcoal to coke .

[ 49 ] These innovations lowered the cost of iron, making horse railways and iron bridges practical. The puddling process , patented by Henry Cort in 1784 produced large scale quantities of wrought iron.

Hot blast , patented by James Beaumont Neilson in 1828, greatly lowered the amount of fuel needed to smelt iron. With the development of the high pressure steam engine, the power to weight ratio of steam engines made practical steamboats and locomotives possible.

[ 50 ] New steel making processes, such as the Bessemer process and the open hearth furnace, ushered in an area of heavy engineering in the late 19th century.

One of the most famous engineers of the mid-19th century was Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who built railroads, dockyards and steamships.

Offshore platform, Gulf of Mexico The Industrial Revolution created a demand for machinery with metal parts, which led to the development of several machine tools . Boring cast iron cylinders with precision was not possible until John Wilkinson invented his boring machine , which is considered the first machine tool .

[ 51 ] Other machine tools included the screw cutting lathe , milling machine , turret lathe and the metal planer . Precision machining techniques were developed in the first half of the 19th century. These included the use of gigs to guide the machining tool over the work and fixtures to hold the work in the proper position. Machine tools and machining techniques capable of producing interchangeable parts lead to large scale factory production by the late 19th century.

[ 52 ] The United States Census of 1850 listed the occupation of "engineer" for the first time with a count of 2,000.

[ 53 ] There were fewer than 50 engineering graduates in the U.S. before 1865. The first PhD in engineering (technically, applied science and engineering ) awarded in the United States went to Josiah Willard Gibbs at Yale University in 1863; it was also the second PhD awarded in science in the U.S.

[ 54 ] In 1870 there were a dozen U.S. mechanical engineering graduates, with that number increasing to 43 per year in 1875. In 1890, there were 6,000 engineers in civil, mining , mechanical and electrical.

[ 50 ] There was no chair of applied mechanism and applied mechanics at Cambridge until 1875, and no chair of engineering at Oxford until 1907. Germany established technical universities earlier.

[ 55 ] The foundations of electrical engineering in the 1800s included the experiments of Alessandro Volta , Michael Faraday , Georg Ohm and others and the invention of the electric telegraph in 1816 and the electric motor in 1872. The theoretical work of James Maxwell (see: Maxwell's equations ) and Heinrich Hertz in the late 19th century gave rise to the field of electronics . The later inventions of the vacuum tube and the transistor further accelerated the development of electronics to such an extent that electrical and electronics engineers currently outnumber their colleagues of any other engineering specialty.

[ 6 ] Chemical engineering developed in the late nineteenth century.

[ 6 ] Industrial scale manufacturing demanded new materials and new processes and by 1880 the need for large scale production of chemicals was such that a new industry was created, dedicated to the development and large scale manufacturing of chemicals in new industrial plants.

[ 6 ] The role of the chemical engineer was the design of these chemical plants and processes.

[ 6 ] Originally deriving from the manufacture of ceramics and its putative derivative metallurgy, materials science is one of the oldest forms of engineering.

[ 56 ] Modern materials science evolved directly from metallurgy , which itself evolved from the use of fire. Important elements of modern materials science were products of the Space Race ; the understanding and engineering of the metallic alloys , and silica and carbon materials, used in building space vehicles enabling the exploration of space. Materials science has driven, and been driven by, the development of revolutionary technologies such as rubbers , plastics , semiconductors , and biomaterials .

The solar furnace at Odeillo in the Pyrénées-Orientales in France can reach temperatures up to 3,500 °C (6,330 °F).

Aeronautical engineering deals with aircraft design process design while aerospace engineering is a more modern term that expands the reach of the discipline by including spacecraft design. Its origins can be traced back to the aviation pioneers around the start of the 20th century although the work of Sir George Cayley has recently been dated as being from the last decade of the 18th century. Early knowledge of aeronautical engineering was largely empirical with some concepts and skills imported from other branches of engineering.

[ 57 ] Only a decade after the successful flights by the Wright brothers , there was extensive development of aeronautical engineering through development of military aircraft that were used in World War I . Meanwhile, research to provide fundamental background science continued by combining theoretical physics with experiments.

Branches of engineering For a topical guide, see Outline of engineering .

Hoover Dam Engineering is a broad discipline that is often broken down into several sub-disciplines. Although most engineers will usually be trained in a specific discipline, some engineers become multi-disciplined through experience. Engineering is often characterized as having five main branches: [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, materials science and engineering, and mechanical engineering.

Below is a list of recognized branches of engineering. There are additional sub-disciplines as well.

Type of engineering Information Aerospace engineering Aerospace engineering covers the design, development, manufacture and operational behaviour of aircraft, satellites and rockets.

Agricultural engineering Agricultural engineering utilizes farm power and machinery, biological material processes, bioenergy, farm structures, and agricultural natural resources.

Biological engineering Biological engineering studies the application of principles of biology and the tools of engineering to create usable, tangible, economically viable products.

Biomedical engineering Biomedical engineering is the application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology for healthcare applications (e.g., diagnostic or therapeutic purposes).

Chemical engineering Chemical engineering is the application of chemical, physical, and biological sciences to developing technological solutions from raw materials or chemicals.

Civil engineering Civil engineering is the design and construction of public and private works, such as infrastructure (airports, roads, railways, water supply, and treatment etc.), bridges, tunnels, dams, and buildings.

Computer engineering Computer engineering integrates several fields of computer science and electronic engineering required to develop computer hardware and software.

Electrical engineering Electrical engineering focuses on the design, development, and application of systems and equipment that utilize electricity and electromagnetism.

Environmental engineering Environmental engineering is a specialized field that uses scientific and engineering principles to protect and improve the environment for human health and well-being.

Geological engineering Geological engineering is associated with anything constructed on or within the Earth by applying geological sciences and engineering principles to direct or support the work of other disciplines.

Industrial engineering Industrial engineering focuses on optimizing complex processes, systems, and organizations by improving efficiency, productivity, and quality.

Marine engineering Marine engineering covers the design, development, manufacture and operational behaviour of watercraft and stationary structures like oil platforms and ports.

Materials engineering Materials engineering is the application of material science and engineering principles to understand the properties of materials.

Mechanical engineering Mechanical engineering comprises the design and analysis of heat and mechanical power for the operation of machines and mechanical systems.

Nuclear engineering Nuclear engineering is a multidisciplinary field that deals with the design, construction, operation, and safety of systems that utilize nuclear energy and radiation.

Software engineering Software engineering is a branch of both computer science and engineering focused on designing, developing, testing, and maintaining software applications. It is distinct from computer engineering .

Interdisciplinary engineering Main article: List of engineering branches Interdisciplinary engineering draws from more than one of the principle branches of the practice. Historically, naval engineering and mining engineering were major branches. Other engineering fields are manufacturing engineering , acoustical engineering , corrosion engineering , instrumentation and control , automotive , information engineering , petroleum , systems , audio , software , architectural , biosystems , and textile engineering .

[ 61 ] These and other branches of engineering are represented in the 36 licensed member institutions of the UK Engineering Council .

New specialties sometimes combine with the traditional fields and form new branches – for example, Earth systems engineering and management involves a wide range of subject areas including engineering studies , environmental science , engineering ethics and philosophy of engineering .

Practice Main article: Regulation and licensure in engineering One who practices engineering is called an engineer , and those licensed to do so may have more formal designations such as Professional Engineer, Chartered Engineer, Incorporated Engineer , Ingenieur , European Engineer . There can also be what is called by the FAA a Designated Engineering Representative .

[ 62 ] Methodology This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Design of a turbine requires collaboration of engineers from many fields, as the system involves mechanical, electro-magnetic and chemical processes. The blades , rotor and stator as well as the steam cycle all need to be carefully designed and optimized.

In the engineering design process, engineers apply mathematics and sciences such as physics to find novel solutions to problems or to improve existing solutions. Engineers need proficient knowledge of relevant sciences for their design projects. As a result, many engineers continue to learn new material throughout their careers.

If multiple solutions exist, engineers weigh each design choice based on their merit and choose the solution that best matches the requirements. The task of the engineer is to identify, understand, and interpret the constraints on a design in order to yield a successful result. It is generally insufficient to build a technically successful product, rather, it must also meet further requirements.

Constraints may include available resources, physical, imaginative or technical limitations, flexibility for future modifications and additions, and other factors, such as requirements for cost, safety , marketability, productivity, and serviceability . By understanding the constraints, engineers derive specifications for the limits within which a viable object or system may be produced and operated.

Problem solving A drawing for a steam locomotive . Engineering is applied to design , with emphasis on function and the utilization of mathematics and science.

Engineers use their knowledge of science , mathematics , logic , economics , and appropriate experience or tacit knowledge to find suitable solutions to a particular problem. Creating an appropriate mathematical model of a problem often allows them to analyze it (sometimes definitively), and to test potential solutions.

[ 63 ] More than one solution to a design problem usually exists so the different design choices have to be evaluated on their merits before the one judged most suitable is chosen.

Genrich Altshuller , after gathering statistics on a large number of patents , suggested that compromises are at the heart of " low-level " engineering designs, while at a higher level the best design is one which eliminates the core contradiction causing the problem.

[ 64 ] Engineers typically attempt to predict how well their designs will perform to their specifications prior to full-scale production. They use, among other things: prototypes , scale models , simulations , destructive tests , nondestructive tests , and stress tests . Testing ensures that products will perform as expected but only in so far as the testing has been representative of use in service. For products, such as aircraft, that are used differently by different users failures and unexpected shortcomings (and necessary design changes) can be expected throughout the operational life of the product.

[ 65 ] Engineers take on the responsibility of producing designs that will perform as well as expected and, except those employed in specific areas of the arms industry , will not harm people. Engineers typically include a factor of safety in their designs to reduce the risk of unexpected failure.

The study of failed products is known as forensic engineering . It attempts to identify the cause of failure to allow a redesign of the product and so prevent a re-occurrence. Careful analysis is needed to establish the cause of failure of a product. The consequences of a failure may vary in severity from the minor cost of a machine breakdown to large loss of life in the case of accidents involving aircraft and large stationary structures like buildings and dams.

[ 66 ] Computer use See also: Computational engineering A computer simulation of high velocity air flow around a Space Shuttle orbiter during re-entry. Solutions to the flow require modelling of the combined effects of fluid flow and the heat equations .

As with all modern scientific and technological endeavors, computers and software play an increasingly important role. As well as the typical business application software there are a number of computer aided applications ( computer-aided technologies ) specifically for engineering. Computers can be used to generate models of fundamental physical processes, which can be solved using numerical methods .

Graphic representation of a minute fraction of the WWW, demonstrating hyperlinks One of the most widely used design tools in the profession is computer-aided design (CAD) software. It enables engineers to create 3D models, 2D drawings, and schematics of their designs. CAD together with digital mockup (DMU) and CAE software such as finite element method analysis or analytic element method allows engineers to create models of designs that can be analyzed without having to make expensive and time-consuming physical prototypes.

These allow products and components to be checked for flaws; assess fit and assembly; study ergonomics; and to analyze static and dynamic characteristics of systems such as stresses, temperatures, electromagnetic emissions, electrical currents and voltages, digital logic levels, fluid flows, and kinematics. Access and distribution of all this information is generally organized with the use of product data management software.

[ 67 ] There are also many tools to support specific engineering tasks such as computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) software to generate CNC machining instructions; manufacturing process management software for production engineering; EDA for printed circuit board (PCB) and circuit schematics for electronic engineers; MRO applications for maintenance management; and Architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) software for civil engineering.

In recent years the use of computer software to aid the development of goods has collectively come to be known as product lifecycle management (PLM).

[ 68 ] Social context Robotic Kismet can produce a range of facial expressions.

The engineering profession engages in a range of activities, from collaboration at the societal level, and smaller individual projects. Almost all engineering projects are obligated to a funding source: a company, a set of investors, or a government. The types of engineering that are less constrained by such a funding source, are pro bono , and open-design engineering.

Engineering has interconnections with society, culture and human behavior. Most products and constructions used by modern society, are influenced by engineering. Engineering activities have an impact on the environment, society, economies, and public safety.

Engineering projects can be controversial. Examples from different engineering disciplines include: the development of nuclear weapons , the Three Gorges Dam , the design and use of sport utility vehicles and the extraction of oil . In response, some engineering companies have enacted serious corporate and social responsibility policies.

The attainment of many of the Millennium Development Goals requires the achievement of sufficient engineering capacity to develop infrastructure and sustainable technological development.

[ 69 ] Radar, GPS , lidar , etc. are all combined to provide proper navigation and obstacle avoidance (vehicle developed for 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge ).

Overseas development and relief NGOs make considerable use of engineers, to apply solutions in disaster and development scenarios. Some charitable organizations use engineering directly for development: Engineers Without Borders Engineers Against Poverty Registered Engineers for Disaster Relief Engineers for a Sustainable World Engineering for Change Engineering Ministries International [ 70 ] Engineering companies in more developed economies face challenges with regard to the number of engineers being trained, compared with those retiring. This problem is prominent in the UK where engineering has a poor image and low status.

[ 71 ] There are negative economic and political issues that this can cause, as well as ethical issues.

[ 72 ] It is agreed the engineering profession faces an "image crisis".

[ 73 ] The UK holds the most engineering companies compared to other European countries, together with the United States.

[ citation needed ] Code of ethics Main article: Engineering ethics Many engineering societies have established codes of practice and codes of ethics to guide members and inform the public at large. The National Society of Professional Engineers code of ethics states: Engineering is an important and learned profession. As members of this profession, engineers are expected to exhibit the highest standards of honesty and integrity. Engineering has a direct and vital impact on the quality of life for all people. Accordingly, the services provided by engineers require honesty, impartiality, fairness, and equity, and must be dedicated to the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Engineers must perform under a standard of professional behavior that requires adherence to the highest principles of ethical conduct.

[ 74 ] In Canada, engineers wear the Iron Ring as a symbol and reminder of the obligations and ethics associated with their profession.

[ 75 ] Relationships with other disciplines Science Scientists study the world as it is; engineers create the world that has never been.

— Theodore von Kármán [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] Engineers, scientists and technicians at work on target positioner inside National Ignition Facility (NIF) target chamber There exists an overlap between the sciences and engineering practice; in engineering, one applies science. Both areas of endeavor rely on accurate observation of materials and phenomena. Both use mathematics and classification criteria to analyze and communicate observations.

[ citation needed ] Scientists may also have to complete engineering tasks, such as designing experimental apparatus or building prototypes. Conversely, in the process of developing technology, engineers sometimes find themselves exploring new phenomena, thus becoming, for the moment, scientists or more precisely "engineering scientists".

[ 79 ] The International Space Station is used to conduct science experiments in space.

In the book What Engineers Know and How They Know It , [ 80 ] Walter Vincenti asserts that engineering research has a character different from that of scientific research. First, it often deals with areas in which the basic physics or chemistry are well understood, but the problems themselves are too complex to solve in an exact manner.

There is a "real and important" difference between engineering and physics as similar to any science field has to do with technology.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Physics is an exploratory science that seeks knowledge of principles while engineering uses knowledge for practical applications of principles. The former equates an understanding into a mathematical principle while the latter measures variables involved and creates technology.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] For technology, physics is an auxiliary and in a way technology is considered as applied physics.

[ 86 ] Though physics and engineering are interrelated, it does not mean that a physicist is trained to do an engineer's job. A physicist would typically require additional and relevant training.

[ 87 ] Physicists and engineers engage in different lines of work.

[ 88 ] But PhD physicists who specialize in sectors of engineering physics and applied physics are titled as Technology officer, R&D Engineers and System Engineers.

[ 89 ] An example of this is the use of numerical approximations to the Navier–Stokes equations to describe aerodynamic flow over an aircraft, or the use of the finite element method to calculate the stresses in complex components. Second, engineering research employs many semi- empirical methods that are foreign to pure scientific research, one example being the method of parameter variation.

[ 90 ] As stated by Fung et al.

in the revision to the classic engineering text Foundations of Solid Mechanics : Engineering is quite different from science. Scientists try to understand nature. Engineers try to make things that do not exist in nature. Engineers stress innovation and invention. To embody an invention the engineer must put his idea in concrete terms, and design something that people can use. That something can be a complex system, device, a gadget, a material, a method, a computing program, an innovative experiment, a new solution to a problem, or an improvement on what already exists. Since a design has to be realistic and functional, it must have its geometry, dimensions, and characteristics data defined. In the past engineers working on new designs found that they did not have all the required information to make design decisions. Most often, they were limited by insufficient scientific knowledge. Thus they studied mathematics , physics , chemistry , biology and mechanics . Often they had to add to the sciences relevant to their profession. Thus engineering sciences were born.

[ 91 ] Although engineering solutions make use of scientific principles, engineers must also take into account safety, efficiency, economy, reliability, and constructability or ease of fabrication as well as the environment, ethical and legal considerations such as patent infringement or liability in the case of failure of the solution.

[ 92 ] Medicine and biology A 3 tesla clinical MRI scanner The study of the human body, albeit from different directions and for different purposes, is an important common link between medicine and some engineering disciplines.

Medicine aims to sustain, repair, enhance and even replace functions of the human body , if necessary, through the use of technology .

Genetically engineered mice expressing green fluorescent protein , which glows green under blue light. The central mouse is wild-type .

Modern medicine can replace several of the body's functions through the use of artificial organs and can significantly alter the function of the human body through artificial devices such as, for example, brain implants and pacemakers .

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The fields of bionics and medical bionics are dedicated to the study of synthetic implants pertaining to natural systems.

Conversely, some engineering disciplines view the human body as a biological machine worth studying and are dedicated to emulating many of its functions by replacing biology with technology. This has led to fields such as artificial intelligence , neural networks , fuzzy logic , and robotics . There are also substantial interdisciplinary interactions between engineering and medicine.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Both fields provide solutions to real world problems. This often requires moving forward before phenomena are completely understood in a more rigorous scientific sense and therefore experimentation and empirical knowledge is an integral part of both.

Medicine, in part, studies the function of the human body. The human body, as a biological machine, has many functions that can be modeled using engineering methods.

[ 97 ] The heart for example functions much like a pump, [ 98 ] the skeleton is like a linked structure with levers, [ 99 ] the brain produces electrical signals etc.

[ 100 ] These similarities as well as the increasing importance and application of engineering principles in medicine, led to the development of the field of biomedical engineering that uses concepts developed in both disciplines.

Newly emerging branches of science, such as systems biology , are adapting analytical tools traditionally used for engineering, such as systems modeling and computational analysis, to the description of biological systems.

[ 97 ] Art Leonardo da Vinci , seen here in a self-portrait, has been described as the epitome of the artist/engineer.

[ 101 ] He is also known for his studies on human anatomy and physiology .

There are connections between engineering and art, for example, architecture , landscape architecture and industrial design (even to the extent that these disciplines may sometimes be included in a university's Faculty of Engineering).

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] The Art Institute of Chicago , for instance, held an exhibition about the art of NASA 's aerospace design.

[ 105 ] Robert Maillart 's bridge design is perceived by some to have been deliberately artistic.

[ 106 ] At the University of South Florida , an engineering professor, through a grant with the National Science Foundation , has developed a course that connects art and engineering.

[ 102 ] [ 107 ] Among famous historical figures, Leonardo da Vinci is a well-known Renaissance artist and engineer, and a prime example of the nexus between art and engineering.

[ 101 ] [ 108 ] Business Business engineering deals with the relationship between professional engineering, IT systems, business administration and change management .

Engineering management or "Management engineering" is a specialized field of management concerned with engineering practice or the engineering industry sector. The demand for management-focused engineers (or from the opposite perspective, managers with an understanding of engineering), has resulted in the development of specialized engineering management degrees that develop the knowledge and skills needed for these roles. During an engineering management course, students will develop industrial engineering skills, knowledge, and expertise, alongside knowledge of business administration, management techniques, and strategic thinking. Engineers specializing in change management must have in-depth knowledge of the application of industrial and organizational psychology principles and methods. Professional engineers often train as certified management consultants in the very specialized field of management consulting applied to engineering practice or the engineering sector. This work often deals with large scale complex business transformation or business process management initiatives in aerospace and defence, automotive, oil and gas, machinery, pharmaceutical, food and beverage, electrical and electronics, power distribution and generation, utilities and transportation systems. This combination of technical engineering practice, management consulting practice, industry sector knowledge, and change management expertise enables professional engineers who are also qualified as management consultants to lead major business transformation initiatives. These initiatives are typically sponsored by C-level executives.

Other fields In political science , the term engineering has been borrowed for the study of the subjects of social engineering and political engineering , which deal with forming political and social structures using engineering methodology coupled with political science principles.

Marketing engineering and financial engineering have similarly borrowed the term.

See also Engineering portal Main article: Outline of engineering Lists List of aerospace engineering topics List of basic chemical engineering topics List of electrical engineering topics List of engineering societies List of engineering topics List of engineers List of genetic engineering topics List of mechanical engineering topics List of nanoengineering topics List of software engineering topics Glossaries Glossary of areas of mathematics Glossary of biology Glossary of chemistry Glossary of engineering Glossary of physics Related subjects Controversies over the term Engineer Design Earthquake engineering Engineer Engineering economics Engineering education Engineering education in the United States Engineering education research Environmental engineering science Global Engineering Education Green engineering Reverse engineering Structural failure Sustainable engineering Women in engineering References ^ Hammack, William; Anderson, John (February 16, 2022).

"Working in the Penumbra of Understanding" .

Issues in Science and Technology .

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and Arizona State University .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2023 . Retrieved August 3, 2023 .

The method used by engineers to create artifacts and systems—from cellular telephony, computers and smartphones, and GPS to remote controls, airplanes, and biomimetic materials and devices—isn't the same method scientists use in their work. The scientific method has a prescribed process: state a question, observe, state a hypothesis, test, analyze, and interpret. It doesn't know what will be discovered, what truth will be revealed. In contrast, the engineering method aims for a specific goal and cannot be reduced to a set of fixed steps that must be followed.

^ definition of "engineering" from the https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/ Archived February 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary © Cambridge University ^ "About IAENG" .

iaeng.org .

International Association of Engineers .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2016 .

^ "About ABET - History" .

Archived from the original on March 26, 2024 . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ "Engineers' Council for Professional Development. (1947). Canons of ethics for engineers" .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2007 . Retrieved August 10, 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g Smith, Ralph J. (March 29, 2024).

"engineering" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on April 25, 2024.

^ "engineer" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Origin: 1250–1300; ME engin < AF, OF < L ingenium nature, innate quality, esp. mental power, hence a clever invention, equiv. to in- + -genium, equiv. to gen- begetting; Source: Random House Unabridged Dictionary, Random House, Inc. 2006.

^ Moorey, Peter Roger Stuart (1999).

Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence .

Eisenbrauns .

ISBN 978-1-57506-042-2 .

^ D.T. Potts (2012).

A Companion to the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East . p. 285.

^ a b Paipetis, S. A.; Ceccarelli, Marco (2010).

The Genius of Archimedes – 23 Centuries of Influence on Mathematics, Science and Engineering: Proceedings of an International Conference held at Syracuse, Italy, June 8–10, 2010 .

Springer Science & Business Media . p. 416.

ISBN 978-90-481-9091-1 .

^ Clarke, Somers; Engelbach, Reginald (1990).

Ancient Egyptian Construction and Architecture .

Courier Corporation . pp.

86– 90.

ISBN 978-0-486-26485-1 .

^ Faiella, Graham (2006).

The Technology of Mesopotamia .

The Rosen Publishing Group . p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-4042-0560-4 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 .

^ a b Moorey, Peter Roger Stuart (1999).

Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence .

Eisenbrauns . p. 4.

ISBN 978-1-57506-042-2 .

^ Arnold, Dieter (1991).

Building in Egypt: Pharaonic Stone Masonry . Oxford University Press. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-19-511374-7 .

^ Woods, Michael; Mary B. Woods (2000).

Ancient Machines: From Wedges to Waterwheels . USA: Twenty-First Century Books. p. 58.

ISBN 0-8225-2994-7 .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 .

^ Wood, Michael (2000).

Ancient Machines: From Grunts to Graffiti . Minneapolis, MN: Runestone Press. pp.

35, 36 .

ISBN 0-8225-2996-3 .

^ Kemp, Barry J.

(2007).

Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilisation .

Routledge . p. 159.

ISBN 978-1-134-56388-3 .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2020 . Retrieved August 20, 2019 .

^ Selin, Helaine (2013).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Westen Cultures .

Springer Science & Business Media . p. 282.

ISBN 978-94-017-1416-7 .

^ G. Mokhtar (1981).

Ancient civilizations of Africa . Unesco. International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa. p. 309.

ISBN 978-0-435-94805-4 .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2022 . Retrieved June 19, 2012 – via Books.google.com.

^ Fritz Hintze, Kush XI; pp. 222–224.

^ "Siege warfare in ancient Egypt" . Tour Egypt . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ Bianchi, Robert Steven (2004).

Daily Life of the Nubians . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 227.

ISBN 978-0-313-32501-4 .

^ Humphris, Jane; Charlton, Michael F.; Keen, Jake; Sauder, Lee; Alshishani, Fareed (2018).

"Iron Smelting in Sudan: Experimental Archaeology at The Royal City of Meroe" .

Journal of Field Archaeology .

43 (5): 399.

doi : 10.1080/00934690.2018.1479085 .

ISSN 0093-4690 .

^ Collins, Robert O.; Burns, James M. (2007).

A History of Sub-Saharan Africa . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-86746-7 .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 – via Google Books.

^ Edwards, David N. (2004).

The Nubian Past: An Archaeology of the Sudan . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-203-48276-6 .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 – via Google Books.

^ Humphris J, Charlton MF, Keen J, Sauder L, Alshishani F (June 2018).

"Iron Smelting in Sudan: Experimental Archaeology at The Royal City of Meroe" .

Journal of Field Archaeology .

43 (5): 399– 416.

doi : 10.1080/00934690.2018.1479085 .

^ " The Antikythera Mechanism Research Project Archived 2008-04-28 at the Wayback Machine ", The Antikythera Mechanism Research Project. Retrieved July 1, 2007 Quote: "The Antikythera Mechanism is now understood to be dedicated to astronomical phenomena and operates as a complex mechanical "computer" which tracks the cycles of the Solar System." ^ Wilford, John (July 31, 2008).

"Discovering How Greeks Computed in 100 B.C." The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2013 . Retrieved February 21, 2017 .

^ Wright, M T. (2005). "Epicyclic Gearing and the Antikythera Mechanism, part 2".

Antiquarian Horology .

29 (1 (September 2005)): 54– 60.

^ Britannica on Greek civilization in the 5th century – Military technology Archived June 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Quote: "The 7th century, by contrast, had witnessed rapid innovations, such as the introduction of the hoplite and the trireme, which still were the basic instruments of war in the 5th." and "But it was the development of artillery that opened an epoch, and this invention did not predate the 4th century. It was first heard of in the context of Sicilian warfare against Carthage in the time of Dionysius I of Syracuse." ^ Chevedden, Paul E. (1988).

"THE HYBRID TREBUCHET:: THE HALFWAY STEP TO THE COUNTERWEIGHT TREBUCHET" . In Kagay, Donald J.; O'Callaghan, Joseph F.; Vann, Theresa M. (eds.).

On the Social Origins of Medieval Institutions Essays in Honor of Joseph F. O'Callaghan . THE MEDIEVAL MEDITTERANEAN PEOPLES, ECONOMIES, AND CULTURES, 400-1453. Vol. 19.

Leiden , Boston , Köln : Brill . p. 179.

ISBN 9789004110960 .

ISSN 0928-5520 . Retrieved February 16, 2025 – via Google Books .

^ Ahmad Y Hassan , Donald Routledge Hill (1986).

Islamic Technology: An illustrated history , p. 54.

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-42239-6 .

^ Lucas, Adam (2006).

Wind, Water, Work: Ancient and Medieval Milling Technology . Brill Publishers. p. 65.

ISBN 90-04-14649-0 .

^ Eldridge, Frank (1980).

Wind Machines (2nd ed.). New York: Litton Educational Publishing, Inc. p.

15 .

ISBN 0-442-26134-9 .

^ Shepherd, William (2011).

Electricity Generation Using Wind Power (1 ed.). Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. p. 4.

ISBN 978-981-4304-13-9 .

^ Taqi al-Din and the First Steam Turbine, 1551 A.D.

Archived February 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , web page, accessed on line October 23, 2009; this web page refers to Ahmad Y Hassan (1976), Taqi al-Din and Arabic Mechanical Engineering , pp. 34–5, Institute for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo .

^ Ahmad Y. Hassan (1976), Taqi al-Din and Arabic Mechanical Engineering , pp. 34–35, Institute for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo ^ Lakwete, Angela (2003).

Inventing the Cotton Gin: Machine and Myth in Antebellum America . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

1– 6.

ISBN 978-0-8018-7394-2 .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2021 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 .

^ Pacey, Arnold (1991) [1990].

Technology in World Civilization: A Thousand-Year History (First MIT Press paperback ed.). Cambridge MA: The MIT Press. pp.

23– 24.

^ Žmolek, Michael Andrew (2013).

Rethinking the Industrial Revolution: Five Centuries of Transition from Agrarian to Industrial Capitalism in England . Brill. p. 328.

ISBN 978-90-04-25179-3 .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2019 . Retrieved October 13, 2019 .

The spinning jenny was basically an adaptation of its precursor the spinning wheel ^ Koetsier, Teun (2001). "On the prehistory of programmable machines: musical automata, looms, calculators".

Mechanism and Machine Theory .

36 (5). Elsevier: 589– 603.

doi : 10.1016/S0094-114X(01)00005-2 .

^ Kapur, Ajay; Carnegie, Dale; Murphy, Jim; Long, Jason (2017).

"Loudspeakers Optional: A history of non-loudspeaker-based electroacoustic music" .

Organised Sound .

22 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 195– 205.

doi : 10.1017/S1355771817000103 .

ISSN 1355-7718 .

S2CID 143427257 .

^ Professor Noel Sharkey, A 13th Century Programmable Robot (Archive) , University of Sheffield .

^ a b c d Musson, A.E.; Robinson, Eric H. (1969).

Science and Technology in the Industrial Revolution . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-0802016379 .

^ Taylor, George Rogers (1969).

The Transportation Revolution, 1815–1860 . M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-87332-101-3 .

^ a b Rosen, William (2012).

The Most Powerful Idea in the World: A Story of Steam, Industry and Invention . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-72634-2 .

^ Jenkins, Rhys (1936).

Links in the History of Engineering and Technology from Tudor Times . Ayer Publishing. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0-8369-2167-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Tylecote, R.F. (1992).

A History of Metallurgy, Second Edition . London: Maney Publishing, for the Institute of Materials.

ISBN 978-0-901462-88-6 .

^ a b Hunter, Louis C. (1985).

A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1730–1930, Vol. 2: Steam Power . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

^ Roe, Joseph Wickham (1916).

English and American Tool Builders . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

LCCN 16011753 .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2018 .

^ Hounshell, David A.

(1984).

From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8018-2975-8 .

LCCN 83016269 .

OCLC 1104810110 .

^ Cowan, Ruth Schwartz (1997).

A Social History of American Technology . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-19-504605-2 .

^ Wheeler, Lynde Phelps (1951).

Josiah Willard Gibbs – the History of a Great Mind . Ox Bow Press.

ISBN 978-1-881987-11-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Williams, Trevor I. (1982).

A Short History of Twentieth Century Technology . US: Oxford University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-19-858159-8 .

^ Defonseka, Chris (2020).

Polymer Fillers and Stiffening Agents: Applications and Non-traditional Alternatives . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. p. 31.

ISBN 978-3-11-066999-2 .

^ Van Every, Kermit E. (1986). "Aeronautical engineering".

Encyclopedia Americana . Vol. 1. Grolier Incorporated. p. 226.

^ Journal of the British Nuclear Energy Society: Volume 1 British Nuclear Energy Society – 1962 – Snippet view Archived September 21, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Quote: In most universities it should be possible to cover the main branches of engineering, i.e. civil, mechanical, electrical and chemical engineering in this way. More specialized fields of engineering application, of which nuclear power is ...

^ The Engineering Profession by Sir James Hamilton, UK Engineering Council Quote: "The Civilingenior degree encompasses the main branches of engineering civil, mechanical, electrical, chemical." (From the Internet Archive) ^ Indu Ramchandani (2000).

Student's Britannica India,7vol.Set . Popular Prakashan. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-85229-761-2 .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2013 . Retrieved March 23, 2013 .

Branches: There are traditionally four primary engineering disciplines: civil, mechanical, electrical and chemical.

^ "Nuclear Engineering Overview" (PDF) .

Career Cornerstone Center . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 29, 2011 . Retrieved August 2, 2011 .

^ "faa.gov: "Engineering and Flight Test Designees - Designated Engineering Representative (DER)" " .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2009 . Retrieved May 31, 2009 .

^ Lucas, Jim (August 22, 2014).

"What is engineering?" .

Live Science .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2019 . Retrieved September 15, 2019 .

^ "Genrich Altshuller's Theory of Inventive Problem Solving" .

Theories About Engineering .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2019 . Retrieved September 15, 2019 .

^ "Comparing the Engineering Design Process and the Scientific Method" .

Science Buddies .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved September 15, 2019 .

^ "Forensic Engineering | ASCE" .

www.asce.org .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2020 . Retrieved September 15, 2019 .

^ Arbe, Katrina (May 7, 2001).

"PDM: Not Just for the Big Boys Anymore" . ThomasNet. Archived from the original on August 6, 2010 . Retrieved December 30, 2006 .

^ Arbe, Katrina (May 22, 2003).

"The Latest Chapter in CAD Software Evaluation" . ThomasNet. Archived from the original on August 6, 2010 . Retrieved December 30, 2006 .

^ Jowitt, Paul W. (2006).

"Engineering Civilisation from the Shadows" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 6, 2006.

^ Home page for EMI Archived April 14, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ "engineeringuk.com/About_us" . Archived from the original on May 30, 2014.

^ George Edwards.

"Why Does It Matter? – why are engineering skills important?" . Archived from the original on June 19, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .

^ George Edwards.

"The ERA Foundation Report" . Archived from the original on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .

^ "Code of Ethics" . National Society of Professional Engineers.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2020 . Retrieved July 12, 2017 .

^ "Origin of the Iron Ring concept" .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2011 . Retrieved August 13, 2021 .

^ Rosakis, Ares.

"Chair's Message, Caltech" . Archived from the original on November 4, 2011 . Retrieved October 15, 2011 .

^ Ryschkewitsch, M.G. NASA Chief Engineer.

"Improving the capability to Engineer Complex Systems – Broadening the Conversation on the Art and Science of Systems Engineering" (PDF) . p. 8 of 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 14, 2013 . Retrieved October 15, 2011 .

^ American Society for Engineering Education (1970).

Engineering education . Vol. 60. American Society for Engineering Education. p. 467.

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

The great engineer Theodore von Karman once said, "Scientists study the world as it is, engineers create the world that never has been." Today, more than ever, the engineer must create a world that never has been ...

^ "What is Engineering Science?" .

esm.psu.edu .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2022 . Retrieved September 7, 2022 .

^ Vincenti, Walter G. (1993).

What Engineers Know and How They Know It: Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-3974-0 .

^ Walter G Whitman; August Paul Peck.

Whitman-Peck Physics . American Book Company, 1946, p. 06 Archived August 1, 2020, at the Wayback Machine .

OCLC 3247002 ^ Ateneo de Manila University Press. Philippine Studies, vol. 11, no. 4, 1963.

p. 600 ^ "Relationship between physics and electrical engineering".

Journal of the A.I.E.E .

46 (2): 107– 108. 1927.

doi : 10.1109/JAIEE.1927.6534988 .

S2CID 51673339 .

^ Puttaswamaiah.

Future Of Economic Science Archived October 26, 2018, at the Wayback Machine . Oxford and IBH Publishing, 2008, p. 208.

^ Yoseph Bar-Cohen, Cynthia L. Breazeal.

Biologically Inspired Intelligent Robots . SPIE Press, 2003.

ISBN 978-0-8194-4872-9 .

p. 190 ^ C. Morón, E. Tremps, A. García, J.A. Somolinos (2011) The Physics and its Relation with the Engineering, INTED2011 Proceedings pp. 5929–34 Archived December 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

ISBN 978-84-614-7423-3 ^ R Gazzinelli, R L Moreira, W N Rodrigues.

Physics and Industrial Development: Bridging the Gap Archived August 1, 2020, at the Wayback Machine . World Scientific, 1997, p. 110.

^ Steve Fuller. Knowledge Management Foundations. Routledge, 2012.

ISBN 978-1-136-38982-5 .

p. 92 Archived August 1, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Industrial Physicists: Primarily specialising in Engineering" (PDF) . American Institute for Physics. October 2016.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved December 23, 2016 .

^ Baofu, Peter (March 26, 2009).

The Future of Post-Human Engineering: A Preface to a New Theory of Technology . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 141.

ISBN 978-1-4438-0813-2 .

^ Classical and Computational Solid Mechanics, YC Fung and P. Tong . World Scientific. 2001.

^ "Code of Ethics | National Society of Professional Engineers" .

www.nspe.org .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2020 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ "Ethical Assessment of Implantable Brain Chips. Ellen M. McGee and G.Q. Maguire, Jr. from Boston University" .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2016 . Retrieved March 30, 2007 .

^ Evans-Pughe, C. (May 2003).

"Foreign parts (electronic body implants)" .

IEE Review .

49 (5): 30– 33.

doi : 10.1049/ir:20030503 (inactive July 12, 2025) . Retrieved March 3, 2020 .

Feeling threatened by cyborgs?

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Institute of Medicine and Engineering: Mission statement The mission of the Institute for Medicine and Engineering (IME) is to stimulate fundamental research at the interface between biomedicine and engineering/physical/computational sciences leading to innovative applications in biomedical research and clinical practice.

Archived March 17, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology: Both general and technical articles on current technologies and methods used in biomedical and clinical engineering ..." Archived from the original on February 13, 2007 . Retrieved March 30, 2007 .

^ a b Royal Academy of Engineering and Academy of Medical Sciences: Systems Biology: a vision for engineering and medicine in pdf: quote1: Systems Biology is an emerging methodology that has yet to be defined quote2: It applies the concepts of systems engineering to the study of complex biological systems through iteration between computational or mathematical modelling and experimentation.

Archived April 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Science Museum of Minnesota: Online Lesson 5a; The heart as a pump" .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2006 . Retrieved September 27, 2006 .

^ Minnesota State University emuseum: Bones act as levers Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "UC Berkeley News: UC researchers create model of brain's electrical storm during a seizure" .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2007 . Retrieved March 30, 2007 .

^ a b Bjerklie, David. "The Art of Renaissance Engineering." MIT's Technology Review Jan./Feb.1998: 54–59. Article explores the concept of the "artist-engineer", an individual who used his artistic talent in engineering. Quote from article: Da Vinci reached the pinnacle of "artist-engineer"-dom, Quote2: "It was Leonardo da Vinci who initiated the most ambitious expansion in the role of artist-engineer, progressing from astute observer to inventor to theoretician." (Bjerklie 58) ^ a b "National Science Foundation:The Art of Engineering: Professor uses the fine arts to broaden students' engineering perspectives" .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2018 . Retrieved April 6, 2018 .

^ MIT World:The Art of Engineering: Inventor James Dyson on the Art of Engineering: quote: A member of the British Design Council, James Dyson has been designing products since graduating from the Royal College of Art in 1970.

Archived July 5, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ "University of Texas at Dallas: The Institute for Interactive Arts and Engineering" .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2007 . Retrieved March 30, 2007 .

^ "Aerospace Design: The Art of Engineering from NASA's Aeronautical Research" . Archived from the original on August 15, 2003 . Retrieved March 31, 2007 .

^ Billington, David P. (1989).

Princeton U: Robert Maillart's Bridges: The Art of Engineering: quote: no doubt that Maillart was fully conscious of the aesthetic implications ...

Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691024219 .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2007 . Retrieved March 31, 2007 .

^ quote:..the tools of artists and the perspective of engineers..

Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Drew U: user website: cites Bjerklie paper Archived April 19, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Further reading Billington, David P. (1996).

The Innovators: The Engineering Pioneers Who Made America Modern (New ed.). Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-471-14026-9 .

Blockley, David (2012).

Engineering: a very short introduction . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-957869-6 .

Dorf, Richard , ed. (2005).

The Engineering Handbook (2 ed.). Boca Raton: CRC.

ISBN 978-0-8493-1586-2 .

Lord, Charles R. (2000).

Guide to Information Sources in Engineering . Libraries Unlimited.

ISBN 978-1-56308-699-1 .

Madhavan, Guru (2015).

Applied Minds: How Engineers Think . W.W. Norton.

Petroski, Henry (1992).

To Engineer is Human: The Role of Failure in Successful Design . Vintage.

ISBN 978-0-679-73416-1 .

Vincenti, Walter G. (1993).

What Engineers Know and How They Know It: Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History . The Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-4588-8 .

External links The dictionary definition of engineering at Wiktionary Learning materials related to Engineering at Wikiversity Quotations related to Engineering at Wikiquote Works related to Engineering at Wikisource v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Agriculture Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Cell biology Cellular and molecular biology 0–L M–Z Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer hardware Computer science Developmental and reproductive biology Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering A–L M–Z Entomology Environmental science Genetics and evolutionary biology Geography A–M N–Z Arabic toponyms Hebrew toponyms Western and South Asia Geology Ichthyology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Mycology Nanotechnology Ornithology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Quantum computing Robotics Scientific naming Structural engineering Virology v t e Major industries by economic sector Primary sector or ′Natural sector′ ( raw materials ) Biotic Agriculture Arable farming Cereals Legumes Vegetables Fiber crops Oilseeds Sugar Tobacco Permanent crops Apples et al.

Berries Citrus Stone fruits Tropical fruit Viticulture Cocoa Coffee Tea Nuts Olives Medicinal plants Spices Horticulture Flowers Seeds Animal husbandry Beef cattle Dairy farming Fur farming Horses Other livestock Pig Wool Poultry Beekeeping Cochineal Shellac Silk Hunting Fur trapping Forestry Silviculture Bamboo Logging Firewood Rattan Tree tapping Frankincense Gum arabic Gutta-percha Maple syrup Mastic Natural rubber Palm sugar , syrup , & wine Pine resin Wild mushrooms Fungiculture Truffles Aquatic Fishing Anchovies Herring Sardines Cod Haddock Pollock Mackerel Shark Swordfish Tuna Crabs Lobsters Sea urchins Squid Whaling Aquaculture Carp Catfish Tilapia Abalone Mussels Oysters Pearls Microalgae Seaweed Both Clams Sea cucumbers Scallops Salmon Shrimp Geological Fossil fuels Coal Peat Natural gas Oil shale Petroleum Tar sands Mining of ores Aluminum Copper Iron Gold Silver Palladium Platinum Lithium Rare-earth metals Uranium Other minerals Gemstones Phosphorus Potash Salt Sulfur Quarrying Gravel Sand Chalk Clay Gypsum Limestone Dimension stone Granite Marble Secondary sector or ′Industrial sector′ ( goods manufacturing ) Manufacturing Light industry Food Animal feed Baking Canning Dairy products Flour Meat Prepared Preserved Sweets Vegetable oils Beverages Beer Bottled water Liquor Soft drinks Wine Textiles Carding Dyeing Prints Spinning Weaving Carpets Lace Linens Rope Clothing Accessories Dressmaking Furs Hatmaking Sewing Shoemaking Tailoring Printing Bookbinding Embossing Engraving Secure Typesetting Media reproduction Cassette tapes Phonographs Optical discs Metal fabrication Boilermaking Builders' & household hardware Cutlery Gunsmithing Locksmithing Machining Other smithing Powder metallurgy Prefabrication Surface finishing Other fabrication 3D printing Blow molding Drawing Extrusion Glassblowing Injection moulding Pottery Sintering Stonemasonry Woodworking Furniture Other goods Baggage Bicycles Jewellery Medical supplies Musical instruments Office supplies Outdoors & sports equipment Personal protective equipment Toys Electrical & optical Electronics Components Circuit boards Semiconductors Computers Computer systems Parts & peripherals Blank storage media Communications equipment Mobile phones Network infrastructure Consumer electronics Televisions Video game consoles Instrumentation Clocks and watches GPS devices Scientific instruments Medical imaging systems Optical instruments Cameras Gun & spotting scopes Laser construction Lens grinding Microscopes Telescopes Electrical equipment Batteries Electrical & fiber optic cables Electric lighting Electric motors Home appliances Transformers Chemicals Coal & oil refining Bitumen Coke Diesel fuel Fuel oil Gasoline Jet fuel Kerosene Mineral oil Paraffin wax Petrochemicals Petroleum jelly Propane Synthetic oil Tar Commodity chemicals Fertilizers Industrial gases Pigments Pure elements Speciality chemicals Adhesives Agrochemicals Aroma compounds Cleaning products Cosmetics Explosives Fireworks Paints & inks Perfumes Soap Toiletries Fine chemicals Pharmaceuticals Antibiotics Blood products Chemical & hormonal contraceptives Generic drugs Illegal drugs Supplements Vaccines Materials Leather Liming & deliming Tanning Currying & oiling Wood Drying Sawmilling Engineered Lumber Composite Paper Sizing Cardboard Pulp Tissue Rubber Tires Vulcanized rubber Plastics Commodity Engineered Specialty Pellets Synthetic fibers Thermoplastics & thermosets Glass Borosilicate Fused quartz Soda-lime Float glass Glass fiber Glass wool & fiberglass Safety glass Ceramics Brick Earthenware Porcelain Refractory Tile Cement Mortar Plaster Ready-mix concrete Other mineral Abrasives Carbon fibers & advanced materials Mineral wool Synthetic gems Metal refining Iron Aluminum Copper Alloys Steel Formed metal Rolled Forged Cast metal Heavy industry Machinery Conveyors Heavy Hydraulic Machine tools Power & wind turbines Automobiles Other heavy vehicles Aerospace & space Rail vehicles Ships & offshore platforms Weapons Utilities Power Electric Gas distribution Renewable Water Sewage Waste management Collection Dumping Hazardous Recycling Remediation Telecom networks Cable TV Internet Mobile Satellite Telephone Construction Buildings Commercial Industrial Residential Civil engineering Bridges Railways Roads Tunnels Canals Dams Dredging Harbors Specialty trades Cabinetry Demolition Electrical wiring Elevators HVAC Painting and decorating Plumbing Site preparation Tertiary sector or ′Service sector′ ( services ) Sales Retail Car dealership Consumer goods General store Grocery store Department store Mail order Online shopping Specialty store Wholesale Auction Brokerage Distribution Transport & Storage Cargo Air cargo Intermodal Mail Moving company Rail Trucking Passenger transport Airlines Car rentals Passenger rail Ridesharing Taxis Warehousing Self storage Hospitality Foodservice Drink service Cafés Catering Fast food Food delivery Restaurants Teahouses Hotels Asset management Financial services Banking Credit Financial advice Holding company Money transfer Payment cards Risk management Securities Insurance Health Life Pension funding Property Reinsurance Real estate Brokerage Property management Professional Accounting Assurance Audit Bookkeeping Tax advice Architecture & engineering Inspection Surveying Physical , product , & system testing Design Fashion Interior Product Legal services Management Consulting Public relations Marketing Advertising Creative Language Research and development Basic research Healthcare Medicine Dentist offices Hospitals Nursing Residential care Veterinary medicine Entertainment & leisure Audio-visual Film Music Video games Broadcasting News Radio Television Sport Travel Business travel Cruise lines Tourism Gambling Online Venues Arcades Amusement parks Fairgrounds Nightclubs Tabletop games Publishing & Mass media Written Books Periodicals Software Internet Hosting Social networks Streaming Websites Education Primary Secondary Tertiary Vocational school University Testing Tutoring Other Administrative Customer service Leasing Renting Staffing Private investigation & security Maintenance Janitors Landscaping Repairs Personal services Beauty Dry cleaning Funeral Maid service Pet care Sex Poverty Related Classification standards Production-based ANZSIC ISIC NACE NAICS SIC UKSIC Market-based GICS ICB TRBC Other Aftermarket Generic OEM Inputs & outputs Externalities Community Crime Culture Pollution Well-being Funding Goods Commodities Final Intermediate Raw material Innovation Primary inputs Labor Natural resources Physical capital Services Technology Organization Centralization Cartel Conglomerate Horizontal integration Mergers and acquisitions Monopoly Monopsony Vertical integration Decentralization Enforced breakup Freelancing Homesteading Outsourcing Putting-out system Spinning-off Temporary work Ownership Cooperative Joint-stock company Nationalization Nonprofit organization Partnership Privatization Sole proprietorship State-owned enterprise Category Commons Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Latvia Korea Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2rtql
Cached time: 20250817071740
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.442 seconds
Real time usage: 1.698 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9255/1000000
Revision size: 87321/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 479631/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7430/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 406326/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.797/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25251181/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1294.210      1 -total
 47.38%  613.182      1 Template:Reflist
 19.13%  247.570     46 Template:Cite_book
 16.84%  217.985     31 Template:Cite_web
  6.80%   88.069      2 Template:Lang
  5.74%   74.242     10 Template:Navbox
  5.61%   72.573      1 Template:TopicTOC-Engineering
  5.50%   71.178      1 Template:Sidebar
  4.94%   63.983      1 Template:Short_description
  3.62%   46.812      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9251:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817071740 and revision id 1305542484. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Engineering&oldid=1305542484 " Categories : Engineering Engineering occupations Philosophy of science Main topic articles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from January 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2020 Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Engineering 167 languages Add topic

