Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Major themes 3 Influence 4 Cultural references 5 References 6 Work 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Sceptical Chymist 15 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1661 book by Robert Boyle The Sceptical Chymist Title page Author Robert Boyle Language English Subject Chemistry Publisher J. Cadwell Publication date 1661 Publication place England Media type Print Pages 230 OCLC 3165496 Dewey Decimal 540 LC Class QD31.3 Text The Sceptical Chymist at Wikisource The Sceptical Chymist: or Chymico-Physical Doubts & Paradoxes is the title of a book by Robert Boyle , published in London in 1661.  In the form of a dialogue, the Sceptical Chymist presented Boyle's hypothesis that matter consisted of corpuscles and clusters of corpuscles in motion and that every phenomenon was the result of collisions of particles in motion. Boyle also objected to the definitions of elemental bodies propounded by Aristotle and by Paracelsus , instead defining elements as "perfectly unmingled bodies" (see below). For these reasons Robert Boyle has sometimes been called the founder of modern chemistry .

[ 1 ] The main setting for the book is a private garden , where five characters are having a conversation about the constituents of mixed bodies. Four of the characters are named, while the fifth one is the unnamed narrator. Due to the popularity of the book, Aristotle’s doctrine of the four elements and Paracelsus’ theory of the three principles gradually passed into disuse.

Contents [ edit ] The first part of the book begins with 5 friends ( Carneades the host and the Skeptic, Philoponus the Chymist, Themistius the Aristotelian, Eleutherius the impartial Judge, and an unnamed narrator) meeting in Carneades 's garden and chatting about the constituents of mixed bodies.
In part one, Carneades (Boyle) lays out four propositions to the gathering, which sets the foundation for the rest of the book. They are as follows: Proposition I.

It seems not absurd to conceive that at the first production of mixt bodies, the universal matter whereof they among other parts of the universe consisted, was actually divided into little particles of several sizes and shapes variously moved.

Proposition II.

Neither is it impossible that of these minute particles divers of the smallest and neighboring ones were here and there associated into minute masses or clusters, and did by their coalitions constitute great store of such little primary concretions or masses as were not easily dissipable into such particles as composed them.

[ 2 ] Proposition III.

I shall not peremptorily deny, that from most such mixt bodies as partake either of animals or vegetable nature, there may by the help of the fire be actually obtained a determinate number (whether three, four, or five, or fewer or more) of substances, worthy of differing denominations.

Proposition IV.

It may likewise be granted, that those distinct substances, which concretes generally either afford or are made up of, may without very much inconvenience be called the elements or principles of them.

[ 3 ] Major themes [ edit ] Boyle first argued that fire is not a universal and sufficient analyzer of dividing all bodies into their elements, contrary to Jean Beguin and Joseph Duchesne . To prove this he turned for support to Jan Baptist van Helmont whose Alkahest was reputed to be a universal analyzer.

Boyle rejected the Aristotelian theory of the four elements (earth, air, fire, and water) and also the three principles (salt, sulfur, and mercury) proposed by Paracelsus . After discussing the classical elements and chemical principles in the first five parts of the book, in the sixth part Boyle defines chemical element in a manner that approaches more closely to the modern concept: I now mean by Elements, as those Chymists that speak plainest do by their Principles, certain Primitive and Simple, or perfectly unmingled bodies; which not being made of any other bodies, or of one another, are the Ingredients of all those call'd perfectly mixt Bodies are immediately compounded, and into which they are ultimately resolved.

[ 4 ] However, Boyle denied that any known material substances correspond to such "perfectly unmingled bodies."  In his view, all known materials were compounds, even such substances as gold , silver , lead , sulfur , and carbon .

Influence [ edit ] According to E. J. Dijksterhuis , "After the appearance of The Sceptical Chymist Aristotle’s doctrine of the four elements as well as Paracelsus’ theory of the three principia gradually passes into disuse." [ 5 ] The book's influence can be discerned in Nicholas Brady 's reference to "jarring seeds" in his Ode to St. Cecilia (set by Henry Purcell in 1691, well before Daniel Bernoulli 's kinetic theory ): Soul of the World! Inspir'd by thee, The jarring Seeds of Matter did agree, Thou didst the scatter'd Atoms bind, Which, by thy Laws of true proportion join'd, Made up of various Parts one perfect Harmony.

Philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn references The Sceptical Chymist in the eleventh chapter of his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , while discussing his views on the historiography of science .

[ 6 ] Cultural references [ edit ] The Sceptical Chymist is referenced in the novel Quicksilver .

References [ edit ] ^ Partington, J. R. (1989) [1937].

A Short History of Chemistry (3rd rev. and enl. ed.). New York: Dover Publications. p. 67.

ISBN 9780486659770 .

OCLC 19353301 .

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 30.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 34.

^ Boyle 1661 , p. 350.

^ Dijksterhuis, E. J.

(1961).

The Mechanization of the World Picture . Translated by Dikshoorn, C.

Oxford University Press . p. 435 – via Internet Archive .

^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolution . University of Chicago Press.

Work [ edit ] Boyle, Robert (1661), The Sceptical Chymist : or Chymico-physical doubts and paradoxes, touching the spagyrist's principles commonly call'd hypostatical, as they are wont to be propos'd and defended by the generality of alchymists. Whereunto is praemis'd part of another discourse relating to the same subject: or Chymico-physical doubts and paradoxes, touching the spagyrist's principles commonly call'd hypostatical, as they are wont to be propos'd and defended by the generality of alchymists. Whereunto is praemis'd part of another discourse relating to the same subject , London: J. Cadwell, p. 436, OCLC 752672500 , Wikidata Q60161 , copy held by the British Library External links [ edit ] The Sceptical Chymist at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Scan of the 1661 edition, at archive.org Transcription of the book at Project Gutenberg In retrospect: The Sceptical Chymist Article by Lawrence Principe in Nature , January 5, 2011 Davidson, John S.

"Annotations to Boyle's "The Sceptical Chymist" " (PDF) . Retrieved 2014-04-11 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Sceptical_Chymist&oldid=1299526027 " Categories : 1661 books 1661 in science 1661 in England 1660s in London Robert Boyle Chemistry books Dialogues Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that link to Wikisource This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 23:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Sceptical Chymist 15 languages Add topic

