Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prehistory 2 Historical and contemporary peoples Toggle Historical and contemporary peoples subsection 2.1 List of peoples by ethnolinguistic grouping 3 Political representation in the Arctic Council 4 Political aims 5 Possible future discussions 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Circumpolar peoples 12 languages Català فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term for Indigenous peoples of the Arctic Circumpolar coastal human population distribution ca. 2009 (includes both Indigenous and non-Indigenous) Circumpolar peoples and Arctic peoples are umbrella terms for the various indigenous peoples of the Arctic region.

Approximately four million people are resident in the Arctic , among which 10 percent are indigenous peoples belonging to a vast number of distinct communities. They represent a minority with the exception of Greenland of which 90 percent of its population is composed of Inuit .

It is difficult to find an exact number of the indigenous peoples in the Arctic as states have a tendency to downplay the numbers. Moreover, each state has its own different methods to count its indigenous population. For instance, Russia excludes from the official status of "small peoples of the North" ( Russian : "малые народы Севера" or "Коренные малочисленные народы Севера" ) every community that exceeds 50,000 people.

[ 1 ] They are therefore excluding from the definition certain numerically large indigenous communities like the Komi peoples , Karelians or Yakuts .

[ 2 ] Prehistory [ edit ] The earliest inhabitants of North America's central and eastern Arctic are referred to as the Arctic small tool tradition (AST) and existed c.

2500 BCE . The AST consisted of several Paleo-Eskimo cultures, including the Independence cultures and Pre-Dorset culture.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Dorset culture ( Inuktitut : Tuniit or Tunit ) refers to the next inhabitants of central and eastern Arctic. The Dorset culture evolved because of technological and economic changes during the period of 1050–550 BCE. With the exception of the Quebec / Labrador Peninsula , the Dorset culture vanished around 1500 CE.

[ 5 ] Dorset / Thule culture transition dates around the 9th–10th centuries. Scientists theorize that there may have been cross-contact of the two cultures with sharing of technology, such as fashioning harpoon heads, or the Thule may have found Dorset remnants and adapted their ways with the predecessor culture.

[ 6 ] Others believe the Thule displaced the Dorset.

[ citation needed ] Historical and contemporary peoples [ edit ] By 1300, the Inuit , present-day Arctic inhabitants and descendants of Thule culture, had settled in west Greenland, and moved into east Greenland over the following century. Over time, the Inuit, and other related peoples, have migrated throughout the Arctic and subarctic regions of Canada ( Inuit Nunangat ), Greenland , Russia ( Siberia ), and the United States ( Alaska ).

[ 7 ] Other Indigenous peoples of the circumpolar north  include the Chukchi , Evenks , Iñupiat , Khanty , Koryaks , Nenets , Sámi , Yukaghir , and Yupik . Yupik people still refer to themselves as Eskimo which means "snowshoe netters", not "raw meat eaters" as it is sometimes mistakenly translated.

[ 8 ] List of peoples by ethnolinguistic grouping [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chukchi , one of many Indigenous peoples of Siberia . Representation of a Chukchi family by Louis Choris (1816) Ancient Beringian – Siberia and Alaska Chukotko-Kamchatkan Chukchi , Siberia ( Chukotka Autonomous Okrug ), Russia Koryaks , Siberia ( Kamchatka Krai ), Russia Tungusic Evenks , China ( Inner Mongolia and Heilongjiang ), Mongolia, Russia Evens , Siberia ( Magadan Oblast , Kamchatka Krai and Sakha ), Russia Turkic Northeast Turkic Dolgans , Siberia ( Krasnoyarsk Krai ), Russia Yakuts , Siberia ( Sakha ), Russia Eskaleut Eskimo A group of igloos forming an Inuit village, 1824, by George Francis Lyon Yupik : Alaska and the Russian Far East ( Chukotka Autonomous Okrug ) Alutiiq , Alaska Yup'ik , Alaska Cup'ik, Alaska Cup'ig, Nunivak Island (Alaska) Siberian Yupik , Siberia ( Chukotka Autonomous Okrug ), Russia Inuit : Greenland , Northern Canada ( Nunavut , Nunavik , Nunatsiavut , Northwest Territories ( Inuvialuit Nunangit ) and Yukon ), Alaska , United States Kalaallit , Greenland Iñupiat : Northwest Arctic and North Slope boroughs and the Bering Straits , Alaska, United States Aleuts : Aleutian Islands , Alaska, United States and Kamchatka Krai , Russia Uralic Finno-Ugric Permians Komi , Russia ( Komi Republic and Perm Krai ) Udmurts , Russia Sami people in Norway, c. 1900, painted by Wilhelm Peters Sámi : Northern Norway, Sweden, Finland, Russia ( Murmansk Oblast ) Balto-Finnic Karelians , Finland, Russia Samoyedic Nenets , Russia Enets , Siberia ( Krasnoyarsk Krai ), Russia Nganasan ,  Siberia ( Krasnoyarsk Krai ), Russia Selkup , Siberia, Russia Yukaghirs , East Siberia, Russia Indo-European Russia's Arctic coastline from the White Sea to the Bering Strait had been explored and settled by Pomors , Russian settlers from Novgorod .

Slavs East Slavic Pomors and other Russians , Russia Political representation in the Arctic Council [ edit ] The voice of indigenous people in the Arctic is important as they have usually been seen as the representatives and voices of the impact of climate change in the Arctic . Some numerically large indigenous communities hold a role in the geopolitics of the Arctic region through the status of permanent participant in the Arctic Council . It is the case of the Aleuts though the Aleut International Association , the Canadian and Alaskan Athabaskans through the Arctic Athabaskan Council , the Gwichʼin through the Gwich'in Council International , the Inuit through the Inuit Circumpolar Council , the Sámi through the Saami Council and the Indigenous peoples of the Russian north through Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North (RAIPON). Generally, when indigenous peoples participate in international discussion, they have the status of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), in order to differentiate them from states. However, the Arctic Council established a unique model of indigenous participation by giving them the status of Permanent Participants .

It is a new reading of their participation and consultative right granted by the United Nation Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People in its article 18. Indigenous people are for once, seated at the same table as states representatives. It enables them to gain influence on the soft law making process, which was until now for states-only. They are also starting to gain influence in the making of legally binding texts as they participated in the making of the Arctic Search and Rescue (May 2011) or the Agreement on Cooperation on Marine Oil Pollution Preparedness and Response in the Arctic (2013). Certain areas still remain under a state-only control as the Arctic Council's aim is to focus on sustainable development and environmental protection in the Arctic region, excluding de facto other topics like security or border disputes. Circumpolar peoples do not have access or have only limited access to these types of discussions which concerns their land but are discussed elsewhere.

Political aims [ edit ] In 2023, the Statement of the Arctic Peoples’ Conference 2023 – Inuiaat Issittormiut Ataatsimeersuarnerat 2023 [ 9 ] was issued on the common circumpolar peoples' political goals for the 50th anniversary of the first Circumpolar Meeting of Arctic Indigenous Peoples. One of the main arguments is the defense of their right to well being.

A major preoccupation is the access to healthcare and the application of mental health policies as suicide, especially among the younger generations, is a major issue that threatens the future of these communities. They also call for climate justice and denounce green colonialism which is the land encroachment, resource extraction and renewable energy production on their land, without their consent as well as the  proliferation of marine protected areas that are not indigenous-led. They recall their right to determine their own priorities for development, which should be understood as not confined to economic development. Finally, they highlight the need to ask for their consensus before making any decision in the Arctic Council and that making decisions without consensus undermines its purpose and integrity.

Possible future discussions [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Circumpolar peoples" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) With the melting of the ice and the possibility of opening new trade routes as well as extracting resources from the seabed, resource managements could be a major topic of discussion between Arctic States and Circumpolar Peoples. According to international law and indigenous rights, resource management should fall into a regime of co-management between the states and the indigenous communities present in the territory on which the resource extraction is being held.

[ 10 ] Moreover, the law states that indigenous peoples have to be part of « strategic planning », in other words in defining the various deadlines of such projects. They should as well receive a « fair and equitable benefit sharing ». A revenue sharing scheme would improve Arctic indigenous peoples' living standards and enable them to gain further economic autonomy. Finally, following United Nation Declaration of the Right of Indigenous People, circumpolar peoples are aiming at having more political representation and being more consulted at all levels: national, regional or international.

See also [ edit ] Indigenous peoples of Siberia Indigenous peoples of the Subarctic References [ edit ] ^ Dodds, K., & Woodward, J. (2021).

The Arctic: a very short introduction .

Oxford University Press.

^ Fondahl, Gail; Filippova, Viktoriya; Mack, Liza (2015).

"Indigenous Peoples in the New Arctic" .

The New Arctic . pp.

7– 22.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-17602-4_2 .

ISBN 978-3-319-17601-7 .

^ Hoffecker, John F. (2005).

A prehistory of the north: human settlement of the higher latitudes . Rutgers University Press. p. 130.

ISBN 0-8135-3469-0 .

^ Gibbon, pp. 28–31 ^ Gibbon, pp. 216–217 ^ Gibbon, p. 218 ^ "First Nations Culture Areas Index" .

the Canadian Museum of Civilization .

^ "Arctic Peoples" .

British Museum .

^ "Statement of the Arctic Peoples' Conference 2023 – Inuiaat Issittormiut Ataatsimeersuarnerat 2023" . 25 July 2023 . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ Shadian, J. M. (2013).

Of whales and oil: Inuit resource governance and the Arctic Council .

Polar Record , 49 (4), 392-405.

Bibliography [ edit ] Takashi Irimoto, Takako Yamada (eds.) Circumpolar Religion and Ecology: An Anthropology of the North , University of Tokyo Press, 1994, ISBN 9780860085157 .

v t e Indigenous peoples in the Northwest Territories Cultural areas: Arctic , Subarctic Ethnolinguistic groups Cree Woodland Cree Dene Deh Cho Dënesųłı̨ne Sahtu Tłı̨chǫ Gwichʼin Inuvialuit Inuit Métis Treaties and land claims Treaty 8 (1899) Treaty 11 (1921) Inuvialuit (1984) Gwich'in (1992) Sahtu (1993) Tłįchǫ (2003) Regional councils and band governments Akaitcho Territory Government Deninu Kųę́ Łutsël K'é Dene Salt River Smith's Landing Yellowknives Dene ( Dettah , Ndilǫ ) Dehcho First Nations Acho Dene Koe Deh Gáh Got'ı̨ę Fort Providence Métis Council Fort Simpson Métis Jean Marie River Kátł'odeeche Ka'a'gee Tu Łı́ı́dlı̨ı̨ Kų́ę́ Nahɂą Dehé Pehdzeh Kı Sambaa K'e West Point Gwich'in Tribal Council Aklavik Gwichya Gwich'in Inuvik Tetlit Gwich'in Inuvialuit Regional Corporation Aklavik Inuvik Paulatuk Sachs Harbour Tuktoyaktuk Ulukhaktok North Slave Métis Alliance Behchokǫ̀ Métis Gamèti Métis Wekweeti Métis Whatì Métis Yellowknife Métis Northwest Territory Métis Nation Fort Resolution Fort Smith Hay River Sahtu Dene Council Behdzi Ahda' Délı̨nę Fort Good Hope Tulita Dene Tłı̨chǫ Government Dechi Laot'i Dog Rib Rae Gameti Wha Ti v t e Arctic topics History Arctic exploration Arctic research History of whaling Government Arctic Council Arctic cooperation and politics Arctic Ocean Conference Chief Directorate of the Northern Sea Route Ilulissat Declaration Inuit Circumpolar Council Saami Council Territorial claims in the Arctic United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea Geography Arctic Archipelago Arctic Circle Arctic Cordillera Arctic ecology Arctic Ocean Arctic Cyclone Greenland ice sheet Impact craters of the Arctic Innuitian Region Nordicity North Pole Populated places in the Arctic Subarctic Tundra Geology Canadian Arctic Rift System Eurekan orogeny Greenland Plate Innuitian orogeny Queen Elizabeth Islands Subplate Southeast Bathurst Fault Zone Ungava Fault Zone Regions Arctic Alaska British Arctic Territories Canadian Arctic Archipelago Finnmark Greenland Iceland Inuvialuit Karelia Komi Northern Canada Northwest Territories Nunavik Nunavut Nunatsiavut Russian Arctic North Sakha Sápmi Yukon North American Arctic Climate Arctic Climate Impact Assessment Arctic dipole anomaly Arctic haze Arctic oscillation Arctic sea ice decline ecology and history Arctic methane emissions Climate change in the Arctic Climate of Alaska Effects of global warming on marine mammals Polar climate Polar amplification Polar vortex Fauna Arctic fox Beluga whale Bowhead whale Lemming Muskox Narwhal Polar bear Reindeer Seal bearded harp hooded ribbon ringed Snowy owl Walrus Flora Arctic ecology Arctic vegetation Tundra Culture Arctic peoples Subarctic peoples Chukchi Chukotka Evenks Karelians Komi Icelandic Inuit Gwich'in Khanty Koryaks Nenets Northern indigenous Russian peoples Sami Selkup Yakuts Yukaghir Arctic Winter Games First sunrise Quviasukvik (New Year's Day) Economy Natural resources Petroleum exploration Arctic Refuge drilling controversy Pollution in the Arctic Ocean Protected areas Transportation Transport Arctic Bridge Arctic shipping routes Northeast Passage Northwest Passage Northern Sea Route Polar air route Transpolar Sea Route Search and rescue Category WikiProject v t e Cultural areas of Indigenous North Americans Arctic Subarctic Northwest Coast Plateau California Great Basin Plains Eastern Woodlands Northeastern Southeastern Southwest Caribbean Mexico Aridoamerica Mesoamerica Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zv974
Cached time: 20250814221324
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.415 seconds
Real time usage: 0.540 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1405/1000000
Revision size: 13488/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 90086/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1385/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54957/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.260/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15823884/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  429.200      1 -total
 22.02%   94.490      1 Template:Reflist
 20.68%   88.777      4 Template:Navbox
 18.58%   79.735      1 Template:Langx
 16.40%   70.391      1 Template:Aboriginal_peoples_in_the_Northwest_Territories
 16.21%   69.552      2 Template:Cite_book
 12.90%   55.371      1 Template:Short_description
  9.51%   40.804      2 Template:Ambox
  7.69%   33.018      1 Template:Unreferenced_section
  7.62%   32.707      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14849617:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221324 and revision id 1305439203. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Circumpolar_peoples&oldid=1305439203 " Categories : Culture of the Arctic Society of the Arctic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 02:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Circumpolar peoples 12 languages Add topic

