Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms 2 Causes 3 Warning signs 4 Treatment Toggle Treatment subsection 4.1 Scalp, behind ears, eyebrows 4.2 Eyelids 5 Prognosis/differential diagnosis 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Cradle cap 15 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français Gaeilge Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Svenska ไทย Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Crusting or scaling of a baby's scalp Medical condition Cradle cap Other names infantile or neonatal seborrhoeic dermatitis, crusta lactea, milk crust, honeycomb disease, scurf cap An infant with characteristic scaly scalp of cradle cap Specialty Dermatology Cradle cap is crusty or oily scaly patches on a baby's scalp. The condition is not painful or itchy, but it can cause thick white or yellow scales that are not easy to remove.

[ 1 ] Cradle cap most commonly begins sometime in the first three months but can occur in later years. Similar symptoms in older children are more likely to be dandruff than cradle cap. The rash is often prominent around the ear, the eyebrows or the eyelids.  It may appear in other locations as well, where it is called infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis . Cradle cap is just a special—and more benign—case of this condition. The exact cause of cradle cap is not known. Cradle cap is not spread from person to person (not contagious). It is also not caused by poor hygiene. It is not an allergy, and it is not dangerous. Cradle cap often lasts a few months. In some children, the condition can last until age 2 or 3.

[ 2 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Close up image of cradle cap Cradle cap is seborrheic dermatitis that affects infants.  It presents on the scalp as greasy patches of scaling, [ 3 ] which appear thick, crusty, yellow, white or brown.

[ 4 ] The affected regions are not usually itchy and do not bother the child.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] Other affected areas can include the eyelids, ear, around the nose, and in the groin. Hair loss can also occur.

[ 4 ] Causes [ edit ] Cradle cap is not caused by bacterial infection, allergy or poor hygiene.

[ 4 ] Cradle cap is also not contagious.

[ 4 ] Doctors do not agree on what causes cradle cap, but the two most common hypotheses are fungal infection and overactive sebaceous glands. Cradle cap is an inflammatory condition.

[ 4 ] Possibly it has to do with overactive sebaceous glands in the skin of newborn babies, due to the mother's hormones still in the baby's circulation. The glands release a greasy substance that makes old skin cells attach to the scalp instead of falling off as they dry. There is a relationship with skin yeasts ( Malassezia furfur ).

[ 6 ] Warning signs [ edit ] If the condition thickens, turns red and irritated, starts spreading, appears on other body parts, or if the baby develops thrush (fungal mouth infection), fungal ear infection (an ear infection that does not respond to antibiotics) or a persistent diaper rash , medical intervention is recommended.

Severe cases of cradle cap, especially with cracked or bleeding skin, can provide a place for bacteria to grow. If the cradle cap is caused by a fungal infection which has worsened significantly over days or weeks to allow bacterial growth ( impetigo , most commonly), a combination treatment of antibiotics and antifungals may be necessary.  Since it is difficult for a layperson to distinguish the difference between sebaceous gland cradle cap, fungal cradle cap, or either of these combined with a bacterial infection, medical advice should be sought if the condition appears to worsen.

Cradle cap is occasionally linked to immune disorders. If the baby is not thriving and has other problems (e.g.

diarrhea ), a doctor should be consulted.

Treatment [ edit ] To help with cradle cap, parents can gently massage their baby's scalp with their fingers or a soft brush to loosen the scales. They may want to shampoo the baby's hair more frequently (no more than once a day), and after shampooing gently brush the baby's scalp with a soft brush or a terrycloth towel. Oil remedies can be used by rubbing a small amount of pure, plant-derived oil (coconut oil, pure olive oil, almond oil) on the baby's scalp and leaving it on for 15 minutes. After 15 minutes, gently comb out the flakes with a fine tooth comb or brush. Be sure to wash out all of the oil to avoid making the cradle cap worse.

[ 7 ] In cases that are related to fungal infection, such as tinea capitis , doctors may recommend a treatment application of clotrimazole (commonly prescribed for jock itch or athlete's foot) or miconazole (commonly prescribed for vaginal candidiasis ).

Doctors may recommend a treatment with a mild dandruff shampoo such as Selsun Blue even though the treatment may cause initial additional scalp irritation. A doctor may instead prescribe an antifungal soap such as ketoconazole (2%) shampoo, which can work in a single treatment and shows significantly less irritation than over-the-counter shampoos such as selenium disulfide shampoos.

[ 8 ] There are only a limited number of studies regarding the efficacy and safety of treatments for cradle cap and infantile seborrheic dermatitis. Several treatments including Promiseb, lactamide MEA gel, hydrocortisone 1% lotion, licochalcone 0.025%, flumethasone pivalate 0.02% ointment, and eosin 2% aqueous solution have been studied, however there is uncertainty regarding the efficacy and safety of these treatments.

[ 9 ] For adults: see the article on seborrheic dermatitis (the adult version of cradle cap).

Scalp, behind ears, eyebrows [ edit ] If the cradle cap is not severe, it could simply be combed out gently after bathing. The softened scales can then be brushed away with a soft brush, comb or cloth, but if not done very gently, this could worsen the condition and bring about temporary hair loss.  Applying petroleum jelly (e.g., Vaseline ) liberally overnight is another popular treatment. The softened scales either fall off during the night, or can be brushed off in the morning.

[ 10 ] There is broad disagreement regarding the role of shampoos . Some sources warn against frequent shampooing, others recommend it. Mild baby shampoo is often recommended, but the exact denotation of the label "mild" in this context is not quite clear.

Baby shampoos often contain detergent surfactants , perfumes, quaternium-15 and other eczematogenic irritants. No studies have been performed on non-prescription shampoos.

[ vague ] In stubborn cases some doctors may recommend keratolytic (dandruff) shampoos (e.g. with sulfur , selenium , zinc pyrithione , or salicylic acid ) while others warn against the use of medicated shampoos in newborns due to systemic absorption. Dandruff shampoos often contain sodium dodecyl sulfate , a noted skin irritant.

[ 11 ] Steroid and tar preparations have also been used but may have drawbacks.

[ clarification needed ] The immunomodulators tacrolimus /Protopic and pimecrolimus /Elidel have not been approved for children under two years.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Ketoconazole shampoos and creams are currently shown to be the most effective medical treatment of moderate to serious cradle cap.

[ 3 ] There appears to be little to no absorption of topical ketoconazole into the bloodstream.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Eyelids [ edit ] Typical medical advice is to use baby shampoo, diluted with warm water, on a cotton swab to cleanse the eyelid. There is no agreement on the dilution, which ranges from as high as a 1:1 mix to as low as a few drops of shampoo per half-cup of water.

Prognosis/differential diagnosis [ edit ] Assurances that this condition will clear as the baby matures are very common. However, the condition occasionally persists into the toddler years, and less commonly into later childhood. It tends to recur in adolescence and persists into adulthood. In an Australian study, about 15 percent of previously diagnosed children still had eczema 10 years later. It is common that people mistake cradle cap for atopic dermatitis due to the similar symptoms. Unlike some signs and symptoms of cradle cap, atopic dermatitis affect infants' sleep and feeding habits with moderate to severe itching. In addition, one of the physical diagnosis of atopic dermatitis is poor crusted lesions on certain surfaces of the baby, such as scalp and cheek.

[ 16 ] Rarely, it turns out to be misdiagnosed psoriasis .

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "Cradle Cap" .

Mayo Clinic . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ "MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia - Cradle Cap" .

Medline Plus . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ a b c Sheffield RC, Crawford P, Wright ST, King VJ (March 2007). "Clinical inquiries. What's the best treatment for cradle cap?".

The Journal of Family Practice .

56 (3): 232– 233.

PMID 17343816 .

^ a b c d e "Seborrheic dermatitis" . National Center for Biotechnology Information. Archived from the original on February 6, 2011 . Retrieved 26 August 2012 .

^ Ro BI, Dawson TL (December 2005).

"The role of sebaceous gland activity and scalp microfloral metabolism in the etiology of seborrheic dermatitis and dandruff" .

The Journal of Investigative Dermatology. Symposium Proceedings .

10 (3): 194– 197.

doi : 10.1111/j.1087-0024.2005.10104.x .

PMID 16382662 .

^ Victoire A, Magin P, Coughlan J, van Driel ML (March 2019).

"Interventions for infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis (including cradle cap)" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2019 (3): CD011380.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2 .

PMC 6397947 .

PMID 30828791 .

^ "Cradle Cap" .

Baby Center . Archived from the original on September 11, 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Danby FW, Maddin WS, Margesson LJ, Rosenthal D (December 1993). "A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of ketoconazole 2% shampoo versus selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo in the treatment of moderate to severe dandruff".

Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology .

29 (6): 1008– 12.

doi : 10.1016/0190-9622(93)70282-x .

PMID 8245236 .

^ Victoire A, Magin P, Coughlan J, van Driel ML (March 2019).

"Interventions for infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis (including cradle cap)" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2019 (3): CD011380.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2 .

PMC 6397947 .

PMID 30828791 .

^ Nobles, T.; Harberger, S.; Krishnamurthy, K. (2022).

"Cradle Cap - StatPearls" .

NBCI Bookshelf .

PMID 30285358 . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ "Fact Sheet: Cradle cap" .

Better Health Channel . Victorian Government, Australia. April 2006. Archived from the original on 2006-06-18 . Retrieved 2006-07-14 .

^ "Tacrolimus Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information" .

medlineplus.gov .

^ "Pimecrolimus Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information" .

medlineplus.gov .

^ Kucers' the use of antibiotics : a clinical review of antibacterial, antifungal, antiparasitic and antiviral drugs (6th ed.). CRC Press. 2010.

ISBN 978-1444147520 . Retrieved 20 November 2019 .

^ Wang K, Wu Y, Chi Z, Shu C, Li L, Wei J, et al. (September 2016). "A highly sensitive LC-MS/MS method for determination of ketoconazole in human plasma: Application to a clinical study of the exposure to ketoconazole in patients after topical administration".

Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis .

128 : 504– 509.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.06.025 .

PMID 27379747 .

^ Nobles T, Krishnamurthy K (2019).

"Cradle Cap" .

StatPearls . StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 30285358 . Retrieved 2019-08-02 .

External links [ edit ] DermNet dermatitis/cradle-cap Cradle Cap : Symptoms, Causes And Treatment Classification D ICD - 10 : L21.0 ICD - 9-CM : 690.11 External resources Patient UK : Cradle cap v t e Dermatitis and eczema Atopic dermatitis Prurigo gestationis Sweat allergy Seborrheic dermatitis Pityriasis simplex capillitii Cradle cap Contact dermatitis ( allergic , irritant ) plants: Urushiol-induced contact dermatitis African blackwood dermatitis Tulip fingers other: Abietic acid dermatitis Diaper rash Airbag dermatitis Baboon syndrome Contact stomatitis Metal allergy Protein contact dermatitis Eczema Autoimmune estrogen dermatitis Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis Breast eczema Ear eczema Eyelid dermatitis Topical steroid withdrawal Hand eczema Dyshidrosis Hyperkeratotic hand dermatitis Autosensitization dermatitis / Id reaction Candidid Dermatophytid Molluscum dermatitis Circumostomy eczema Juvenile plantar dermatosis Nummular eczema Nutritional deficiency eczema Sulzberger–Garbe syndrome Xerotic eczema Pruritus / Itch / Prurigo Lichen simplex chronicus / Prurigo nodularis by location: Pruritus ani Pruritus scroti Pruritus vulvae Scalp pruritus Drug-induced pruritus Hydroxyethyl starch-induced pruritus Senile pruritus Aquagenic pruritus Aquadynia Adult blaschkitis due to liver disease Biliary pruritus Cholestatic pruritus Prion pruritus Prurigo pigmentosa Prurigo simplex Puncta pruritica Uremic pruritus Other substances taken internally: Bromoderma Fixed drug reaction Nummular dermatitis Pityriasis alba Papuloerythroderma of Ofuji v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cradle_cap&oldid=1300833651 " Categories : Babycare Infancy Seborrheic dermatitis Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 17:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cradle cap 15 languages Add topic

