Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Reflex arc 2 Suppression and activation 3 Absence 4 Reflexive pharyngeal swallow 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pharyngeal reflex 20 languages العربية Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Gag Reflex ) Reflex at the back of the throat "Gag reflex" redirects here. For the novel, see Gag Reflex (novel) .

The pharyngeal reflex or gag reflex is a reflex muscular contraction of the back of the throat, evoked by touching the roof of the mouth , back of the tongue , area around the tonsils , uvula , and back of the throat . It, along with other aerodigestive reflexes such as reflexive pharyngeal swallowing, prevents objects in the oral cavity from entering the throat except as part of normal swallowing and helps prevent choking , and is a form of coughing. The pharyngeal reflex is different from the laryngeal spasm , which is a reflex muscular contraction of the vocal cords.

Reflex arc [ edit ] In a reflex arc , a series of physiological steps occur very rapidly to produce a reflex. Generally, a sensory receptor receives an environmental stimulus, in this case from objects reaching nerves in the back of the throat, and sends a message via an afferent nerve to the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS receives this message and sends an appropriate response via an efferent nerve (also known as a motor neuron ) to effector cells located in the same initial area that can then carry out the appropriate response.

[ 1 ] In the case of the pharyngeal reflex: the sensory limb is mediated predominantly by CN IX ( glossopharyngeal nerve ) the motor limb by CN X ( vagus nerve ).

The gag reflex involves a brisk and brief elevation of the soft palate and bilateral contraction of pharyngeal muscles evoked by touching the posterior pharyngeal wall. Touching the soft palate can lead to a similar reflex response. However, in that case, the sensory limb of the reflex is the CN V ( trigeminal nerve ). In very sensitive individuals, much more of the brain stem may be involved; a simple gag may enlarge to retching and vomiting in some.

Suppression and activation [ edit ] Swallowing unusually large objects or placing objects in the back of the mouth may cause the pharyngeal reflex. Some people, for instance sword swallowers , have learned how to suppress it.

[ 1 ] In contrast, triggering the reflex is sometimes done intentionally to induce vomiting, by those who have bulimia nervosa .

According to one study, one in three people lacks a gag reflex.

[ 2 ] However, on the other end of the spectrum are people with a hypersensitive gag reflex. This hypersensitivity can lead to issues in various situations, such as swallowing a pill or large bites of food, or visiting the dentist. Hypersensitivity is generally a conditioned response, usually occurring following a previous experience. There are a variety of ways to desensitize one's hypersensitivity, from relaxation to numbing the mouth and throat to training one's soft palate to get used to being touched.

[ citation needed ] Anti-nausea medicines, sedatives , local and general anaesthetics , herbal remedies, behavioural therapies, acupressure , acupuncture , laser, and prosthetic devices can be used to manage exaggerated gag reflex during dental treatment. Studies showed with very low‐certainty evidence that acupuncture and laser at the P6 point (located in the wrist) reduced gagging without sedation. However, there was no difference when practiced with sedation. Therefore, more research needs to be carried out regarding these interventions.

[ 3 ] Some people seem to be able to completely stop their gag reflex for a short time by pressing certain pressure points, even without prior training.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Absence [ edit ] In certain cases, absence of the gag reflex and pharyngeal sensation can be a symptom of a number of severe medical conditions, such as damage to the glossopharyngeal nerve , the vagus nerve , or brain death .

In unilateral (one-sided) glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX - sensory component) damage, there will be no gag response when touching the pharyngeal wall on the same side of the damaged nerve.
With one-sided vagal nerve (CN X - motor component) damage, the soft palate will elevate and pull toward the intact side regardless of the side of the pharynx that is touched. This is because the sensory component is intact on both sides, but only the motor nerves supplying one side of the soft palatine and pharyngeal muscles is working, therefore the contraction of the muscles in the reflex is asymmetrical. 
If both CN IX and X are damaged on one side (not uncommon), stimulation of the normal side elicits only a unilateral response, with deviation of the soft palate to that side; no consensual response is seen. Touching the damaged side produces no response at all.

At one point, it was thought that a lack of the gag reflex in stroke patients was a good predictor for dysphagia (difficulty with swallowing) or laryngeal aspiration (food or drink entering the larynx ), and was therefore commonly checked for. However, in one study, 37% of healthy people did not have a gag reflex, yet all subjects except for one still retained an intact pharyngeal sensation. These results suggest that the muscles that control the gag reflex remain independent of those that control normal swallowing. Since this reflex is commonly not found in healthy people, its predictive value in determining the risk for swallowing disorders is severely limited. Pharyngeal sensation, on the other hand, as seen by this study, is rarely absent, and could prove better at predicting future problems with swallowing.

[ 2 ] Reflexive pharyngeal swallow [ edit ] Closely related to the gag reflex, in which food or other foreign substances are forced back out of the pharynx , swallowing generally pushes food through the digestive system into the stomach. This reflex in particular functions as a protective system for the upper respiratory tract as it not only forces the glottis to close, thereby preventing any substances getting into the airways, but also clears the pharynx of any residual substances by a swallow.

This particular reflex is simply one of several aerodigestive reflexes, including also the pharyngoglottal closure reflex (in which no swallowing occurs, yet the glottis still closes) and the pharyngo-upper esophageal sphincter contractile reflex, which occurs mainly during gastroesophageal reflux episodes. All either forcibly close the glottis or allow the pharynx to remove particles into the digestive tract that may have been forced back up by both this tract and the upper respiratory tract. These reflexes can also protect the airways from any food or liquids that may spill over from the hypopharynx . The hypopharynx is the bottom part of the pharynx, and can be considered the first area where the digestive tract splits from the airways. However, if the maximum capacity of fluids that the hypopharynx can safely hold is exceeded, then this excess fluid spills into the larynx and from there into the lungs. Therefore, these reflexes prevent levels reaching this maximum volume.

[ 6 ] Since both the digestive system and the respiratory system are connected by the pharynx, there are many problems and diseases that occur when the body is unable to regulate passage of food and air into the appropriate tracts. Perhaps the most preventable cause of damage to these reflexes originates from smoking. One study has shown that, when compared to non-smokers, the threshold volumes (the lowest volume at which one of these reflexes is triggered) for both the pharyngo-upper esophageal sphincter contractile reflex and reflexive pharyngeal swallowing is increased.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Retching , also known as dry heaving References [ edit ] ^ a b Wilson, Tracy V. (29 June 2007).

"How Sword Swallowing Works" .

HowStuffWorks .

^ a b Davies AE, Kidd D, Stone SP, MacMahon J (February 1995). "Pharyngeal sensation and gag reflex in healthy subjects".

Lancet .

345 (8948): 487– 8.

doi : 10.1016/s0140-6736(95)90584-7 .

PMID 7861875 .

S2CID 38343691 .

^ Eachempati P, Kumbargere Nagraj S, Kiran Kumar Krishanappa S, George RP, Soe HH, Karanth L (November 2019).

"Management of gag reflex for patients undergoing dental treatment" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2019 (11).

doi : 10.1002/14651858.cd011116.pub3 .

PMC 6953338 .

PMID 31721146 .

^ Scarborough D, Kuren M, Hughes M (October 2008).

"Altering the Gag Reflex Via a Palm Pressure Point" .

The Journal of the American Dental Association .

139 (1): 1365– 1372.

doi : 10.14219/jada.archive.2008.0048 .

^ "Turn Your Gag Reflex Off with Pressure Points" . wonderhowto.com . Retrieved 2024-01-24 .

^ Dua K, Surapaneni SN, Kuribayashi S, Hafeezullah M, Shaker R (August 2011).

"Pharyngeal airway protective reflexes are triggered before the maximum volume of fluid that the hypopharynx can safely hold is exceeded" .

American Journal of Physiology. Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology .

301 (2): G197-202.

doi : 10.1152/ajpgi.00046.2011 .

PMC 3154610 .

PMID 21566013 .

^ Dua K, Bardan E, Ren J, Sui Z, Shaker R (October 1998).

"Effect of chronic and acute cigarette smoking on the pharyngo-upper oesophageal sphincter contractile reflex and reflexive pharyngeal swallow" .

Gut .

43 (4): 537– 41.

doi : 10.1136/gut.43.4.537 .

PMC 1727281 .

PMID 9824582 .

v t e Reflexes Cranial nerve Pupillary light reflex Accommodation reflex Jaw jerk reflex Corneal reflex Caloric reflex test / Vestibulo-ocular reflex / Oculocephalic reflex Pharyngeal (gag) reflex Stretch reflexes Arm Biceps reflex Brachioradialis reflex Triceps reflex Leg Patellar reflex Ankle jerk reflex Plantar reflex Primitive reflexes Galant Gastrocolic Grasp Moro Rooting Stepping Sucking Tonic neck Parachute Superficial reflexes Abdominal reflex Cremasteric reflex Cardiovascular Bainbridge reflex Bezold–Jarisch reflex Coronary reflex Cushing reflex Diving reflex Oculocardiac reflex Baroreflex Reflex bradycardia Reflex tachycardia Respiratory Churchill–Cope reflex Other List of reflexes Acoustic reflex H-reflex Golgi tendon reflex Optokinetic Startle response Withdrawal reflex Crossed extensor reflex Symmetrical tonic neck reflex Scratch reflex Escape reflex Escape response Avoidance response Knismesis and gargalesis Ideomotor reflex Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pharyngeal_reflex&oldid=1303356945 " Categories : Human throat Reflexes Vomiting Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 14:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pharyngeal reflex 20 languages Add topic

