Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Marriage and family 3 Early career in law and politics Toggle Early career in law and politics subsection 3.1 Legal career 3.2 Early political career 4 Speaker of the House Toggle Speaker of the House subsection 4.1 Election and leadership 4.2 Madison administration, 1811–1817 4.3 Monroe administration, 1817–1825 4.3.1 1824 presidential election 5 Secretary of State 6 Later career Toggle Later career subsection 6.1 Jackson administration, 1829–1837 6.1.1 Return to the Senate 6.1.2 Bank War and the 1832 presidential election 6.1.3 Nullification Crisis 6.1.4 Formation of the Whig Party 6.2 Van Buren administration, 1837–1841 6.3 Harrison and Tyler administrations, 1841–1845 6.3.1 1844 presidential election 6.4 Polk administration, 1845–1849 6.5 Taylor and Fillmore administrations, 1849–1852 7 Death 8 Ideology and slavery Toggle Ideology and slavery subsection 8.1 American System 8.2 Practices as an enslaver and the Dupuy case 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Historical reputation 9.2 Monuments and memorials 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Works cited 13 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 13.1 Secondary sources 13.2 Primary sources 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Henry Clay 39 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American politician (1777–1852) For other people named Henry Clay, see Henry Clay (disambiguation) .

Henry Clay Clay in 1848 9th United States Secretary of State In office March 4, 1825 – March 4, 1829 President John Quincy Adams Preceded by John Quincy Adams Succeeded by Martin Van Buren United States Senator from Kentucky In office March 4, 1849 – June 29, 1852 Preceded by Thomas Metcalfe Succeeded by David Meriwether In office November 10, 1831 – March 31, 1842 Preceded by John Rowan Succeeded by John J. Crittenden In office January 4, 1810 – March 3, 1811 Appointed by Charles Scott Preceded by Buckner Thruston Succeeded by George M. Bibb In office December 29, 1806 – March 3, 1807 Preceded by John Adair Succeeded by John Pope 7th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives In office December 1, 1823 – March 3, 1825 Preceded by Philip P. Barbour Succeeded by John Taylor In office December 4, 1815 – October 28, 1820 Preceded by Langdon Cheves Succeeded by John Taylor In office November 4, 1811 – January 19, 1814 Preceded by Joseph Varnum Succeeded by Langdon Cheves Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Kentucky In office March 4, 1823 – March 6, 1825 Preceded by John Johnson Succeeded by James Clark Constituency 3rd district In office March 4, 1815 – March 3, 1821 Preceded by Joseph H. Hawkins Succeeded by Samuel Woodson Constituency 2nd district In office March 4, 1811 – January 19, 1814 Preceded by William T. Barry Succeeded by Joseph H. Hawkins Constituency 2nd district (1813–1814) 5th district (1811–1813) Personal details Born ( 1777-04-12 ) April 12, 1777 Hanover County, Virginia Died June 29, 1852 (1852-06-29) (aged 75) Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Resting place Lexington Cemetery Political party Democratic-Republican (1797–1825) National Republican (1825–1833) Whig (1833–1852) Spouse Lucretia Hart ​ ( m.

1799) ​ Children 11, including Thomas , Henry Jr.

, James , John Education College of William & Mary Signature This article is part of a series about Henry Clay Personal Early law and political career Family Law office Ashland Charlotte Dupuy U.S. Speaker of the House Great Triumvirate War of 1812 American System Second Bank of the United States Missouri Compromise U.S. Secretary of State Corrupt bargain U.S. Senator from Kentucky Nullification Crisis Bank War Whig Party Compromise of 1850 Presidential campaigns 1824 election 1832 convention election 1844 convention election Legacy Eponyms Monument Statue Henry Clay Oak v t e Henry Clay (April 12, 1777 – June 29, 1852) was an American lawyer and statesman who represented Kentucky in both the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives . He was the seventh House speaker as well as the ninth secretary of state . He unsuccessfully ran for president in the 1824 , 1832 , and 1844 elections. He helped found both the National Republican Party and the Whig Party . For his role in defusing sectional crises, he earned the appellation of the " Great Compromiser " and was part of the " Great Triumvirate " of Congressmen, alongside fellow Whig Daniel Webster and Democrat John C. Calhoun .

Clay was born in Virginia , in 1777, and began his legal career in Lexington, Kentucky , in 1797. As a member of the Democratic-Republican Party , Clay won election to the Kentucky state legislature in 1803 and to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1810. He was chosen as Speaker of the House in early 1811 and, along with President James Madison , led the United States into the War of 1812 against Great Britain. In 1814, he helped negotiate the Treaty of Ghent , which brought an end to the War of 1812, and then after the war, Clay returned to his position as Speaker of the House and developed the American System , which called for federal infrastructure investments , support for the national bank , and high protective tariff rates . In 1820 he helped bring an end to a sectional crisis over slavery by leading the passage of the Missouri Compromise . Clay finished with the fourth-most electoral votes in the multi-candidate 1824-1825 presidential election and used his position as speaker to help John Quincy Adams win the contingent election held to select the president. President Adams then appointed Clay to the prestigious position of secretary of state; as a result, critics alleged that the two had agreed to a " corrupt bargain ".

Despite receiving support from Clay and other National Republicans, Adams was defeated by Democrat Andrew Jackson in the 1828 presidential election . Clay won election to the Senate in 1831 and ran as the National Republican nominee in the 1832 presidential election. Clay was defeated decisively by President Jackson primarily due to his support for the national bank , which Jackson vehemently opposed. After the 1832 election, Clay helped bring an end to the nullification crisis by leading passage of the Tariff of 1833 . During Jackson's second term, opponents of the president including Clay, Webster, and William Henry Harrison created the Whig Party, and through the years, Clay became a leading congressional Whig.

Clay sought the presidency in the 1840 election but was passed over at the Whig National Convention in favor of Harrison. When Harrison died and his vice president John Tyler ascended to office in 1841, Clay clashed with Tyler, who broke with Clay and other congressional Whigs. Clay resigned from the Senate in 1842 and won the 1844 Whig presidential nomination, but he was narrowly defeated in the general election by Democrat James K. Polk , who made the annexation of the Republic of Texas his top issue. Clay strongly criticized the subsequent Mexican–American War and sought the Whig presidential nomination in 1848 but was passed over in favor of General Zachary Taylor who went on to win the election. After returning to the Senate in 1849, Clay played a key role in passing the Compromise of 1850 , which postponed a crisis over the status of slavery in the territories. Clay was one of the most important and influential political figures of his era.

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] Henry Clay was born on April 12, 1777, at the Clay homestead in Hanover County, Virginia .

[ 2 ] He was the seventh of nine children born to the Reverend John Clay and Elizabeth (née Hudson) Clay.

[ 3 ] Almost all of Henry's older siblings died before adulthood.

[ 4 ] His father, a Baptist minister nicknamed "Sir John", died in 1781, leaving Henry and his brothers two enslaved individuals each; he also left his wife 18 slaves and 464 acres (188 ha) of land.

[ 5 ] Clay was of entirely English descent; [ 6 ] his ancestor, John Clay, settled in Virginia in 1613.

[ 7 ] The Clay family became a well-known political family including three other US senators, numerous state politicians, and Clay's cousin Cassius Clay , a prominent anti-slavery activist active in the mid-19th century.

[ 8 ] The British raided Clay's home shortly after the death of his father, leaving the family in a precarious economic position.

[ 9 ] However, the widow Elizabeth Clay married Captain Henry Watkins, a successful planter and cousin to John Clay.

[ 10 ] Elizabeth would have seven more children with Watkins, bearing a total of sixteen children.

[ 11 ] Watkins became a kind and supportive stepfather and Clay had a very good relationship with him.

[ 12 ] After his mother's remarriage, the young Clay remained in Hanover County, where he learned how to read and write.

[ 10 ] In 1791, Watkins moved the family to Kentucky, joining his brother in the pursuit of fertile new lands in the West. However, Clay did not follow, as Watkins secured his temporary employment in a Richmond emporium, with the promise that Clay would receive the next available clerkship at the Virginia Court of Chancery .

[ 13 ] After Clay had worked at the Richmond emporium for a year, he obtained a clerkship that had become available at the Virginia Court of Chancery. Clay adapted well to his new role, and his handwriting earned him the attention of College of William & Mary professor George Wythe , a signer of the Declaration of Independence , mentor of Thomas Jefferson , and judge on Virginia's High Court of Chancery.

[ 14 ] Hampered by a crippled hand, Wythe chose Clay as his secretary and amanuensis , a role in which Clay would remain for four years.

[ 15 ] Clay began to read law under Wythe's mentorship.

[ 16 ] Wythe had a powerful effect on Clay's worldview, with Clay embracing Wythe's belief that the example of the United States could help spread human freedom around the world.

[ 17 ] Wythe subsequently arranged a position for Clay with Virginia attorney general Robert Brooke , with the understanding that Brooke would finish Clay's legal studies.

[ 18 ] After completing his studies under Brooke, Clay was admitted to the Virginia Bar in 1797.

[ 19 ] Marriage and family [ edit ] See also: Clay family On April 11, 1799, Clay married Lucretia Hart (1781–1864) at the Hart home in Lexington, Kentucky . Her father, Colonel Thomas Hart, was an early settler of Kentucky and a prominent businessman.

[ 20 ] Hart proved to be an important business connection for Clay, as he helped Clay gain new clients and grow in professional stature.

[ 21 ] Hart was the namesake and grand-uncle of Missouri Senator Thomas Hart Benton and was also related to James Brown , a prominent Louisiana politician, and Isaac Shelby , the first governor of Kentucky .

[ 22 ] Henry Clay was an active Freemason, and served as worshipful master of Lexington lodge No.1 in 1801. Henry and Lucretia would remain married until his death in 1852; she lived until 1864, dying at the age of 83. Both are buried at Lexington Cemetery .

[ 23 ] Henry Clay and Lucretia ( née Hart ) Clay and Lucretia had eleven children (six daughters and five sons): [ 24 ] Henrietta (born in 1800), Theodore (1802), Thomas (1803), Susan (1805), Anne (1807), Lucretia (1809), Henry Jr.

(1811), Eliza (1813), Laura (1815), James (1817), and John (1821). By 1835, all six daughters had died of varying causes, two when very young, two as children, and the last two as young mothers. Henry Jr. was killed while commanding a regiment at the Battle of Buena Vista during the Mexican–American War . Clay's oldest son, Theodore Wythe Clay, spent the second half of his life confined to a psychiatric hospital . When a young child, Theodore was injured by a blow to his head that fractured his skull. As he grew older his condition devolved into insanity, and from 1831 until his death in 1870 he was confined to an asylum in Lexington .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Thomas (who had served some jail time in Philadelphia in 1829–1830) [ 24 ] became a successful farmer, James established a legal practice (and later served in Congress), and John (who in his mid-20s was also confined to the asylum for a short time) became a successful horse breeder.

[ 26 ] Clay was greatly interested in gambling, although he favored numerous restrictions and legal limitations on it. Famously, he once won $40,000 (approximately $970,000 as of 2020).

[ 27 ] Clay asked for $500 (approximately $12,000 today) and waived the remainder of the debt. Shortly afterward, Clay fell into a debt of $60,000 (approximately $1.5 million today [ 28 ] ) while gambling with the same man, who then asked for the $500 back and waived the rest of the debt.

[ 29 ] External videos Guided tour of Ashland, The Henry Clay Estate, June 22, 2015 , C-SPAN They initially lived in Lexington, but in 1804 they began building a plantation outside of Lexington known as Ashland . The Ashland estate eventually encompassed over 500 acres (200 ha), with numerous outbuildings such as a smokehouse, a greenhouse, and several barns. There were 122 enslaved people at the estate during Clay's lifetime, with about 50 people needed for farming and the household.

[ 30 ] He planted crops such as corn, wheat, and rye, as well as hemp , the chief crop of the Bluegrass region .

[ 31 ] Clay also took a strong interest in thoroughbred racing and imported livestock such as Arabian horses , Maltese donkeys , and Hereford cattle .

[ 32 ] Though Clay suffered some financial issues during economic downturns, he never fell deeply into debt and ultimately left his children a large inheritance.

[ 33 ] After the deaths of Anne and Susan, Clay and Lucretia raised several grandchildren at Ashland.

[ 34 ] Early career in law and politics [ edit ] Legal career [ edit ] View of Henry Clay's law office (1803–1810), Lexington, Kentucky In November 1797, Clay relocated to Lexington, Kentucky, near where his parents and siblings resided. The Bluegrass region, with Lexington at its center, had quickly grown in the preceding decades but had only recently stopped being under the threat of Native American raids. Lexington was an established town that hosted Transylvania University , the first university west of the Appalachian Mountains .

[ 35 ] Having already passed the Virginia Bar, Clay quickly received a Kentucky license to practice law. After apprenticing himself to Kentucky attorneys such as George Nicholas , John Breckenridge , and James Brown, Clay established his own law practice, frequently working on debt collections and land disputes.

[ 36 ] Clay soon established a reputation for strong legal ability and courtroom oratory. In 1805, he was appointed to the faculty of Transylvania University where he taught, among others, future Kentucky Governor Robert P. Letcher and Robert Todd, the future father-in-law of Abraham Lincoln .

[ 37 ] Clay's most notable client was Aaron Burr , who was indicted for treason in the Burr conspiracy . Clay and his law partner John Allen successfully defended Burr without a fee in 1807.

[ 38 ] Thomas Jefferson later convinced Clay that Burr had been guilty of the charges.

[ 39 ] Clay's legal practice was light after his election to Congress. In the 1823 case Green v. Biddle , Clay submitted the Supreme Court's first amicus curiae . However, he lost that case.

[ 40 ] Early political career [ edit ] Further information: 9th United States Congress and 11th United States Congress Clay entered politics shortly after arriving in Kentucky. In his first political speech, he attacked the Alien and Sedition Acts , laws passed by Federalists to suppress dissent during the Quasi-War with France.

[ 41 ] Like most Kentuckians, Clay was a member of the Democratic-Republican Party , but he clashed with state party leaders over a state constitutional convention. Using the pseudonym "Scaevola" (in reference to Gaius Mucius Scaevola ), Clay advocated for direct elections for Kentucky elected officials and the gradual emancipation of slavery in Kentucky . The 1799 Kentucky Constitution included the direct election of public officials, but the state did not adopt Clay's plan for gradual emancipation.

[ 42 ] In 1803, Clay won election to the Kentucky House of Representatives .

[ 43 ] His first legislative initiative was the partisan gerrymander of Kentucky's Electoral College districts, which ensured that all of Kentucky's presidential electors voted for President Jefferson in the 1804 presidential election .

[ 44 ] Clay clashed with legislators who sought to reduce the power of Clay's Bluegrass region, and he unsuccessfully advocated moving the state capitol from Frankfort to Lexington. Clay frequently opposed populist firebrand Felix Grundy , and he helped defeat Grundy's effort to revoke the banking privileges of the state-owned Kentucky Insurance Company. He advocated for the construction of internal improvements , which would become a consistent theme throughout his public career.

[ 44 ] Clay's influence in Kentucky state politics was such that in 1806 the Kentucky legislature elected him to the United States Senate .

[ 45 ] [ a ] During his two-month tenure in the Senate, Clay advocated for the construction of various bridges and canals, including a canal connecting the Chesapeake Bay and the Delaware River .

[ 48 ] After Clay returned to Kentucky in 1807, he was elected as the speaker of the state house of representatives.

[ 49 ] That same year, in response to attacks on American shipping by Britain and France during the Napoleonic Wars , President Jefferson arranged passage of the Embargo Act of 1807 . In support of Jefferson's policy, which limited trade with foreign powers, Clay introduced a resolution to require legislators to wear homespun suits rather than those made of imported British broadcloth .

[ 50 ] The vast majority of members of the state house voted for the measure, but Humphrey Marshall , an "aristocratic lawyer who possessed a sarcastic tongue," voted against it.

[ 51 ] In early 1809, Clay challenged Marshall to a duel , which took place on January 19.

[ 52 ] While many contemporary duels were called off or fought without the intention of killing one another, both Clay and Marshall fought the duel with the intent of killing their opponent.

[ 53 ] They each had three turns to shoot; both were hit by bullets, but both survived.

[ 51 ] Clay quickly recovered from his injury and received only a minor censure from the Kentucky legislature.

[ 54 ] In 1810, U.S. Senator Buckner Thruston resigned to accept appointment to a position as a federal judge, and Clay was selected by the legislature to fill Thruston's seat. Clay quickly emerged as a fierce critic of British attacks on American shipping, becoming part of an informal group of " war hawks " who favored expansionist policies.

[ 55 ] He also advocated the annexation of West Florida , which was controlled by Spain.

[ 56 ] On the insistence of the Kentucky legislature, Clay helped prevent the re-charter of the First Bank of the United States , arguing that it interfered with state banks and infringed on states' rights .

[ 57 ] After serving in the Senate for one year, Clay decided that he disliked the rules of the Senate and instead sought election to the United States House of Representatives .

[ 58 ] He won election unopposed in late 1810.

[ 59 ] Speaker of the House [ edit ] Election and leadership [ edit ] The 1810–1811 elections produced many young, anti-British members of Congress who, like Clay, supported going to war with Great Britain. Buoyed by the support of fellow war hawks , Clay was elected Speaker of the House for the 12th Congress .

[ 60 ] At 34, he was the youngest person to become speaker, a distinction he held until 1839, when 30-year-old Robert M. T. Hunter took office.

[ 61 ] He was also the first of only two new members elected speaker to date, [ b ] the other being William Pennington in 1860.

[ 62 ] Between 1810 and 1824, Clay was elected to seven terms in the House.

[ 63 ] His tenure was interrupted from 1814 to 1815 when he was a commissioner to peace talks with the British in Ghent , United Netherlands to end the War of 1812 , and from 1821 to 1823, when he left Congress to rebuild his family's fortune in the aftermath of the Panic of 1819 .

[ 64 ] Elected speaker six times , Clay's cumulative tenure in office of 10 years, 196 days, is the second-longest, surpassed only by Sam Rayburn .

[ 65 ] As speaker, Clay wielded considerable power in making committee appointments, and like many of his predecessors he assigned his allies to important committees. Clay was exceptional in his ability to control the legislative agenda through well-placed allies and the establishment of new committees and departed from precedent by frequently taking part in floor debates.

[ 66 ] Yet he also gained a reputation for personal courteousness and fairness in his rulings and committee appointments.

[ 67 ] Clay's drive to increase the power of the office of speaker was aided by President James Madison , who deferred to Congress in most matters.

[ 68 ] John Randolph , a member of the Democratic-Republican Party but also a member of the " tertium quids " group that opposed many federal initiatives, emerged as a prominent opponent of Speaker Clay.

[ 69 ] While Randolph frequently attempted to obstruct Clay's initiatives, Clay became a master of parliamentary maneuvers that enabled him to advance his agenda even over the attempted obstruction by Randolph and others.

[ 70 ] [ c ] Madison administration, 1811–1817 [ edit ] Further information: Presidency of James Madison , 12th United States Congress , 13th United States Congress , and 14th United States Congress Clay and other war hawks demanded that the British revoke the Orders in Council , a series of decrees that had resulted in a de facto commercial war with the United States.

[ 72 ] Though Clay recognized the dangers inherent in fighting Britain, one of the most powerful countries in the world, he saw it as the only realistic alternative to a humiliating submission to British attacks on American shipping.

[ 73 ] Clay led a successful effort in the House to declare war against Britain, complying with a request from President Madison.

[ 74 ] Madison signed the declaration of war on June 18, 1812, beginning the War of 1812. During the war, Clay frequently communicated with Secretary of State James Monroe and Secretary of War William Eustis , though he advocated for the replacement of the latter.

[ 75 ] The war started poorly for the Americans, and Clay lost friends and relatives in the fighting.

[ 74 ] In October 1813, the British asked Madison to begin negotiations in Europe, and Madison asked Clay to join his diplomatic team, as the president hoped that the presence of the leading war hawk would ensure support for a peace treaty. Clay was reluctant to leave Congress but felt duty-bound to accept the offer, and so he resigned from Congress on January 19, 1814.

[ 76 ] Clay left the country on February 25, but negotiations with the British did not begin until August 1814. Clay was part of a team of five commissioners that included Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin , Senator James Bayard , ambassador Jonathan Russell , and ambassador John Quincy Adams , the head of the American team.

[ 77 ] Clay and Adams maintained an uneasy relationship marked by frequent clashes, and Gallatin emerged as the unofficial leader of the American team. When the British finally presented their initial peace offer, Clay was outraged by its terms, especially the British proposal for an Indian barrier state on the Great Lakes . After a series of American military successes in 1814, the British delegation made several concessions and offered a better peace deal.

[ 78 ] While Adams and Gallatin were eager to make peace as quickly as possible even if that required sub-optimal terms in the peace treaty, Clay believed that the British, worn down by years of fighting against France, greatly desired peace with the United States. Partly due to Clay's hard-line stance, the Treaty of Ghent included relatively favorable terms for the United States, essentially re-establishing the status quo ante bellum between Britain and the U.S. The treaty was signed on December 24, 1814, bringing a close to the War of 1812.

[ 79 ] After the signing of the treaty, Clay briefly traveled to London, where he helped Gallatin negotiate a commercial agreement with Britain.

[ 80 ] Clay returned to the United States in September 1815; despite his absence, he had been elected to another term in the House of Representatives. Upon his return to Congress, Clay won election as Speaker of the House.

[ 81 ] The War of 1812 strengthened Clay's support for interventionist economic policies such as federally funded internal improvements, which he believed were necessary to improve the country's infrastructure system.

[ 82 ] He eagerly embraced President Madison's ambitious domestic package, which included infrastructure investment, tariffs to protect domestic manufacturing, and spending increases for the army and navy. With the help of John C. Calhoun and William Lowndes , Clay passed the Tariff of 1816 , which served the dual purpose of raising revenue and protecting American manufacturing.  To stabilize the currency, Clay and Treasury Secretary Alexander Dallas arranged passage of a bill establishing the Second Bank of the United States (also known as the national bank).

[ 83 ] Clay also supported the Bonus Bill of 1817 , which would have provided a fund for internal improvements, but Madison vetoed the bill on constitutional concerns.

[ 84 ] Beginning in 1818, Clay advocated for an economic plan known as the " American System ," which encompassed many of the economic measures, including protective tariffs and infrastructure investments, that he helped pass in the aftermath of the War of 1812.

[ 85 ] Monroe administration, 1817–1825 [ edit ] Further information: Presidency of James Monroe , 15th United States Congress , 16th United States Congress , 17th United States Congress , and 18th United States Congress Like Jefferson and George Washington , President Madison decided to retire after two terms, leaving open the Democratic-Republican nomination for the 1816 presidential election . At the time, the Democratic-Republicans used a congressional nominating caucus to choose their presidential nominees, giving congressmen a powerful role in the presidential selection process. Monroe and Secretary of War William Crawford emerged as the two main candidates for the Democratic-Republican nomination. Clay had a favorable opinion of both individuals, but he supported Monroe, who won the nomination and went on to defeat Federalist candidate Rufus King in the general election.

[ 86 ] Monroe offered Clay the position of secretary of war, but Clay strongly desired the office of secretary of state and was angered when Monroe instead chose John Quincy Adams for that position.

[ 87 ] Clay became so bitter that he refused to allow Monroe's inauguration to take place in the House Chamber and subsequently did not attend Monroe's outdoor inauguration.

[ 88 ] Portrait by Matthew Harris Jouett , 1818 In early 1819, a dispute erupted over the proposed statehood of Missouri after New York Congressman James Tallmadge introduced a legislative amendment that would provide for the gradual emancipation of Missouri's enslaved people.

[ 89 ] Though Clay had previously called for gradual emancipation in Kentucky, he sided with fellow Southerners in voting down Tallmadge's amendment.

[ 90 ] Clay instead supported Illinois Senator Jesse B. Thomas 's compromise proposal in which Missouri would be admitted as a slave state , Maine would be admitted as a free state, [ d ] and slavery would be forbidden in the territories north of 36° 30' parallel. Clay helped assemble a coalition that passed the Missouri Compromise , as Thomas's proposal became known.

[ 91 ] Further controversy ensued when Missouri's constitution banned free blacks from entering the state, but Clay was able to engineer another compromise that allowed Missouri to join as a state in August 1821.

[ 92 ] In foreign policy, Clay was a leading American supporter of the independence movements and revolutions that broke out in Latin America beginning in 1810.

[ 93 ] Clay frequently called on the Monroe administration to recognize the fledgling Latin American republics, but Monroe feared that doing so would derail his plans to acquire Spanish Florida .

[ 94 ] In 1818, General Andrew Jackson crossed into Spanish Florida to suppress raids by Seminole Indians.

[ 95 ] Though Jackson was following Monroe's implied wishes in entering Florida, he created additional controversy in seizing the Spanish town of Pensacola . Despite protests from Secretary of War Calhoun, Monroe and Adams decided to support Jackson's actions in the hope that they would convince Spain to sell Florida.

[ 95 ] Clay, however, was outraged, and he publicly condemned Jackson's decision to hang two foreign nationals without a trial. Before the House chamber, he compared Jackson to military dictators of the past, telling his colleagues "that Greece had her Alexander , Rome her Caesar , England her Cromwell , France her Bonaparte , and, that if we would escape the rock on which they split, we must avoid their errors." [ 96 ] Jackson saw Clay's protestations as an attack on his character and thus began a long rivalry between Clay and Jackson.

[ 96 ] The rivalry and the controversy over Jackson's expedition temporarily subsided after the signing of the Adams–Onís Treaty , in which the U.S. purchased Florida and delineated its western boundary with New Spain .

[ 97 ] 1824 presidential election [ edit ] Main article: 1824 United States presidential election Clay helped Adams win the 1825 contingent House election after Clay failed to finish among the three electoral vote-winners. States in orange voted for Crawford, states in green for Adams, and states in blue for Jackson.

By 1822, several members of the Democratic-Republican Party had begun exploring presidential bids to succeed Monroe, who planned to retire after two terms like his predecessors.

[ 98 ] As the Federalist Party was near collapse, the 1824 presidential election would be contested only by members of the Democratic-Republican Party, including Clay. Having led the passage of the Tariff of 1824 and the General Survey Act , Clay campaigned on his American System of high tariffs and federal spending on infrastructure.

[ 99 ] Three members of Monroe's Cabinet, Secretary of the Treasury William Crawford, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, and Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, appeared to be Clay's strongest competitors for the presidency.

[ 98 ] Though many, including Clay, did not take his candidacy seriously at first, General Andrew Jackson emerged as a presidential contender, eroding Clay's base of support in the western states.

[ 100 ] In February 1824, the sparsely attended Democratic-Republican congressional caucus endorsed Crawford's candidacy, but Crawford's rivals ignored the caucus results, and various state legislatures nominated candidates for president.

[ 101 ] During the campaign, Crawford suffered a major stroke, while Calhoun withdrew from the race after Jackson won the endorsement of the Pennsylvania legislature.

[ 102 ] By 1824, with Crawford still in the race, Clay concluded that no candidate would win a majority of electoral votes; in that scenario, the House of Representatives would hold a contingent election to decide the election. Under the terms of the Twelfth Amendment , the top three electoral vote-getters would be eligible to be elected by the House. Clay was confident that he would prevail in a contingent held in the chamber he presided over, so long as he was eligible for election.

[ 103 ] Clay won Kentucky, Ohio, and Missouri, but his loss in New York and Louisiana relegated him to a fourth-place finish behind Adams, Jackson, and Crawford.

[ 104 ] Clay was humiliated that he finished behind the invalid Crawford and Jackson, but supporters of the three remaining presidential candidates immediately began courting his support for the contingent election.

[ 105 ] For various reasons, supporters of all three candidates believed they had the best chance of winning Clay's backing, but Clay quickly settled on supporting Adams.

[ 106 ] Of the three candidates, Adams was the most sympathetic to Clay's American System, and Clay viewed both Jackson and the sickly Crawford as unsuitable for the presidency.

[ 107 ] On January 9, 1825, Clay privately met with Adams for three hours, after which Clay promised Adams his support; both would later claim that they did not discuss Clay's position in an Adams administration.

[ 108 ] With the help of Clay, Adams won the House vote on the first ballot.

[ 109 ] After his election, Adams offered Clay the position of secretary of state, which Clay accepted, despite fears that he would be accused of trading his support for the Cabinet post. Jackson was outraged by the election, and he and his supporters accused Clay and Adams of having reached a " Corrupt Bargain ." [ 110 ] Pro-Jackson forces immediately began preparing for the 1828 presidential election , with the Corrupt Bargain accusation becoming their central issue.

[ 111 ] Secretary of State [ edit ] Portrait of Henry Clay Further information: Presidency of John Quincy Adams Clay served as secretary of state from 1825 to 1829. As secretary of state, he was the top foreign policy official in the Adams administration, but he also held several domestic duties, such as oversight of the patent office.

[ 112 ] Clay came to like Adams, a former rival, and to despise Jackson. They developed a strong working relationship.

[ 113 ] Adams and Clay were both wary of forming entangling alliances with the emerging states, and they continued to uphold the Monroe Doctrine , which called for European non-intervention in former colonies.

[ 114 ] Clay was rebuffed in his efforts to reach a commercial treaty and a settlement of the Canada–United States border with Britain, and was also unsuccessful in his attempts to make the French pay for damages arising from attacks on American shipping during the Napoleonic Wars .

[ 114 ] He had more success in negotiating commercial treaties with Latin American republics, reaching " most favoured nation " trade agreements in an attempt to ensure that no European country had a trading advantage over the United States.

[ 115 ] Seeking deeper relations with Latin American countries, Clay strongly favored sending American delegates to the Congress of Panama , but his efforts were defeated by opponents in the Senate.

[ 116 ] Clay supported construction of the National Road , which extended west from Cumberland, Maryland .

Adams proposed an ambitious domestic program based in large part on Clay's American System, but Clay warned the president that many of his proposals held little chance of passage in the 19th Congress .

[ 117 ] Adams's opponents defeated many of his proposals, including the establishment of a naval academy and a national observatory, but Adams did preside over the construction or initiation of major infrastructure projects like the National Road and the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal .

[ 118 ] Followers of Adams began to call themselves National Republicans , and Jackson's followers became known as Democrats .

[ 119 ] Both campaigns spread untrue stories about the opposing candidates.

[ 120 ] Adams' followers denounced Jackson as a demagogue , and some Adams-aligned papers accused Jackson's wife Rachel of bigamy . Though Clay was not directly involved in these attacks, his failure to denounce them earned him the lifelong enmity of Jackson.

[ 121 ] Clay was one of Adams's most important political advisers, but because of his myriad responsibilities as secretary of state, he was often unable to take part in campaigning.

[ 122 ] As Adams was averse to the use of patronage for political purposes, Jackson's campaign enjoyed a marked advantage in organization, and Adams' allies such as Clay and Daniel Webster were unable to create an equally powerful organization headed by the president.

[ 123 ] In the 1828 election, Jackson took 56% of the popular vote and won almost every state outside of New England ; Clay was especially distressed by Jackson's victory in Kentucky. The election result represented not only the victory of a man Clay viewed as unqualified and unprincipled but also a rejection of Clay's domestic policies.

[ 124 ] Later career [ edit ] See also: Second Party System and Jacksonian democracy Jackson administration, 1829–1837 [ edit ] See also: Presidency of Andrew Jackson , 22nd United States Congress , 23rd United States Congress , and 24th United States Congress Henry Clay, c.

1832 Return to the Senate [ edit ] Even with Clay out of office, President Jackson continued to see Clay as one of his major rivals, and Jackson at one point suspected Clay of being behind the Petticoat affair , a controversy involving the wives of his Cabinet members.

[ 125 ] Clay strongly opposed the 1830 Indian Removal Act , which authorized the administration to relocate Native Americans to land west of the Mississippi River .

[ 126 ] Another key point of contention between Clay and Jackson was the proposed Maysville Road , which would connect Maysville, Kentucky , to the National Road in Zanesville, Ohio ; transportation advocates hoped that later extensions would eventually connect the National Road to New Orleans .

[ 127 ] In 1830, Jackson vetoed the project both because he felt that the road did not constitute interstate commerce, and also because he generally opposed using the federal government to promote economic modernization.

[ 128 ] While Jackson's veto garnered support from opponents of infrastructure spending, it damaged his base of support in Clay's home state of Kentucky.

[ 129 ] Clay returned to federal office in 1831 by winning election to the Senate over Richard Mentor Johnson in a 73 to 64 vote of the Kentucky legislature.

[ 130 ] His return to the Senate after 20 years, 8 months, 7 days out of office, marks the fourth-longest gap in service to the chamber in history.

[ 131 ] Bank War and the 1832 presidential election [ edit ] Main articles: Bank War , 1831 National Republican National Convention , and 1832 United States presidential election Andrew Jackson defeated Clay in the 1832 election With the defeat of Adams, Clay became the de facto leader of the National Republicans, and he began making preparations for a presidential campaign in the 1832 election .

[ 132 ] In 1831, Jackson made it clear that he was going to run for re-election, ensuring that support or opposition to his presidency would be a central feature of the upcoming race.

[ 133 ] Jackson's Democrats rallied around his policies towards the national bank, internal improvements, Indian removal , and nullification , but these policies also earned Jackson various enemies, including Vice President John C. Calhoun.

[ 134 ] However, Clay rejected overtures from the fledgling Anti-Masonic Party , [ e ] and his attempt to convince Calhoun to serve as his running mate failed, leaving the opposition to Jackson split among different factions.

[ 136 ] Inspired by the Anti-Masonic Party's national convention, Clay's National Republican followers arranged for a national convention that nominated Clay for president.

[ 137 ] As the 1832 election approached, the debate over the re-authorization of the national bank emerged as the most important issue in the campaign.

[ 134 ] By the early 1830s, the national bank had become the largest corporation in the United States, and banknotes issued by the national bank served as the de facto legal tender of the United States.

[ 138 ] Jackson disliked the national bank because of a hatred of both banks and paper currency.

[ 139 ] The bank's charter did not expire until 1836, but bank president Nicholas Biddle asked for renewal in 1831, hoping that election year pressure and support from Secretary of the Treasury Louis McLane would convince Jackson to allow the re-charter.

[ 140 ] Biddle's application set off the " Bank War "; Congress passed a bill to renew the national bank's charter, but Jackson vetoed it, holding the bank to be unconstitutional.

[ 141 ] Clay had initially hoped that the national bank re-charter would work to his advantage, but Jackson's allies seized on the issue, redefining the 1832 election as a choice between the president and a "monied oligarchy." [ 142 ] Ultimately, Clay was unable to defeat a popular sitting president. Jackson won 219 of the 286 electoral votes and 54.2% of the popular vote, carrying almost every state outside of New England.

[ 143 ] Nullification Crisis [ edit ] Main article: Nullification crisis The high rates of the Tariff of 1828 and the Tariff of 1832 angered many Southerners because they resulted in higher prices for imported goods.

[ 144 ] After the 1832 election, South Carolina held a state convention that declared the tariff rates of 1828 and 1832 to be nullified within the state, and further declared that federal collection of import duties would be illegal after January 1833.

[ 145 ] In response to this Nullification Crisis , Jackson issued his Proclamation to the People of South Carolina , which strongly denied the right of states to nullify federal laws or secede .

[ 146 ] He asked Congress to pass what became known as the Force Bill , which would authorize the president to send federal soldiers against South Carolina if it sought to nullify federal law.

[ 147 ] Though Clay favored high tariff rates, he found Jackson's strong rhetoric against South Carolina distressing and sought to avoid a crisis that could end in civil war.

[ 144 ] He proposed a compromise tariff bill that would lower tariff rates, but do so gradually, thereby giving manufacturing interests time to adapt to less protective rates. Clay's compromise tariff won the backing of both manufacturers, who believed they would not receive a better deal, and Calhoun, who sought a way out of the crisis but refused to work with President Jackson's supporters on an alternative tariff bill.

[ 148 ] Though most members of Clay's own National Republican Party opposed it, the Tariff of 1833 passed both houses of Congress. Jackson simultaneously signed the tariff bill and the Force bill, and South Carolina leaders accepted the new tariff, effectively bringing the crisis to an end. Clay's role in resolving the crisis brought him renewed national stature in the wake of a crushing presidential election defeat, and some began referring to him as the "Great Compromiser." [ 149 ] Formation of the Whig Party [ edit ] Main articles: National Republican Party and Whig Party (United States) Following the end of the Nullification Crisis in March 1833, Jackson renewed his offensive against the national bank, despite some opposition from within his own Cabinet.

[ 150 ] Jackson and Secretary of the Treasury Roger Taney pursued a policy of removing all federal deposits from the national bank and placing them in state-chartered banks known as " pet banks ." [ 151 ] Because federal law required the president to deposit federal revenue in the national bank so long as it was financially stable, many regarded Jackson's actions as illegal, and Clay led the passage of a Senate motion censuring Jackson.

[ 152 ] Nonetheless, the national bank's federal charter expired in 1836, and though the institution continued to function under a Pennsylvania charter, it never regained the influence it had had at the beginning of Jackson's administration.

[ 153 ] The removal of deposits helped unite Jackson's opponents into one party for the first time, as National Republicans, Calhounites, former Democrats, and members of the Anti-Masonic Party coalesced into the Whig Party .

[ 154 ] The term "Whig" originated from a speech Clay delivered in 1834, in which he compared opponents of Jackson to the Whigs , a British political party opposed to absolute monarchy .

[ 155 ] Neither the Whigs nor the Democrats were unified geographically or ideologically. However, Whigs tended to favor a stronger legislature, a stronger federal government, a higher tariff, greater spending on infrastructure, re-authorization of the Second Bank of the United States, and publicly funded education. Conversely, Democrats tended to favor a stronger president, stronger state governments, lower tariffs, hard money , and expansionism. Neither party took a strong national stand on slavery.

[ 156 ] The Whig base of support lay in wealthy businessmen, professionals, the professional class, and large planters, while the Democratic base of support lay in immigrant Catholics and yeomen farmers, but each party appealed across class lines.

[ 157 ] Partly due to grief over the death of his daughter, Anne, Clay chose not to run in the 1836 presidential election , and the Whigs were too disorganized to nominate a single candidate.

[ 158 ] Three Whig candidates ran against Van Buren: General William Henry Harrison , Senator Hugh Lawson White , and Senator Daniel Webster. By running multiple candidates, the Whigs hoped to force a contingent election in the House of Representatives. Clay personally preferred Webster, but he threw his backing behind Harrison who had the broadest appeal among voters. Clay's decision not to endorse Webster opened a rift between the two Whig party leaders, and Webster would work against Clay in future presidential elections.

[ 159 ] Despite the presence of multiple Whig candidates, Van Buren won the 1836 election with 50.8 percent of the popular vote and 170 of the 294 electoral votes.

[ 160 ] Van Buren administration, 1837–1841 [ edit ] See also: Presidency of Martin Van Buren , 25th United States Congress , and 26th United States Congress Clay (brown) won the backing of several state delegations on the first ballot of the 1839 Whig National Convention , but William Henry Harrison ultimately won the party's presidential nomination.

Van Buren's presidency was affected badly by the Panic of 1837 , a major recession that badly damaged the Democratic Party.

[ 161 ] Clay and other Whigs argued that Jackson's policies, including the use of pet banks, had encouraged speculation and caused the panic.

[ 162 ] He promoted the American System as a means for economic recovery, but President Van Buren's response focused on the practice of "strict economy and frugality." [ 163 ] As the 1840 presidential election approached, many expected that the Whigs would win control of the presidency due to the ongoing economic crisis.

[ 164 ] Clay initially viewed Webster as his strongest rival, [ 165 ] but Clay, Harrison, and General Winfield Scott emerged as the principal candidates at the 1839 Whig National Convention .

[ 166 ] Though he was widely regarded as the most qualified Whig leader to serve as president, many Whigs questioned Clay's electability after two presidential election defeats. He also faced opposition in the North due to his ownership of enslaved people and lingering association with the Freemasons, and in the South from Whigs who distrusted his moderate stance on slavery.

[ 167 ] Clay won a plurality on the first ballot of the Whig National Convention, but, with the help of Thurlow Weed and other backers, Harrison consolidated support on subsequent ballots and won the Whig presidential nomination on the fifth ballot of the convention.

[ 168 ] [ f ] Seeking to placate Clay's supporters and to balance the ticket geographically, the convention chose former Virginia Governor and Senator John Tyler , a personal friend of Clay, whose previous career in the Democratic Party had practically come to an end, as the vice-presidential nominee.

[ 170 ] Clay was disappointed by the outcome but helped Harrison's ultimately successful campaign by delivering numerous speeches.

[ 171 ] With Whigs also winning control of Congress in the 1840 elections , Clay saw the upcoming 27th Congress as an opportunity for the Whig Party to establish itself as the dominant political party by leading the country out of recession.

[ 172 ] Harrison and Tyler administrations, 1841–1845 [ edit ] See also: Presidency of William Henry Harrison , Presidency of John Tyler , and 27th United States Congress President-elect Harrison asked Clay to serve another term as Secretary of State, but Clay chose to remain in Congress. Webster was instead chosen as Secretary of State, while John J. Crittenden , a close ally of Clay, was chosen as Attorney General.

[ 173 ] As Harrison prepared to take office, Clay and Harrison clashed over the leadership of the Whig Party, with Harrison sensitive to accusations that he would answer to Clay.

[ 174 ] Just a month into his presidency, Harrison died of an illness and was succeeded by Vice President John Tyler.

[ 175 ] Tyler retained Harrison's Cabinet, but the former Democrat and avid follower of both Jefferson's and Jackson's philosophy quickly made it known that he had reservations about re-establishing a national bank, a key priority of Clay's.

[ 176 ] Clay nonetheless initially expected that Tyler would approve the measures passed by the Whig-controlled Congress; his priorities included the re-establishment of the national bank, higher tariff rates, a national bankruptcy law, and an act to distribute the proceeds of land sales to the states for investments in infrastructure and education. Clay and his congressional allies attempted to craft a national bank bill acceptable to Tyler, but Tyler vetoed two separate bills to re-establish the national bank, showing that he in fact had no will to reach a solution for the party's issues. Clay and other Whig leaders were now outraged not only by Tyler's rejection of the Whig party platform but also because they felt that Tyler had purposely misled them into thinking that he would sign the bills.

[ 177 ] After the second veto, congressional Whigs voted to expel Tyler from the party, and on Clay's request, every Cabinet member except for Webster, who wanted to continue negotiating the Webster-Ashburton Treaty with Great Britain about the border to Canada, resigned from office.

[ 178 ] This made Tyler increasingly move closer to his former Democratic Party and, with Webster still serving in the Tyler administration, Clay emerged as the clear leader of the Whig Party.

[ 179 ] In early 1842, Clay resigned from the Senate after arranging for Crittenden to succeed him.

[ 180 ] Though he vetoed other Whig bills, Tyler did sign some Whig priorities into law, including the Preemption Act of 1841 , which distributed the proceeds of land sales to the states, and the Bankruptcy Act of 1841, which was the first law in U.S. history that allowed for voluntary bankruptcy.

[ 181 ] Facing a large budget deficit, Tyler also signed the Tariff of 1842 , which restored the protective rates of the Tariff of 1832 but ended the distribution policy that had been established with the Preemption Act of 1841.

[ 182 ] 1844 presidential election [ edit ] Main articles: 1844 United States presidential election and 1844 Whig National Convention James K. Polk defeated Clay in the 1844 election.

President Tyler's break with the Whig Party, combined with Webster's continuing affiliation with Tyler, positioned Clay as the leading contender for the Whig nomination in the 1844 presidential election .

[ 183 ] By 1842, most observers believed that Clay would face Van Buren in the 1844 presidential election, as he had still remained as the clear leader of the Democrats and, following the tradition of the founders, wanted a second term.

[ 184 ] Hoping to win another term, President Tyler forged an alliance with John C. Calhoun and pursued the annexation of the Republic of Texas , which would add another slave state to the union.

[ 185 ] After President Tyler concluded an annexation treaty with Texas, Clay announced his opposition to annexation.

[ 186 ] He argued that the country needed "union, peace, and patience," and annexation would bring tensions over slavery and war with Mexico. The same day that Clay published a letter opposing the annexation of Texas, [ g ] Van Buren also came out against annexation, citing similar reasons as Clay, so that slavery and especially expansionism seemed to play no role in the next election.

[ 188 ] [ h ] Clay unanimously won the presidential nomination at the 1844 Whig National Convention , but a minority of expansionist Southern Democrats, encouraged by Tyler's alternative outline, blocked Van Buren's nomination at the 1844 Democratic National Convention for countless ballots, until Van Buren withdrew, making place for an unexpected compromise candidate: The party nominated former Speaker of the House James K. Polk of Tennessee, who favored annexation, but in order to calm anti-expansionists, promised to just run for a single term.

[ 190 ] Following the nomination of a pro-annexation Democrat, Tyler soon ended his incipient independent run for president and endorsed Polk.

[ 191 ] Clay was surprised by Van Buren's defeat but remained confident of his chances in the 1844 election.

[ 192 ] Polk was the first " dark horse " presidential nominee in U.S. history, and Whigs mocked him as a "fourth rate politician." Despite his relative lack of national stature, Polk proved to be a strong candidate capable of uniting the factions of the Democratic Party and winning the support of Southerners who had been reluctant to support Van Buren.

[ 193 ] Clay's stance on slavery alienated some voters in both the North and the South. Pro-slavery Southerners flocked to Polk, while many Northern abolitionists , who tended to align with the Whig Party, favored James G. Birney of the Liberty Party .

[ 194 ] Clay's opposition to annexation damaged his campaign in the South, as Democrats argued that he worked in unison with Northerners to stop the extension of slavery.

[ 195 ] In July, Clay wrote two letters in which he attempted to clarify his position on the annexation of Texas, and Democrats attacked his supposedly inconsistent position.

[ 196 ] Polk narrowly won the election, taking 49.5% of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes.

[ 197 ] [ i ] Birney won several thousand anti-annexation votes in New York, and his presence in the race may have cost Clay the election.

[ 198 ] Most of Clay's contemporaries believed that annexation had been the decisive issue in the race, but Polk's savvy campaigning on the tariff may have also been decisive, as he narrowly won pro-tariff Pennsylvania after downplaying his anti-tariff views.

[ 199 ] After Polk's victory and the final indirect success of Tyler's strategy, Congress approved the annexation of Texas, which was signed by Tyler on his last day in office, and Texas gained statehood in late 1845.

[ 200 ] Polk administration, 1845–1849 [ edit ] See also: Presidency of James K. Polk , 1848 United States presidential election , and 1848 Whig National Convention Clay (brown) won the backing of numerous delegates on the first ballot of the 1848 Whig National Convention , but Zachary Taylor ultimately won the party's presidential nomination.

Henry Clay Jr., who died serving in the Mexican–American War After the 1844 election, Clay returned to his career as an attorney.

[ 201 ] Though he was no longer a member of Congress, he remained closely interested in national politics. In 1846, the Mexican–American War broke out after American and Mexican forces clashed at the disputed border region between Mexico and Texas. Initially, Clay did not publicly oppose the war, but privately he saw it as an immoral war that risked producing "some military chieftain who will conquer us all." [ 202 ] He suffered a personal blow in 1847 when his son, Henry Clay Jr., died at the Battle of Buena Vista .

[ 203 ] In November 1847, Clay re-emerged on the political scene with a speech that was harshly critical of the Mexican–American War and President Polk.

[ 204 ] He attacked Polk for fomenting the conflict with Mexico and urged the rejection of any treaty that added new slave territory to the United States. Months after the speech, the Senate ratified the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo , in which Mexico ceded hundreds of thousands of square miles of territory known as the Mexican Cession .

[ 205 ] By 1847, General Zachary Taylor , who commanded the American forces at Buena Vista, had emerged as a contender for the Whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election .

[ 206 ] Despite Taylor's largely unknown political views, many Whigs believed he was the party's strongest possible candidate due to his martial accomplishments in the Mexican–American War.

[ 207 ] One of Clay's most trusted allies and advisers, John J. Crittenden, was Taylor's de facto campaign manager.

[ 208 ] Clay had initially told his allies that he would not run in the 1848 presidential election, but he was unwilling to support Taylor, a "mere military man." On April 10, 1848, he announced his candidacy for the Whig nomination.

[ 209 ] Although Webster and Winfield Scott each commanded a limited base of support in the party, Taylor and Clay each saw the other as their lone serious rival for the Whig nomination.

[ 210 ] As Taylor commanded the support of most Southern Whigs, Clay focused his efforts on courting Northern Whigs, emphasizing his opposition to the Mexican–American War and his life-long support for the gradual emancipation of enslaved people in Kentucky.

[ 211 ] Clay presented a strong challenge to Taylor at the 1848 Whig National Convention , but Taylor won the presidential nomination on the fourth ballot. Partially in an attempt to please the Clay wing of the party, the convention nominated Millard Fillmore as Taylor's running mate.

[ 212 ] Clay was embittered by his failure at the convention, and he did not campaign on behalf of Taylor. Nonetheless, Taylor won the election, taking 47.3 percent of the popular vote and 163 of 290 electoral votes.

[ 213 ] Taylor and Fillmore administrations, 1849–1852 [ edit ] See also: Presidency of Zachary Taylor , Presidency of Millard Fillmore , 31st United States Congress , and 32nd United States Congress The United States after the ratification of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo , with the Mexican Cession still unorganized The United States after the Compromise of 1850 Increasingly worried about the sectional tensions arising over the issue of slavery in newly acquired territories, Clay accepted election to the Senate in 1849.

[ 214 ] Having refused to campaign for Taylor, Clay played little role in the formation of Taylor's Cabinet or in determining the new administration's policies.

[ 215 ] In January 1850, with Congress still deadlocked regarding the status of the Mexican Cession, Clay proposed a compromise designed to organize territory acquired in the Mexican–American War and address other issues contributing to sectional tensions.

[ 216 ] His legislative package included the admission of California as a free state, the cession by Texas of some of its northern and western territorial claims in return for debt relief, the establishment of New Mexico and Utah territories, a ban on the importation of enslaved people into the District of Columbia for sale, and a more stringent fugitive slave law .

[ 217 ] Though it faced opposition from Southern extremists like Calhoun and Northern abolitionists like William Seward , Clay's proposal won the backing of many Southern and Northern leaders.

[ 218 ] President Taylor, who favored the immediate admission of California and New Mexico as free states without any attached conditions, opposed the plan, and Clay openly broke with the president in May 1850.

[ 219 ] Debate over Clay's proposal continued into July when Taylor unexpectedly died of an illness.

[ 220 ] After Taylor's death, President Fillmore, who supported Clay's compromise bill, consulted with Clay in appointing a new Cabinet.

[ 221 ] Exhausted by the debate in the Senate, Clay took a leave of absence shortly after Taylor's death, but Fillmore, Webster, and Democratic Senator Stephen A. Douglas took charge of pro-compromise forces. By the end of September 1850, Clay's proposal, which became known as the Compromise of 1850 , had been enacted. Though contemporaries credited Fillmore, Douglas, and Webster for their role in passing the Compromise of 1850, Clay was widely regarded as the key figure in ending a major sectional crisis.

[ 222 ] Death [ edit ] Henry Clay monument and mausoleum, Lexington Cemetery In December 1851, at the age of 74, with his health declining, Clay announced that he would resign from the Senate the following September.

[ 223 ] Clay never recovered from his illnesses. He eventually died of tuberculosis aged 75 in his room at the National Hotel in Washington, D.C.

, on June 29, 1852.

[ 224 ] He was the first person to lie in state in the United States Capitol rotunda .

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] Clay's headstone reads: "I know no North—no South—no East—no West". Hymn writer Fanny Crosby penned this line of lament on Clay's death: Sleep on, oh, statesman, sleep Within thy hallowed tomb, Where pearly streamlets glide, And summer roses bloom.

[ 227 ] Ideology and slavery [ edit ] American System [ edit ] Main article: American System (economic plan) Throughout most of his political life, Clay promoted his American System as both an economic program and a means for unifying the country. Clay's American System rejected strict constructionism in favor of an activist government that would promote industry and commerce. The American System had four key tenets: high tariffs, a stable financial system, federal investment in internal improvements, and a public land sale policy designed to raise revenue and provide for carefully managed expansion into the American frontier .

[ 228 ] Through high tariffs, Clay hoped to free the United States from dependence on foreign imports, especially from Britain.

[ 229 ] Clay sought to ensure a stable financial system through support for the national bank, which regulated the country's banking system and helped ensure a consistent supply of credit.

[ 230 ] Clay's support for federally financed internal improvements stemmed from his belief that only the federal government could construct the transportation system necessary for uniting the country commercially and culturally.

[ 231 ] His land policy focused on using federal revenue from land sales to fund states' investments in education, infrastructure projects, and other priorities.

[ 232 ] Practices as an enslaver and the Dupuy case [ edit ] Clay inherited enslaved people as a young child, [ 5 ] and he continued to own enslaved people throughout his life. In the 1790s, he adopted anti-slavery views under the influence of his mentor, Founding Father George Wythe , who emancipated his own human property.

[ 233 ] Like most of his contemporaries, Clay was not a racial egalitarian and never called for the immediate abolition of slavery, but he viewed slavery as a "grievous wrong to the slave" and spoke in favor of equal treatment for free blacks .

[ 234 ] Early in his career, Clay favored gradual emancipation in both Kentucky and Missouri, but each state rejected plans that would have provided for gradual emancipation.

[ 235 ] Clay continued to support gradual emancipation throughout his career and published an open letter in 1849 calling for gradual emancipation in Kentucky, though he qualified this view by stating he would only support emancipation if it included a plan for colonizing free blacks outside of the state.

[ 236 ] Unlike many other Southern leaders, he consistently favored recognition of Haiti , which had been established through a slave revolt .

[ 237 ] In 1816, Clay helped establish the American Colonization Society , a group that wanted to establish a colony for free American blacks in Africa. The group was made up of abolitionists who wanted to end slavery and slaveholders who wanted to deport free blacks.

[ 238 ] Clay's support for colonization reflected his belief that a multiracial society was ultimately unworkable, both for whites and free blacks.

[ 239 ] Under Clay's plan, all enslaved children born after 1860 would be freed at age 25. At that time, they were to work for three years in order to finance their own importation. During this period, enslavers could still sell or mortgage their human property.

[ 240 ] Some abolitionists did not view this plan favorably. In 1849, Frederick Douglass denounced this plan in a speech to the New England Anti-Slavery Society at Faneuil Hall . He objected to the three years when the enslaved were in jeopardy as they were still held as property. The date of 1860 would lead to family separations as those born before 1860 would remain enslaved and those born after were subjected to a mandatory importation. Those gathered first applauded at the mention of Clay; however, once Douglass made these points, those gathered change their response to hisses and cries of shame.

[ 240 ] Later in his career, Clay became increasingly concerned about abolitionism, remarking that "the ultraism of the South on the one hand ... and the ultraism of abolition on the other" represented the greatest threat to the Union. Nonetheless, he consistently defended the right of abolitionists to send materials through the mail and opposed the gag rule , which limited congressional debate on slavery .

[ 241 ] Lewis Hayden's wife and child were enslaved by Clay. The three journeyed via the Underground Railroad to Amherstburg, Ontario. The couple became prominent abolitionists and later resided in Boston. Lewis was elected in 1873 to the state legislature.

[ 242 ] On his 600-acre plantation, there were 122 enslaved people held over the course of his life.

[ 30 ] Clay's status as a slave owner and his anti-slavery views occasionally led to conflicts in his political career.  During a visit to Indiana in the 1840s, Clay was confronted at a political meeting by a Quaker abolitionist, Hiram Mendenhall, who presented Clay with a petition calling on him to free his enslaved people. Clay dismissed Mendenhall out of hand, stating that the petition was no different from if it demanded he give up his farm.

[ 243 ] Many of his contemporaries, including anti-slavery activist James G. Birney , believed that Clay's home state of Kentucky had the laws most permissive to enslaved people of any slave state. Clay considered himself to be a "good" master. Biographer James C. Klotter concludes that Clay took actions, such as keeping families together, to mitigate the harshness of slavery; however, showing the opposite is his treatment of the family of Lewis Hayden .

[ 244 ] Klotter also states that there is no evidence that Clay ever had sex with any of his enslaved people. Others state quite the contrary of his punitive and sexual practices.

[ 245 ] In 1844, Clay's wife discovered that he was having relations with the "yellow girl that attended his poultry and fowls". The young woman and her children were then sent to Louisiana to be sold.

[ 245 ] While in Washington, D.C., Clay acquired an octoroon to serve as concubine . Phoebe Moore, age 16, was purchased by Henry Clay from his wife's cousin, [ 4 ] Senator Thomas Hart Benton , according to her obituary in New Orleans Times-Picayune .

When he was in Washington, she resided with Clay in his Washington home and bore him two children. After he emancipated her, she moved to Memphis, Tennessee .

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] The Hayden household sheltered hundreds of blacks seeking freedom; it was said they "harbored 75 percent of all slaves passing through Boston". Following the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act in 1850 , Harriet Hayden managed and operated Boston's main Underground Railroad operations, and was key to leading people through Boston's tunnel system.

[ 248 ] Regarding keeping families together, Clay applied the opposite to the family of Lewis Hayden .

[ 244 ] Around 1836. Clay had an enslaved mother, Esther Harvey, and her son, sold South. They were the family of Lewis Hayden , a waiter at the upscale Phoenix Hotel .

[ 240 ] Around 1842, Hayden was threatened, also by Clay, with the sale of his second wife, Harriet Bell Hayden and her son Joseph who he had adopted. Hayden secured the aid of Vermont resident Delia Webster and Oberlin College student Rev.

Calvin Fairbank through the assistance of John Mifflin, AME minister and resident of Oberlin, Ohio .

[ 249 ] They crafted a successful escape plan via the Underground Railroad through Maysville, Kentucky , across the Ohio River to the free states of Ohio and Michigan. The Haydens became residents of Amherstburg , Ontario, Canada.

[ 244 ] On January 4, 1845, Webster received a sentence of two years hard labor for her part in the escape; she was pardoned on February 24, 1845. Also during February, Fairbank was sentenced to 15 years.

[ 250 ] The Kentucky governor pardoned him in 1849. However, he was imprisoned again in 1852 and served 12 years for aiding in another escape.

[ 251 ] Another example is Lewis Richardson, Clay's self-emancipated enslaved person. He gave a speech that belies Clay's self-portrayal as a "good master". Richardson had been enslaved at Ashland for 20 years, and after a beating escaped via the Underground Railroad in January, 1846. By May of that year, Richardson was also living in Amherstburg, Ontario. In a speech he gave at Union Chapel there, he told not only of continual sparse food and lack of warm clothing but of 150 lashes from overseer Ambrose Brice for the offense of being an hour late returning from a visit to his wife.

[ 252 ] Brice later denied this claim, stating it was 16 lashes, and the offense was drunkenness. Clay was away on business when this occurred.

[ 4 ] Richardson's speech was published in the abolitionist newspaper Signal of Liberty .

[ 250 ] [ 253 ] The text of his speech is available at the following reference.

[ 254 ] In 1829, Charlotte Dupuy , who was enslaved by Clay, sued for her freedom while visiting relatives in Maryland . Dupuy's attorney gained an order from the court for her to remain in Washington until the case was settled, and she worked for wages for 18 months for Martin Van Buren , Clay's successor as secretary of state.

[ 255 ] The case embarrassed Clay politically and personally, but he ultimately prevailed in court. After winning the case, Clay sent Dupuy to New Orleans , causing her to be away from her own family, but he later freed Dupuy and two of her children. Aaron Dupuy, Charlotte's husband, was ordered by Clay to be whipped, at the behest of Clay's wife, Lucretia. Dupuy's infraction was a late return as Lucretia's carriage driver. The overseer attempted the whipping, but Dupuy managed to wrest the whip away and began beating the overseer.

[ 256 ] He was not freed at the time of Clay's death, but became freed after the Civil War.

[ 257 ] Clay himself wrote, "here in Kentucky slavery is in its most mitigated form, still it is slavery." [ 258 ] [ 259 ] Clay's will provided for the gradual emancipation of the slaves he held at the time of his death in 1852. Aaron Dupuy was an exception. Clay also stipulated that several of those enslaved people were bequeathed to his son, John.

[ 223 ] Legacy [ edit ] Historical reputation [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Clay's Whig Party collapsed four years after his death, but Clay cast a long shadow over the generation of political leaders that presided over the Civil War . Mississippi Senator Henry S. Foote stated his opinion that "had there been one such man in the Congress of the United States as Henry Clay in 1860–1861 there would, I feel sure, have been no civil war".

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] Clay's protege and fellow Kentuckian John J. Crittenden attempted to keep the Union together with the formation of the Constitutional Union Party and the proposed Crittenden Compromise . Though Crittenden's efforts were unsuccessful, Kentucky remained in the Union during the Civil War, reflecting in part Clay's continuing influence.

[ 262 ] Abraham Lincoln was a great admirer of Clay, saying he was "my ideal of a great man". Lincoln wholeheartedly supported Clay's economic programs; prior to the Civil War, he also held similar stances about slavery and the Union.

[ 263 ] Some historians have argued that a Clay victory in the 1844 election would have prevented both the Mexican-American War and the American Civil War.

[ 264 ] External videos Presentation by James Klotter on the life and career of Henry Clay, February 11, 2011 , C-SPAN Clay is generally regarded as one of the important political figures of his era.

[ 265 ] Most historians and political scientists consider Clay to be one of the most influential speakers of the house in U.S. history.

[ 266 ] In 1957, a Senate Committee selected Clay as one of the five greatest U.S. senators, along with Daniel Webster , John C. Calhoun , Robert La Follette , and Robert A. Taft .

[ 267 ] A 1986 survey of historians ranked Clay as the greatest senator in U.S. history, while a 2006 survey of historians ranked Clay as the 31st-most influential American of all time.

[ 268 ] A 1998 poll of historians ranked Clay as the most qualified unsuccessful major party presidential nominee in U.S. history.

[ 269 ] In 2015, political scientist Michael G. Miller and historian Ken Owen ranked Clay as one of the four most influential American politicians who never served as president, alongside Alexander Hamilton , William Jennings Bryan , and Calhoun.

[ 270 ] Noting Clay's influence over the United States in the last three decades of his life, biographer James Klotter writes that "perhaps posterity should no longer call it the Jacksonian Era ... and instead term it the Clay Era." [ 271 ] Monuments and memorials [ edit ] Main article: List of things named for Henry Clay Clay's estate, Ashland , in Lexington, Kentucky Many monuments, memorials, and even high schools have been erected and named in honor of Clay. Sixteen counties, one each in Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Illinois , Indiana , Kansas , Kentucky , Minnesota , Mississippi , Missouri , Nebraska , North Carolina , South Dakota , Tennessee , Texas , and West Virginia , are named for Clay. Communities named for Clay include Clay, Kentucky , Clay, West Virginia, Claysville, Alabama and Claysville, Pennsylvania . The United States Navy named a submarine, the USS Henry Clay , in his honor. Several statues honor Clay, including the Henry Clay Monument in Pottsville, Pennsylvania , and one of Kentucky's two statues in the National Statuary Hall Collection . Clay's estate of Ashland is a National Historic Landmark . The Decatur House , Clay's home in Washington, D.C. during his tenure as secretary of state, is also a National Historic Landmark.  Due to his involvement in the American Colonization Society, a town in the newly formed Liberia in West Africa was named Clay-Ashland after Henry Clay and to where the freed enslaved people from Kentucky emigrated. Clay is also one of the "famous five" senators honored with their portraits in the Senate Reception Room .

[ 272 ] "He loved his country partly because it was his own country, but mostly because it was a free country." — Lincoln's Eulogy for Henry Clay – July 6, 1852 [ 273 ] See also [ edit ] Nathaniel G. S. Hart , member of the prominent Hart family of Kentucky and Henry Clay's brother in law who was killed during the Battle of Frenchtown's River Raisin Massacre Amicus curiae ( lit.

' friend of the court ' ), a lawyer who argues as a non-party Notes [ edit ] ^ When elected by the legislature, Clay was below the constitutionally required age of thirty .

[ 46 ] It is unclear whether the state legislature or Clay himself knew that he did not meet the Senate's age requirement at the time, though he did know of the issue later in his career.

[ 47 ] Such an age qualification issue has occurred with only three other U.S. senators : Armistead Thomson Mason , John Jordan Crittenden , and John Eaton .

^ The speaker during the 1st Congress , Frederick Muhlenberg , was technically also a new member.

^ The Clay–Randolph rivalry eventually escalated into a duel in 1826, the second of two duels fought by Clay, and ended with both parties unhurt.

[ 71 ] ^ Maine was part of Massachusetts prior to gaining statehood.

^ Though it adopted other policy issues, the Anti-Masonic Party strongly opposed the influence of Freemasonry ; Jackson and Clay were both Freemasons. Though he not been active Freemason since 1824, Clay refused to openly condemn the organization.

[ 135 ] ^ During the balloting, Clay and Scott played cards with Whig politicians John J. Crittenden and George Evans at the Astor House hotel in New York City .  When the group received word of Harrison's victory, Clay blamed his loss on Scott and struck him, with the blow landing on the shoulder which had been wounded during Scott's participation in the Battle of Lundy's Lane .  Afterwards Clay had to be physically removed from the hotel room. Scott then sent Crittenden to Clay with Scott's challenge for a duel, but Crittenden reconciled them by convincing Clay to apologize.

[ 169 ] ^ According to local tradition, the famous "Raleigh Letter" of April 17, 1844 was written under the shade of a large white oak which became known as the Henry Clay Oak .

[ 187 ] ^ Some writers have come to the conclusion that Clay and Van Buren had reached an agreement to jointly oppose annexation, but Klotter writes that "no real evidence" supports this conclusion.

[ 189 ] ^ Clay received a significant share of the presidential electoral vote in three separate elections, a feat matched only by John Adams , Thomas Jefferson , Andrew Jackson , Grover Cleveland , Franklin D. Roosevelt , Richard Nixon , and William Jennings Bryan , with only the latter (like Clay) failing to ever win a presidential election.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ D. A. Smith, Presidents from Adams Through Polk, 1825–1849 (Santa Barbara: Greenwood Press, 2005), p. 12 .

^ Eaton 1957 , p. 5.

^ Van Deusen 1937 , p. 4.

^ a b c Heider, David S. & Jeanne T.

Henry Clay: the Essential American . pp.

445– 446.

^ a b Eaton 1957 , pp. 6–7.

^ Remini 1991 , pp. xxiv, 4.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 4–5.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 309.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 9–10.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 11–13.

^ Eaton 1957 , p. 6.

^ "Henry Clay and the art of American politics" . Boston, Little, Brown. January 5, 2024.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 13–15.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 19–20.

^ Eaton 1957 , p. 7.

^ Henry Clay - Encyclopedia Virginia ^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 20–21.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 23.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 5.

^ Eaton 1957 , p. 12.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 41–42.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 12–13.

^ Lexington Cemetery and Henry Clay Monument , National Park Service ^ a b c Gatton, John Spalding (Fall 1979).

" "Mr. Clay & I got stung": Harriet Martineau in Lexington" .

The Kentucky Review .

1 (1): 55– 56 . Retrieved May 16, 2019 .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 402.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 285–286.

^ Webster, Ian.

"$40,000 in 1802–2020" .

in2013dollars.com .

^ Webster, Ian.

"$60,000 in 1802–2020" .

in2013dollars.com .

^ Heidler, David S. & Jeanne T.

Henry Clay: the Essential American . Random House. p. 45.

^ a b "People Enslaved at Ashland – Henry Clay" . Retrieved January 18, 2023 .

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 275–277.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 277–278.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 279–280.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 288.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 27–29.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 30–31.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 43.

^ Maurice G. Baxter, Henry Clay the lawyer (2000) pp 26–36.

^ Eaton 1957 , p. 15.

^ Baxter, pp 38–54.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 20–21.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 33–36.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 21–23.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 48–51.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 25–26.

^ "Youngest Senator" . United States Senate. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 13, 2020 .

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 26.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 64–67.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 10–10.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 70–71.

^ a b Eaton 1957 , p. 17.

^ Remini 1991 , p. 55.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 72–73.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 74.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 26–30.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 79–81.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 81–83.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 76–78.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 30.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 85.

^ Ostermeier, Eric (October 13, 2015).

"Paul Ryan Would Be Youngest House Speaker Since 1860s" .

Smart Politics . Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Libraries . Retrieved February 19, 2019 .

^ Heitshusen, Valerie (February 11, 2011).

"The Speaker of the House: House Officer, Party Leader, and Representative" (PDF) .

CRS Report for Congress . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service , the Library of Congress. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 17, 2018 . Retrieved February 18, 2019 .

^ "Clay, Henry: 1777–1852" .

History, Art & Archives, U.S. House of Representatives . Washington, D.C.: The Office of the Historian and the Clerk of the House's Office of Art and Archives . Retrieved February 19, 2019 .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 148–149.

^ "List of Speakers of the House" .

History, Art & Archives, U.S. House of Representatives . Washington, D.C.: The Office of the Historian and the Clerk of the House's Office of Art and Archives . Retrieved February 19, 2019 .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 86.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 31–32.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 88–89.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 87–88.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 96.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 65–67.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 89–90.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 33.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 97–98.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 99–101.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 107–108.

^ Richard Archer, "Dissent and peace negotiations at Ghent." American Studies 18.2 (1977): 5–16 online .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 110–117.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 35–36.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 117.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 119–122.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 39–40.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 123–131.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 132–133.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 81–82.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 126–130.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 40–41.

^ Remini 1991 , pp. 150–151.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 44–45.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 143–144.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 45–46.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 150–152.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 74–75.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 136–137.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 137–138.

^ a b Klotter 2018 , pp. 104–105.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 143.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 155–157.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 166–168.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 99–101.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 96–97.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 162–164.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 110–112.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 174–175.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 176.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 122–124.

^ Hargreaves 1985 , pp. 33–34, 36–38.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 179–180.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 183–184.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 184–185.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 134–136.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 142–143.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 187, 191–192.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 192–193.

^ Graebner & Herring 2009 , pp. 555–556.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 145–147.

^ Hargreaves 1985 , pp. 165–166.

^ Hargreaves 1985 , pp. 166–177.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 2207.

^ Remini 1981 , p. 134.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 205–207.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 143–148.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 154–155.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 212–213.

^ Howe 2007 , p. 340.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 222–223.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 161–162.

^ Goodrich 1950 , pp. 145–169.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 162–163.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 236.

^ Ostermeier, Eric (December 4, 2013).

"Bob Smith and the 12-Year Itch" .

Smart Politics .

^ Gammon 1922 , pp. 53–54.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 231.

^ a b Gammon 1922 , pp. 135–136.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 168–170.

^ Cole 1993 , pp. 140–141.

^ Gammon 1922 , pp. 60–61.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 171–173.

^ Howe 2007 , pp. 375–376.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 242–244.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 174, 179–180.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 175, 181–182.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 184–187.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 251.

^ Cole 1993 , pp. 157–158.

^ Cole 1993 , pp. 160–161.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 212–213.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 217–218.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 219–221.

^ Cole 1993 , pp. 187–188.

^ Howe 2007 , pp. 387–388.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 225–227.

^ Cole 1993 , pp. 209–211.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 227–228.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 266.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 313–315.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 229–231.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 272–273.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 239–241.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 274.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 279–280.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 242–243.

^ Howe 2007 , pp. 505–506.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 84.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 284–287.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 296–297, 300.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 249–254.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 257–258.

^ Eisenhower, John S. D.

(1999).

Agent of Destiny: The Life and Times of General Winfield Scott . University of Oklahoma Press. pp.

205– 206.

ISBN 978-0806131283 .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 309–310.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 311–312.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 261–263.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 328.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 334–335.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 263–264.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 342–343.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 265–269.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 351–353.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 270–271.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 362–363.

^ Howe 2007 , pp. 592–593.

^ Peterson 1989 , pp. 103–108.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 358–359.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 290–291.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 293–294.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 383, 385–386.

^ Murray, Elizabeth Reid (2006).

"Henry Clay Oak" . Powell, William S. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of North Carolina . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. pp. 559–560.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 296–298.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 298.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 387–388.

^ Peterson 1989 , pp. 239–241.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 388–389.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 302–303.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 307–309.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 311–312.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 390.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 392.

^ Howe 2007 , p. 688.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 322–324.

^ Peterson 1989 , pp. 257–258.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 395–398.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 329–331.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 332–334.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 427.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 335–336.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 337–338.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 420–421.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 340–342.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 342–345.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 345–346.

^ Holt 1999 , p. 279.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 441–442.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 443–444.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 444, 454.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 460.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 461–462.

^ Smith 1988 , pp. 111–112.

^ Smith 1988 , pp. 112–119.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 359, 364–365.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 365–366.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 465.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 365–367.

^ a b Heidler & Heidler 2010 , p. 484.

^ John DeFerrari.

The National Hotel." Streets of Washington: Stories and images of historic Washington, D.C. website. November 24, 2009. Retrieved October 20, 2018.

^ "Individuals Who Have Lain in State or in Honor" . United States House of Representatives . Retrieved August 28, 2018 .

^ "Lying in State or in Honor" . US Architect of the Capitol (AOC) . Retrieved September 1, 2018 .

^ Fanny J. Crosby: An Autobiography ( Peabody, Massachusetts : Hendrickson Publishers Marketing, 2013 printing), p. 87, ISBN 978-1598562811 .

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 80–82.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 85–87.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 87–89.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 89–91.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 220–221.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 19–21.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 189–191.

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 33–36, 143–144.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 354–356.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 191–192.

^ Eaton 1957 , p. 133.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 198–199.

^ a b c Woo, Ilyon (2023).

Master Slave Husband Wife: An Epic Journey from Slavery to Freedom (First hardcover ed.). New York London Sydney Toronto New Delhi: Simon & Schuster. pp.

194– 195.

ISBN 978-1-5011-9105-3 .

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 204–205, 247.

^ "Lewis and Harriet Hayden House – Boston African American National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved January 18, 2023 .

^ "American Lives: Reconsidering Henry Clay" .

NPR .

^ a b c Turley-Adams, Alicestyne (2022).

The gospel of freedom : Black evangelicals and the Underground Railroad (EPUB ed.). Lexington, Kentucky: University of Kentucky Press. pp.

149– 150, 310.

ISBN 978-0-8131-9548-3 .

OCLC 1337923258 .

^ a b Myers, Amrita Chakrabarti (2023).

The vice president's Black wife: the untold life of Julia Chinn . Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. pp. 133, 152, 241, 243.

ISBN 978-1-4696-7523-7 .

^ Blackford, Linda (July 10, 2020).

"With stories of the enslaved, Ashland brings 'new truth' to Henry Clay story" .

The Lexington Herald Leader . Retrieved December 1, 2023 .

^ "Passing the word on Henry Clay and the slave labor camp known as Ashland" .

North of Center . December 8, 2021 . Retrieved December 1, 2023 .

^ Snodgrass, Mary Ellen (2008).

The Underground Railroad : an encyclopedia of people, places, and operations . Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-7656-8093-8 .

OCLC 85830740 .

^ "The AME Church and Kentucky Underground Railroad" .

issuu . Retrieved February 3, 2024 .

^ a b "Richardson, Lewis · Notable Kentucky African Americans Database" .

nkaa.uky.edu . Retrieved January 16, 2023 .

^ Cheves, John (March 12, 2010).

"Pardons pushed for Kentuckians convicted of helping slaves escape" .

Lexington Herald Leader . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ "Lewis Richardson – Henry Clay" . Retrieved January 16, 2023 .

^ "Black refugees in Canada : accounts of escape during the era of slavery · Notable Kentucky African Americans Database" .

nkaa.uky.edu . Retrieved January 16, 2023 .

^ Richardson, Lewis (January 24, 2007).

"(1846) Lewis Richardson, "I am Free From American Slavery" 1846 •" .

Blackpast . Retrieved February 5, 2023 .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2010 , pp. 217–218.

^ Still, Peter (1970).

The kidnapped and the ransomed : the narrative of Peter and Vina Still after forty years of slavery . Jewish Publication Society.

OCLC 641424126 .

^ "Aaron Dupuy – Henry Clay" . Retrieved January 18, 2023 .

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 192–193, 196.

^ Klotter 2018 , pp. 195–196.

^ Remini 1991 , pp. 761–762.

^ King, Gilbert (December 6, 2012).

"The Day Henry Clay Refused to Compromise" .

Smithsonian . Retrieved October 25, 2016 .

^ Klotter 2012 , pp. 243–263.

^ Bowman 2008 , pp. 495–512.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 379.

^ Singletary, Otis (April 2, 2013).

" 'Henry Clay Statesman for the Union' by Robert V. Remini" .

Washington Post . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ Strahan et al. 2000 , pp. 563, 586–587.

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 389.

^ "The 100 Most Influential Figures in American History" .

The Atlantic Monthly . December 2006 . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ "The Presidency; The Ones Who Got Away" .

The New York Times . July 19, 1998.

ProQuest 2235859447 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Masket, Seth (November 19, 2015).

"A bracket to determine the most influential American who never became president" . Vox . Retrieved August 1, 2018 .

^ Klotter 2018 , p. 387.

^ "The 'Famous Five' " . United States Senate. March 12, 1959 . Retrieved January 23, 2019 .

^ "Eulogy on Henry Clay" .

Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln . Retrieved September 27, 2023 .

Works cited [ edit ] Bowman, Shearer Davis (2008). "Comparing Henry Clay and Abraham Lincoln".

The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society .

106 (3/4): 495– 512.

JSTOR 23388014 .

Cole, Donald B. (1993).

The Presidency of Andrew Jackson . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 0700606009 .

Eaton, Clement (1957).

Henry Clay and the Art of American Politics . Little, Brown.

OCLC 351740 .

Gammon, Samuel Rhea (1922).

The Presidential Campaign of 1832 . The Johns Hopkins Press.

OCLC 1067062411 .

Goodrich, Carter (1950). "The Revulsion Against Internal Improvements".

Journal of Economic History .

10 (2): 145– 169.

doi : 10.1017/s0022050700064111 .

JSTOR 2113517 .

S2CID 154953642 .

Graebner, Norman; Herring, George (2009). "Henry Clay, Realist".

The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society .

107 (4): 551– 576.

JSTOR 23387602 .

Hargreaves, Mary W. M. (1985).

The Presidency of John Quincy Adams . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 9780700602728 .

Heidler, David S.; Heidler, Jeanne T. (2010).

Henry Clay: The Essential American . Random House.

ISBN 978-1588369956 .

Holt, Michael F. (1999).

The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Politics and the Onset of the Civil War . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199772032 .

Howe, Daniel Walker (2007).

What Hath God Wrought: the Transformation of America, 1815–1848 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195078947 .

Klotter, James C. (2018).

Henry Clay: The Man Who Would Be President . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190498047 .

Klotter, James (Autumn 2012). "Kentucky, The Civil War, and the Spirit of Henry Clay".

The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society .

110 (3/4): 243– 263.

doi : 10.1353/khs.2012.0068 .

JSTOR 23388052 .

S2CID 161945941 .

Peterson, Norma Lois (1989).

The Presidencies of William Henry Harrison and John Tyler . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0700604005 .

Remini, Robert V. (1991).

Henry Clay: Statesmen for the Union . W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0393030044 .

Remini, Robert V. (1981).

Andrew Jackson and the Course of American Freedom, 1822–1832 . Harper & Row Publishers, Inc.

ISBN 978-0801859137 .

Smith, Elbert B. (1988).

The Presidencies of Zachary Taylor & Millard Fillmore . The American Presidency. University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0700603626 .

Strahan, Randall; Moscardelli, Vincent G.; Moshe, Haspel; Wike, Richard S. (2000). "The Clay Speakership Revisited".

Polity .

32 (4): 561– 593.

doi : 10.2307/3235293 .

JSTOR 3235293 .

S2CID 155152645 .

Van Deusen, Glyndon G. (1937).

The Life of Henry Clay . Little, Brown, and Co.

ISBN 9780313207174 .

OCLC 424654 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Secondary sources [ edit ] Apple, Lindsey (2011).

The Family Legacy of Henry Clay: In the Shadow of a Kentucky Patriarch . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0813134109 .

Baxter, Maurice (1995).

Henry Clay and the American System . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0813119199 .

Baxter, Maurice (2000).

Henry Clay the Lawyer . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0813121475 .

Bordewich, Fergus M. (2012).

America's Great Debate: Henry Clay, Stephen A. Douglas, and the Compromise That Preserved the Union . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1439124604 .

Brands, H. W. (2018).

Heirs of the Founders: The Epic Rivalry of Henry Clay, John Calhoun and Daniel Webster, the Second Generation of American Giants . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0385542548 .

Brown, Thomas (1985).

Politics and Statesmanship: Essays on the American Whig Party . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0231056021 .

Greenberg, Amy S. (2012).

A Wicked War: Polk, Clay, Lincoln, and the 1846 U.S. Invasion of Mexico . Knopf.

ISBN 978-0307592699 .

King, Quentin Scott (2014).

Henry Clay and the War of 1812 . McFarland.

ISBN 978-1476613901 .

Klotter, James C.

Henry Clay: The Man Who Would Be President (Oxford UP, 2018) online review , scholarly biography Mathias, Frank F. "Henry Clay and His Kentucky Power Base," Register of the Kentucky Historical Society (1980) 78#2 pp. 123–139 online Mayo, Bernard (1937).

Henry Clay: Spokesman of the New West . Houghton Mifflin.

OCLC 35020339 .

, an older scholarly biography.

Meyer, Jeff (2002). "Henry Clay's Legacy to Horse Breeding and Racing".

The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society .

100 (4): 473– 496.

JSTOR 23384634 .

Morgan, William G. "Henry Clay's Biographers and the 'Corrupt Bargain' Charge." Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 66#3 (1968), pp. 242–58.

online Morgan, William G. "John Quincy Adams Versus Andrew Jackson: Their Biographers And The 'Corrupt Bargain' Charge." Tennessee Historical Quarterly 26#1 (1967), pp. 43–58.

online Patrick, Andrew P. "Hemp & Henry Clay: Binding the Bluegrass to the World." Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 117.1 (2019): 39–55.

online Paulus, Sarah Bischoff (2014). "America's Long Eulogy for Compromise: Henry Clay and American Politics, 1854–58".

Journal of the Civil War Era .

4 (1): 28– 52.

doi : 10.1353/cwe.2014.0014 .

JSTOR 26062123 .

S2CID 154139588 .

Pearson, Joseph W.

The Whigs' America: Middle-Class Political Thought in the Age of Jackson and Clay (University Press of Kentucky, 2020).

Peterson, Merrill D. (1987).

The Great Triumvirate: Webster, Clay, and Calhoun . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195038774 .

Petriello, David. "Consumption and Compromise: Illness and Its Impact on the Political Career of Henry Clay." Journal of the Southern Association for the History of Medicine and Science 2.1 (2020): 43–56 online .

Poage, George Rawlings (1936).

Henry Clay and the Whig Party . University of North Carolina Press.

OCLC 611501 .

Portteus, Kevin J. "'My Beau Ideal of a Statesman': Abraham Lincoln's Eulogy on Henry Clay." Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association 41.2 (2021) online .

Ratcliffe, Donald (2015).

The One-Party Presidential Contest . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0700621309 .

Remini, Robert V. (2010).

At the Edge of the Precipice: Henry Clay and the Compromise That Saved the Union . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465012886 .

Runyon, Randolph Paul.

The Mentelles: Mary Todd Lincoln, Henry Clay, and the Immigrant Family Who Educated Antebellum Kentucky (University Press of Kentucky, 2018).

Schurz, Carl .

Life of Henry Clay , 2 vols., 1899., outdated biography Strahan, Randall (2007).

Leading Representatives: The Agency of Leaders in the Politics of the U.S. House . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0801886904 .

Swift, Elaine K. "The start of something new: Clay, Stevenson, Polk, and the development of the speakership, 1789–1869."  in Masters of the House (Routledge, 2018) pp. 9–32.

Unger, Harlow Giles (2015).

Henry Clay: America's Greatest Statesman . Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0306823923 .

Watson, Harry L. (1998). Watson, Harry L. (ed.).

Andrew Jackson vs. Henry Clay: Democracy and Development in Antebellum America . Bedford/St. Martin's.

ISBN 978-0312112134 .

Zarefsky, David (2003). "Henry Clay and the Election of 1844: the Limits of a Rhetoric of Compromise".

Rhetoric & Public Affairs .

6 (1): 79– 96.

doi : 10.1353/rap.2003.0040 .

JSTOR 41939810 .

S2CID 143245070 .

Primary sources [ edit ] Clay, Henry.

The Papers of Henry Clay , 1797–1852. Edited by James Hopkins, Mary Hargreaves, Robert Seager II, Melba Porter Hay et al. 11 vols. University Press of Kentucky, 1959–1992.

vol 1 online, 1797–1814 Clay, Henry.

Works of Henry Clay , 7 vols. (1897) online External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Henry Clay .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Portal:Henry Clay Wikimedia Commons has media related to Henry Clay .

Henry Clay Center – "transforming the tone of our country’s national discourse" Clay's Ashland Home web site Henry Clay: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Works by Henry Clay at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Henry Clay at the Internet Archive Works by Henry Clay at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Henry Clay – Biographical Directory of the United States Congress A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787–1825 For Henry Clay's election results.

Henry Clay Letters, 1825–1851 at the Newberry Library Letters of Henry Clay Abraham Lincoln's Eulogy of Henry Clay at Teaching American History.Org "Henry Clay, Presidential Contender" from C-SPAN 's The Contenders Guide to the Henry Clay Letters, 1801–1843 housed at the University of Kentucky Libraries Special Collections Research Center Guide to the Henry Clay Memorial Foundation papers housed at the University of Kentucky Libraries Special Collections Research Center Guide to the Henry Clay account book , housed at the University of Kentucky Libraries Special Collections Research Center George Pope Morris and Henry Russell wrote A Song for the Man in 1844 as a campaign song for Clay.

Henry Clay's Market Speech Against the Mexican War (November 13, 1847 Lexington Kentucky) v t e Henry Clay 9th US Secretary of State (1841-1843, 1850–1852) • 7th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (1811-1814, 1815–1820, 1823-1825) • U.S. Senator from Kentucky (1806-1807, 1810–1811, 1831-1842, 1849-1852) Political career Great Triumvirate Whig Party Treaty of Ghent American System Second Bank of the United States Missouri Compromise Tariff of 1833 Compromise of 1850 Electoral history U.S. Senate 1806 1831 1836 1848 Speaker 1811 1813 1815 1817 1819 Presidential 1824 election 1832 election convention 1844 election convention Legacy Henry Clay Monument Statue of Henry Clay (U.S. Capitol) Henry Clay Oak Mount Clay List of things named for Henry Clay Family Lucretia Hart (wife) Thomas Hart Clay (son) Henry Clay Jr.

(son) James Brown Clay (son) John Morrison Clay (son) Cassius Marcellus Clay (cousin) Related Ashland Charlotte Dupuy Nullification crisis Salt River Offices and distinctions U.S. Senate Preceded by John Adair United States Senator (Class 3) from Kentucky 1806–1807 Served alongside: Buckner Thruston Succeeded by John Pope Preceded by Buckner Thruston United States Senator (Class 2) from Kentucky 1810–1811 Served alongside: John Pope Succeeded by George M. Bibb Preceded by John Rowan United States Senator (Class 3) from Kentucky 1831–1842 Served alongside: George M. Bibb , John J. Crittenden , James T. Morehead Succeeded by John J. Crittenden Preceded by Thomas Metcalfe United States Senator (Class 3) from Kentucky 1849–1852 Served alongside: Joseph R. Underwood Succeeded by David Meriwether Preceded by William Wilkins Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee 1834–1836 Succeeded by James Buchanan Preceded by Silas Wright Chair of the Senate Finance Committee 1841 Succeeded by George Evans Honorary titles Preceded by Thomas Worthington Baby of the Senate 1806–1807 Succeeded by James Fenner Preceded by William Plumer Most senior living U.S. senator (Sitting or former) 1850–1852 Succeeded by Elisha Mathewson First Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda July 1, 1852 Succeeded by Abraham Lincoln U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by William T. Barry Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Kentucky's 5th congressional district 1811–1813 Succeeded by Samuel Hopkins Preceded by Samuel McKee Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Kentucky's 2nd congressional district 1813–1814 Succeeded by Joseph H. Hawkins Preceded by Joseph H. Hawkins Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Kentucky's 2nd congressional district 1815–1821 Succeeded by Samuel Woodson Preceded by John Johnson Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Kentucky's 3rd congressional district 1823–1825 Succeeded by James Clark Political offices Preceded by Joseph Varnum Speaker of the United States House of Representatives 1811–1814 Succeeded by Langdon Cheves Preceded by Langdon Cheves Speaker of the United States House of Representatives 1815–1820 Succeeded by John Taylor Preceded by Philip P. Barbour Speaker of the United States House of Representatives 1823–1825 Preceded by John Quincy Adams United States Secretary of State 1825–1829 Succeeded by Martin Van Buren Party political offices Preceded by James Monroe Democratic-Republican nominee for President of the United States ¹ 1824 Served alongside: John Quincy Adams , William Crawford , Andrew Jackson Party abolished Preceded by John Quincy Adams National Republican nominee for President of the United States 1832 Preceded by William Henry Harrison Whig nominee for President of the United States 1844 Succeeded by Zachary Taylor Notes and references 1. The Democratic-Republican Party split in the 1824 election , fielding four separate candidates.

Articles related to Henry Clay v t e Speakers of the U.S. House of Representatives ▌ Muhlenberg (1789–1791) ▌ Trumbull (1791–1793) ▌ Muhlenberg (1793–1795) ▌ Dayton (1795–1799) ▌ Sedgwick (1799–1801) ▌ Macon (1801–1807) ▌ Varnum (1807–1811) ▌ Clay (1811–1814) ▌ Cheves (1814–1815) ▌ Clay (1815–1820) ▌ Taylor (1820–1821) ▌ Barbour (1821–1823) ▌ Clay (1823–1825) ▌ Taylor (1825–1827) ▌ Stevenson (1827–1834) ▌ Bell (1834–1835) ▌ ▌ Polk (1835–1839) ▌ Hunter (1839–1841) ▌ White (1841–1843) ▌ Jones (1843–1845) ▌ Davis (1845–1847) ▌ Winthrop (1847–1849) ▌ Cobb (1849–1851) ▌ Boyd (1851–1855) ▌ Banks (1856–1857) ▌ Orr (1857–1859) ▌ Pennington (1860–1861) ▌ Grow (1861–1863) ▌ Colfax (1863–1869) ▌ Pomeroy (1869) ▌ Blaine (1869–1875) ▌ Kerr (1875–1876) ▌ Randall (1876–1881) ▌ Keifer (1881–1883) ▌ Carlisle (1883–1889) ▌ Reed (1889–1891) ▌ Crisp (1891–1895) ▌ Reed (1895–1899) ▌ Henderson (1899–1903) ▌ Cannon (1903–1911) ▌ Clark (1911–1919) ▌ Gillett (1919–1925) ▌ Longworth (1925–1931) ▌ Garner (1931–1933) ▌ Rainey (1933–1934) ▌ Byrns (1935–1936) ▌ Bankhead (1936–1940) ▌ Rayburn (1940–1947) ▌ Martin (1947–1949) ▌ Rayburn (1949–1953) ▌ Martin (1953–1955) ▌ Rayburn (1955–1961) ▌ McCormack (1962–1971) ▌ Albert (1971–1977) ▌ O'Neill (1977–1987) ▌ Wright (1987–1989) ▌ Foley (1989–1995) ▌ Gingrich (1995–1999) ▌ Hastert (1999–2007) ▌ Pelosi (2007–2011) ▌ Boehner (2011–2015) ▌ Ryan (2015–2019) ▌ Pelosi (2019–2023) ▌ McCarthy (2023) ▌ McHenry (2023, pro tempore ) ▌ Johnson (2023–present) ▌ Pro-Administration ▌ Anti-Administration ▌ Federalist ▌ Democratic-Republican ▌ National Republican ▌ Jacksonian ▌ Democratic ▌ Whig ▌ Know Nothing ▌ Republican Category List v t e United States senators from Kentucky Class 2 Brown Thruston Clay Bibb Walker Barry Hardin Crittenden Johnson Bibb Crittenden Morehead J. Underwood Thompson Powell Guthrie McCreery Stevenson Beck Carlisle Lindsay Blackburn Paynter James Martin Stanley Sackett Robsion Williamson M. Logan Chandler Stanfill Cooper Chapman T. Underwood Cooper Barkley Humphreys Cooper Huddleston McConnell Class 3 Edwards Marshall J. Breckinridge Adair Clay Pope Bledsoe Talbot W. Logan Talbot Rowan Clay Crittenden Metcalfe Clay Meriwether Dixon Crittenden J. C. Breckinridge Davis Machen McCreery Williams Blackburn Deboe McCreary Bradley Camden Beckham Ernst Barkley Withers Clements Morton Cook Ford Bunning Paul v t e ( ← 1820 ) 1824 United States presidential election ( 1828 → ) Democratic-Republican Party Adams–Clay faction Nominees President: John Quincy Adams Henry Clay (eliminated in contingent election) Vice President: John C. Calhoun Nathan Sanford Jacksonian faction Nominees President: Andrew Jackson Vice President: John C. Calhoun Tertium quids Nominees President: William H. Crawford Vice President: Nathaniel Macon Other candidates John C. Calhoun Smith Thompson Other 1824 elections: Contingent election House Senate v t e ( ← 1828 ) 1832 United States presidential election ( 1836 → ) Democratic Party Nominees President: Andrew Jackson (incumbent) Vice President: Martin Van Buren Other candidates Vice President: Philip P. Barbour Richard M. Johnson National Republican Party Nominees President: Henry Clay Vice President: John Sergeant Nullifier Party Nominees President: John Floyd Vice President: Henry Lee Anti-Masonic Party Nominees President: William Wirt Vice President: Amos Ellmaker Other candidates President: John Quincy Adams Richard Rush Vice President: John C. Spencer Other 1832 elections : House Senate v t e Chairs of the United States Senate Committee on Finance Campbell Eppes Sanford Holmes Lowrie Smith Forsyth Webster Wright Clay Evans Woodbury Calhoun Lewis Atherton Dickinson Hunter Pearce Fessenden Sherman Fessenden Sherman Morrill Bayard Morrill Voorhees Morrill Aldrich Penrose Simmons Penrose McCumber Smoot Harrison George Millikin George Millikin Byrd Long Dole Packwood Bentsen Moynihan Packwood Roth Baucus Grassley Baucus Grassley Baucus Wyden Hatch Grassley Wyden Crapo v t e Chairs of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Barbour Macon Brown Barbour R. King Barbour Macon Sanford Macon Tazewell Forsyth Wilkins Clay Buchanan Rives Archer Allen Sevier Hannegan Benton W. King Foote Mason Sumner Cameron Hamlin Eaton Burnside Edmunds Windom Miller Sherman Morgan Sherman Frye Davis Cullom Bacon Stone Hitchcock Lodge Borah Pittman George Connally Vandenberg Connally Wiley George Green Fulbright Sparkman Church Percy Lugar Pell Helms Biden Helms Biden Lugar Biden Kerry Menendez Corker Risch Menendez Cardin Risch v t e Democratic-Republican Party Anti-Administration Party Anti-Federalists First Party System Jeffersonian democracy Era of Good Feelings Presidency of Thomas Jefferson Presidency of James Madison Presidency of James Monroe Tertium quids Presidential tickets 1796 : Jefferson / Burr 1800 : Jefferson / Burr 1804 : Jefferson / Clinton 1808 : Madison / Clinton 1812 : Madison / Gerry 1816 : Monroe / Tompkins 1820 : Monroe / Tompkins 1824 : Adams / Calhoun Jackson / Calhoun Crawford / Macon Clay / Sanford U.S. House speakers Frederick Muhlenberg (1793–1795) Nathaniel Macon (1801–1807) Joseph Bradley Varnum (1807–1811) Henry Clay (1811–1814) Langdon Cheves (1814–1815) Henry Clay (1815–1820) John W. Taylor (1820–1821) Philip P. Barbour (1821–1823) Henry Clay (1823–1825) U.S. Cabinet State Thomas Jefferson (1790–1794) Levi Lincoln Sr.

(1801) James Madison (1801–1809) Robert Smith (1809–1811) James Monroe (1811–1817) John Graham (1817) John Quincy Adams (1817–1825) Treasury Albert Gallatin (1801–1814) George W. Campbell (1814) Alexander J. Dallas (1814–1816) William Jones (1816) William H. Crawford (1816–1825) War Henry Dearborn (1801–1809) William Eustis (1809–1813) John Armstrong Jr.

(1813–1814) James Monroe (1814–1815) Alexander J. Dallas (1815) William H. Crawford (1815–1816) George Graham (1816–1817) John C. Calhoun (1817–1825) Attorney General Levi Lincoln Sr.

(1801–1805) John Breckinridge (1805–1806) Caesar Augustus Rodney (1807–1811) William Pinkney (1811–1814) William Wirt (1817–1825) Navy Robert Smith (1801–1809) Paul Hamilton (1809–1813) William Jones (1813–1814) Benjamin Williams Crowninshield (1815–1818) Smith Thompson (1819–1823) Samuel L. Southard (1823–1825) v t e National Republican and Whig Parties American System American Party 1856 American National Convention Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union 1860 Constitutional Union Convention Opposition Party Second Party System Union Party Presidency of John Quincy Adams Presidency of William Henry Harrison Presidency of John Tyler Presidency of Zachary Taylor Presidency of Millard Fillmore Presidential tickets 1828 (None) : Adams / Rush 1831 (Baltimore) : Clay / Sergeant 1836 (None) : Harrison / Granger White / Tyler Webster / Granger Mangum / Tyler 1839 (Harrisburg) : Harrison / Tyler 1844 (Baltimore) : Clay / Frelinghuysen 1848 (Philadelphia) : Z. Taylor / Fillmore 1852 (Baltimore) : Scott / Graham 1856 (Baltimore) : Fillmore / Donelson U.S. House Speakers J. Taylor (1825–1827) Hunter (1839–1841) White (1841–1843) Winthrop (1847–1849) Banks (1856–1857) U.S. Cabinet State Henry Clay (1825–1829) Daniel Webster (1841–1843) Abel P. Upshur (1843–1844) John M. Clayton (1849–1850) Daniel Webster (1850–1852) Edward Everett (1852–1853) Treasury Richard Rush (1825–1829) Thomas Ewing (1841) Walter Forward (1841–1843) John C. Spencer (1843–1844) George M. Bibb (1844–1845) William M. Meredith (1849–1850) Thomas Corwin (1850–1853) War James Barbour (1825–1828) Peter B. Porter (1828–1829) John Bell (1841) John C. Spencer (1841–1843) James M. Porter (1843–1844) George W. Crawford (1849–1850) Charles M. Conrad (1850–1853) Attorney General William Wirt (1825–1829) John J. Crittenden (1841) John Nelson (1843–1845) Reverdy Johnson (1849–1850) John J. Crittenden (1850–1853) Navy Samuel L. Southard (1825–1829) George E. Badger (1841) Abel P. Upshur (1841–1843) William B. Preston (1849–1850) William A. Graham (1850–1852) John P. Kennedy (1852–1853) Interior Thomas Ewing (1849–1850) Thomas M. T. McKennan (1850) Alexander H. H. Stuart (1850–1853) v t e United States secretaries of state Foreign affairs 1781–1789 R. Livingston Jay State 1789–present Jefferson Randolph Pickering J. Marshall Madison Smith Monroe Adams Clay Van Buren E. Livingston McLane Forsyth Webster Upshur Calhoun Buchanan Clayton Webster Everett Marcy Cass Black Seward Washburne Fish Evarts Blaine Frelinghuysen Bayard Blaine Foster Gresham Olney Sherman Day Hay Root Bacon Knox Bryan Lansing Colby Hughes Kellogg Stimson Hull Stettinius Byrnes G. Marshall Acheson Dulles Herter Rusk Rogers Kissinger Vance Muskie Haig Shultz Baker Eagleburger Christopher trips Albright trips Powell trips Rice tenure trips Clinton tenure trips Kerry trips Tillerson trips Pompeo trips Blinken trips Rubio trips List of international trips made by secretaries of state of the United States • Air Force Three v t e Cabinet of President John Quincy Adams (1825–1829) Secretary of State Henry Clay (1825–1829) Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush (1825–1829) Secretary of War James Barbour (1825–1828) Peter Buell Porter (1828–1829) Attorney General William Wirt (1825–1829) Secretary of the Navy Samuel L. Southard (1825–1829) v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Kentucky 's delegation(s) to the 9th–32nd United States Congress (ordered by seniority) 9th Senate : ▌ J. Breckinridge (DR) ▌ B. Thruston (DR) ▌ J. Adair (DR) ▌ H. Clay (DR) House : ▌ J. Fowler (DR) ▌ M. Lyon (DR) ▌ G. Bedinger (DR) ▌ J. Boyle (DR) ▌ T. Sandford (DR) ▌ M. Walton (DR) 10th Senate : ▌ B. Thruston (DR) · ▌ J. Pope (DR) House : ▌ M. Lyon (DR) ▌ J. Boyle (DR) ▌ J. Desha (DR) ▌ B. Howard (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ J. Rowan (DR) 11th Senate : ▌ B. Thruston (DR) ▌ J. Pope (DR) ▌ H. Clay (DR) House : ▌ M. Lyon (DR) ▌ J. Desha (DR) ▌ B. Howard (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ H. Crist (DR) ▌ S. McKee (DR) ▌ W. Barry (DR) 12th Senate : ▌ J. Pope (DR) · ▌ G. Bibb (DR) House : ▌ A. New (DR) ▌ J. Desha (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ S. McKee (DR) ▌ H. Clay (DR) ▌ S. Ormsby (DR) 13th Senate : ▌ G. Bibb (DR) ▌ J. Bledsoe (DR) ▌ G. Walker (DR) ▌ W. Barry (DR) ▌ I. Talbot (DR) House : ▌ J. Desha (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ S. McKee (DR) ▌ H. Clay (DR) ▌ S. Ormsby (DR) ▌ J. Clark (DR) ▌ W. P. Duval (DR) ▌ S. Hopkins (DR) ▌ T. Montgomery (DR) ▌ S. Sharp (DR) ▌ J. Hawkins (DR) 14th Senate : ▌ W. Barry (DR) ▌ I. Talbot (DR) ▌ M. Hardin (DR) House : ▌ J. Desha (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ S. McKee (DR) ▌ S. Ormsby (DR) ▌ H. Clay (DR) ▌ J. Clark (DR) ▌ S. Sharp (DR) ▌ B. Hardin (DR) ▌ A. McLean (DR) ▌ M. Taul (DR) ▌ T. Fletcher (DR) 15th Senate : ▌ I. Talbot (DR) · ▌ J. Crittenden (DR) House : ▌ A. New (DR) ▌ J. Desha (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ H. Clay (DR) ▌ R. Anderson Jr.

(DR) ▌ T. Quarles (DR) ▌ G. Robertson (DR) ▌ T. Speed (DR) ▌ D. Trimble (DR) ▌ D. Walker (DR) 16th Senate : ▌ W. Logan (DR) ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) ▌ I. Talbot (DR) House : ▌ H. Clay (DR) ▌ R. Anderson Jr.

(DR) ▌ T. Quarles (DR) ▌ G. Robertson (DR) ▌ D. Trimble (DR) ▌ D. Walker (DR) ▌ B. Hardin (DR) ▌ A. McLean (DR) ▌ T. Montgomery (DR) ▌ W. Brown (DR) ▌ T. Metcalfe (DR) ▌ F. Johnson (DR) 17th Senate : ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) · ▌ I. Talbot (DR) House : ▌ A. New (DR) ▌ G. Robertson (DR) ▌ D. Trimble (DR) ▌ B. Hardin (DR) ▌ T. Montgomery (DR) ▌ T. Metcalfe (DR) ▌ F. Johnson (DR) ▌ J. T. Johnson (DR) ▌ W. Bullock (DR) ▌ S. Woodson (DR) ▌ J. S. Smith (DR) ▌ J. D. Breckinridge (DR) 18th Senate : ▌ R. M. Johnson (DR) · ▌ I. Talbot (DR) House : ▌ H. Clay (DR) ▌ D. Trimble (DR) ▌ T. Metcalfe (DR) ▌ F. Johnson (DR) ▌ J. T. Johnson (DR) ▌ R. Buckner (DR) ▌ R. Henry (DR) ▌ R. Letcher (DR) ▌ T. Moore (DR) ▌ P. Thompson (DR) ▌ D. White (DR) ▌ C. Wickliffe (DR) 19th Senate : ▌ R. M. Johnson (J) · ▌ J. Rowan (J) House : ▌ H. Clay (NR) ▌ D. Trimble (NR) ▌ T. Metcalfe (NR) ▌ F. Johnson (NR) ▌ J. Clark (NR) ▌ R. Buckner (NR) ▌ R. Henry (J) ▌ R. Letcher (NR) ▌ T. Moore (J) ▌ C. Wickliffe (J) ▌ J. Johnson (J) ▌ J. Lecompte (J) ▌ W. Young (NR) ▌ J. Henry (NR) ▌ R. McHatton (J) 20th Senate : ▌ R. M. Johnson (J) · ▌ J. Rowan (J) House : ▌ T. Metcalfe (NR) ▌ J. Clark (NR) ▌ R. Buckner (NR) ▌ R. Letcher (NR) ▌ T. Moore (J) ▌ C. Wickliffe (J) ▌ J. Lecompte (J) ▌ W. Young (NR) ▌ R. McHatton (J) ▌ H. Daniel (J) ▌ C. Lyon (J) ▌ J. Yancy (J) ▌ J. Calhoon (NR) ▌ T. Chilton (J) ▌ J. Chambers (NR) 21st Senate : ▌ J. Rowan (J) · ▌ G. Bibb (J) House : ▌ R. M. Johnson (J) ▌ J. Clark (NR) ▌ R. Letcher (NR) ▌ C. Wickliffe (J) ▌ J. Lecompte (J) ▌ H. Daniel (J) ▌ C. Lyon (J) ▌ J. Yancy (J) ▌ T. Chilton (J) ▌ N. Coleman (J) ▌ N. Gaither (J) ▌ J. Kincaid (J) 22nd Senate : ▌ G. Bibb (J) · ▌ H. Clay (NR) House : ▌ R. M. Johnson (J) ▌ R. Letcher (J) ▌ C. Wickliffe (J) ▌ J. Lecompte (J) ▌ H. Daniel (J) ▌ C. Lyon (J) ▌ N. Gaither (J) ▌ J. Adair (J) ▌ C. Allan (NR) ▌ A. G. Hawes (J) ▌ T. A. Marshall (NR) ▌ C. Tompkins (NR) 23rd Senate : ▌ G. Bibb (J) · ▌ H. Clay (NR) House : ▌ R. M. Johnson (J) ▌ R. Letcher (NR) ▌ B. Hardin (NR) ▌ C. Lyon (J) ▌ T. Chilton (NR) ▌ C. Allan (NR) ▌ A. G. Hawes (J) ▌ T. A. Marshall (NR) ▌ C. Tompkins (NR) ▌ M. Beaty (NR) ▌ A. Davis (NR) ▌ J. Love (NR) ▌ P. Pope (J) 24th Senate : ▌ H. Clay (NR) · ▌ J. Crittenden (NR) House : ▌ R. M. Johnson (J) ▌ B. Hardin (NR) ▌ C. Allan (NR) ▌ A. G. Hawes (J) ▌ J. Calhoon (NR) ▌ J. Chambers (NR) ▌ L. Boyd (J) ▌ R. French (J) ▌ W. Graves (NR) ▌ J. Harlan (NR) ▌ J. R. Underwood (NR) ▌ J. White (NR) ▌ S. Williams (NR) 25th Senate : ▌ H. Clay (W) · ▌ J. Crittenden (W) House : ▌ J. Calhoon (W) ▌ J. Chambers (W) ▌ W. Graves (W) ▌ J. Harlan (W) ▌ J. Underwood (W) ▌ J. White (W) ▌ S. Williams (W) ▌ R. Hawes (W) ▌ R. Menefee (W) ▌ J. Murray (D) ▌ J. Pope (W) ▌ E. Rumsey (W) ▌ W. Southgate (W) 26th Senate : ▌ H. Clay (W) · ▌ J. Crittenden (W) House : ▌ W. Graves (W) ▌ J. Underwood (W) ▌ J. White (W) ▌ S. Williams (W) ▌ R. Hawes (W) ▌ J. Pope (W) ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ S. Anderson (W) ▌ L. Andrews (W) ▌ W. O. Butler (D) ▌ G. Davis (W) ▌ W. Green (W) ▌ P. Triplett (W) ▌ J. B. Thompson (W) 27th Senate : ▌ H. Clay (W) ▌ J. T. Morehead (W) ▌ J. Crittenden (W) House : ▌ J. Underwood (W) ▌ J. White (W) ▌ J. Pope (W) ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ L. Andrews (W) ▌ W. O. Butler (D) ▌ G. Davis (W) ▌ W. Green (W) ▌ P. Triplett (W) ▌ J. Thompson (W) ▌ T. Marshall (W) ▌ B. Owsley (W) ▌ J. Sprigg (W) 28th Senate : ▌ J. T. Morehead (W) · ▌ J. Crittenden (W) House : ▌ J. White (W) ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ G. Davis (W) ▌ W. Green (W) ▌ R. French (D) ▌ G. Caldwell (D) ▌ H. Grider (W) ▌ J. Stone (D) ▌ W. Thomasson (W) ▌ J. Tibbatts (D) 29th Senate : ▌ J. T. Morehead (W) · ▌ J. Crittenden (W) House : ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ G. Davis (W) ▌ H. Grider (W) ▌ W. Thomasson (W) ▌ J. Tibbatts (D) ▌ J. Bell (W) ▌ J. Martin (D) ▌ J. McHenry (W) ▌ A. Trumbo (W) ▌ B. Young (W) 30th Senate : ▌ J. Crittenden (W) ▌ J. R. Underwood (W) ▌ T. Metcalfe (W) House : ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ R. French (D) ▌ J. Thompson (W) ▌ G. Adams (W) ▌ A. Buckner (W) ▌ B. L. Clarke (D) ▌ G. Duncan (W) ▌ J. P. Gaines (W) ▌ C. Morehead (W) ▌ S. Peyton (D) 31st Senate : ▌ J. R. Underwood (W) · ▌ H. Clay (W) House : ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ J. Thompson (W) ▌ C. Morehead (W) ▌ G. Caldwell (D) ▌ D. Breck (W) ▌ J. L. Johnson (W) ▌ H. Marshall (W) ▌ J. Mason (D) ▌ F. McLean (W) ▌ R. Stanton (D) 32nd Senate : ▌ J. R. Underwood (W) ▌ H. Clay (W) ▌ D. Meriwether (D) ▌ A. Dixon (W) House : ▌ L. Boyd (D) ▌ H. Marshall (W) ▌ J. Mason (D) ▌ R. Stanton (D) ▌ J. Stone (D) ▌ J. C. Breckinridge (D) ▌ P. Ewing (W) ▌ B. Grey (W) ▌ W. Ward (W) ▌ A. White (W) ▌ W. Preston (W) v t e Unsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States Thomas Jefferson ( 1796 ) John Adams ( 1800 ) Charles C. Pinckney ( 1804 , 1808 ) DeWitt Clinton ( 1812 ) Rufus King ( 1816 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1824 ) William H. Crawford ( 1824 ) Henry Clay ( 1824 , 1832 , 1844 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1828 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1836 ) Hugh Lawson White ( 1836 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1840 ) Lewis Cass ( 1848 ) Winfield Scott ( 1852 ) John C. Frémont ( 1856 ) Stephen A. Douglas ( 1860 ) George B. McClellan ( 1864 ) Horatio Seymour ( 1868 ) Horace Greeley ( 1872 ) Samuel J. Tilden ( 1876 ) Winfield Scott Hancock ( 1880 ) James G. Blaine ( 1884 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1888 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1892 ) William J. Bryan ( 1896 , 1900 , 1908 ) Alton B. Parker ( 1904 ) William Howard Taft ( 1912 ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1916 ) James M. Cox ( 1920 ) John W. Davis ( 1924 ) Al Smith ( 1928 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1932 ) Alf Landon ( 1936 ) Wendell Willkie ( 1940 ) Thomas E. Dewey ( 1944 , 1948 ) Adlai Stevenson ( 1952 , 1956 ) Richard Nixon ( 1960 ) Barry Goldwater ( 1964 ) Hubert Humphrey ( 1968 ) George McGovern ( 1972 ) Gerald Ford ( 1976 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1980 ) Walter Mondale ( 1984 ) Michael Dukakis ( 1988 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1992 ) Bob Dole ( 1996 ) Al Gore ( 2000 ) John Kerry ( 2004 ) John McCain ( 2008 ) Mitt Romney ( 2012 ) Hillary Clinton ( 2016 ) Donald Trump ( 2020 ) Kamala Harris ( 2024 ) All presidential candidates Presidents Third-party candidates v t e ( ← 1836 ) 1840 United States presidential election ( 1844 → ) Whig Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: William Henry Harrison campaign Vice President: John Tyler Other candidates Henry Clay Winfield Scott Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Martin Van Buren (incumbent) Vice President: none Other 1840 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1840 ) 1844 United States presidential election ( 1848 → ) Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: James K. Polk campaign Vice President: George M. Dallas Other candidates Martin Van Buren James Buchanan Lewis Cass Richard M. Johnson Whig Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Henry Clay Vice President: Theodore Frelinghuysen Other candidates for Vice President: John Davis Millard Fillmore John Sargeant Third-party and independent candidates Liberty Party President: James G. Birney Vice President: Thomas Morris Reform Party President: Joseph Smith campaign Vice President: Sidney Rigdon Other 1844 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1844 ) 1848 United States presidential election ( 1852 → ) Whig Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Zachary Taylor Vice President: Millard Fillmore Other candidates Henry Clay John M. Clayton Winfield Scott Daniel Webster Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Lewis Cass Vice President: William O. Butler Other candidates James Buchanan Levi Woodbury Martin Van Buren Free Soil Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Martin Van Buren Vice President: Charles F. Adams Other candidates John P. Hale Joshua R. Giddings Other 1848 elections : House Senate v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Greece Sweden Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Clay&oldid=1303406517 " Categories : Henry Clay 1777 births 1852 deaths People from Hanover County, Virginia Clay family Henry Clay family American people of English descent United States secretaries of state John Quincy Adams administration cabinet members Democratic-Republican Party United States senators from Kentucky Speakers of the United States House of Representatives Democratic-Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Kentucky National Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Kentucky National Republican Party United States senators from Kentucky Whig Party United States senators from Kentucky Chairmen of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Candidates in the 1824 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1832 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1840 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1844 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1848 United States presidential election Whig Party (United States) presidential nominees Speakers of the Kentucky House of Representatives Members of the Kentucky House of Representatives People of the American colonization movement American political party founders American duellists Freedom suits in the United States Great Triumvirate 19th-century American lawyers Kentucky lawyers Second Party System American nationalists College of William & Mary alumni Transylvania University faculty People from Kentucky in the War of 1812 Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees 19th-century deaths from tuberculosis Tuberculosis deaths in Washington, D.C.

Burials at Lexington Cemetery United States senators who owned slaves Members of the United States House of Representatives who owned slaves 19th-century United States senators 19th-century members of the United States House of Representatives 19th-century members of the Kentucky General Assembly Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2020 CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 20:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry Clay 39 languages Add topic

