Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Central Revolutionary Committee 2 Use of the term "Blanquism" Toggle Use of the term "Blanquism" subsection 2.1 Vladimir Lenin 3 Bibliography 4 References Toggle the table of contents Blanquism 32 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Буряад Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Left-wing revolutionary ideology Louis Auguste Blanqui Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Blanquism ( / ˈ b l ɒ ŋ k ɪ z əm / [ 1 ] ) refers to a conception of revolution generally attributed to Louis Auguste Blanqui (1805–1881) that holds that socialist revolution should be carried out by a relatively small group of highly organised and secretive conspirators.

[ 2 ] Having seized power, the revolutionaries would then use the power of the state to introduce socialism . It is considered a particular sort of "putschism"—that is, the view that political revolution should take the form of a putsch or coup d'état .

[ 3 ] Blanquism is distinguished from other socialist currents in various ways: on the one hand, Blanqui did not believe in the predominant role of the proletariat , nor did he believe in popular movements—instead he believed that revolution should be carried out by a small group of professional, dedicated revolutionaries, who would establish a temporary dictatorship by force. This dictatorship would permit the implementation of the basis of a new order, after which power would then be handed to the people.

[ 4 ] In another respect, Blanqui was more concerned with the revolution itself rather than the future society that would result from it—if his thought was based on precise socialist principles. Blanquist thought rarely goes so far as to imagine a purely socialist society. For Blanquists, the overturning of the bourgeois social order and the revolution are ends sufficient in themselves, at least for their immediate purposes.

Central Revolutionary Committee [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Central Revolutionary Committee (CRC) was a French Blanquist political party founded in 1881 and dissolved in 1898.

The CRC was founded by Édouard Vaillant to continue the political struggle of Auguste Blanqui (1805–1881). The CRC was a Blanquist party, supporting revolutionary activism, atheism , patriotism , and the Jacobinism of the French Revolution . The CRC was weakened by a split in 1888, when numerous members ( Henri Rochefort ) followed General Georges Boulanger who synthesized Jacobin nationalism with socialism . Many saw Boulangism as a possible way to socialism. Following the Boulangist dissidence, Vaillant adopted a strategy of syndicalism and strike action .

The CRC was further re-enforced by the affiliation of the Revolutionary Communist Alliance (ACR), formed by dissidents of the Revolutionary Socialist Workers' Party (POSR) in 1896.

The CRC merged into the Socialist Revolutionary Party in 1898.

Use of the term "Blanquism" [ edit ] The term "Blanquism" has often been used polemically to accuse some revolutionaries of failing to sufficiently meld their praxis with the mass working class .

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels were keen to distinguish their conception of revolution from Blanquism. As Engels put it in a short fragment, The Program of the Blanquist Fugitives from the Paris Commune : Blanqui is essentially a political revolutionist. He is a socialist only through sentiment, through his sympathy with the sufferings of the people, but he has neither a socialist theory nor any definite practical suggestions for social remedies. In his political activity he was mainly a "man of action", believing that a small and well organized minority, who would attempt a political stroke of force at the opportune moment, could carry the mass of the people with them by a few successes at the start and thus make a victorious revolution.

[ 5 ] Vladimir Lenin [ edit ] Rosa Luxemburg and Eduard Bernstein [ 6 ] have criticised Vladimir Lenin that his conception of revolution was elitist and essentially Blanquist. For instance, as part of a longer section on Blanquism in her Organizational Questions of the Russian Social Democracy (later published as Leninism or Marxism?

), Luxemburg writes: For Lenin, the difference between the Social Democracy and Blanquism is reduced to the observation that in place of a handful of conspirators we have a class-conscious proletariat. He forgets that this difference implies a complete revision of our ideas on organization and, therefore, an entirely different conception of centralism and the relations existing between the party and the struggle itself. Blanquism did not count on the direct action of the working class. It, therefore, did not need to organize the people for the revolution. The people were expected to play their part only at the moment of revolution. Preparation for the revolution concerned only the little group of revolutionists armed for the coup. Indeed, to assure the success of the revolutionary conspiracy, it was considered wiser to keep the mass at some distance from the conspirators.

[ 7 ] By " social democracy ", Luxemburg has in mind the original use of the term derived from Marx and synonymous with "socialism"; she conceived of the social democratic party as a mass based organisation of working class struggle. However, Lenin dismissed as meaningless rhetoric the conflation of Blanquism with Bolshevism: The bourgeoisie wants, by using the bogy of “Blanquism”, to belittle, discredit and slander the people’s struggle for power. The bourgeoisie stands to gain if the proletarians and peasants fight only for concessions from the old regime. The Right Social-Democrats use the word “Blanquism” merely as a rhetorical device in their polemics. The bourgeoisie converts this word into a weapon against the proletariat: “Workers, be reasonable! Fight for the extension of the powers of the Cadet Duma ! Pull the chestnuts out of the fire for the bourgeoisie, [ 8 ] but don't dare to think of such madness, anarchism , Blanquism, as fighting for complete power for the people!" [ 9 ] Lenin himself denied any accusations of Blanquism in The State and Revolution (1917) and accused Bernstein of "opportunism".

[ 6 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Bernstein, Samuel.

Auguste Blanqui . 1970.

Hutton, Patrick.

The Cult of the Revolutionary Tradition: The Blanquists in French Politics, 1864-1893 . 1981.

Spitzer, Alan.

The Revolutionary Theories of Louis-Auguste Blanqui . 1951.

References [ edit ] ^ "Blanquism" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ "Blanquism" . Archived from the original on 29 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 April 2007 .

^ "Blanquism" . Archived from the original on 21 August 2008 . Retrieved 25 April 2007 .

^ "Louis-Auguste Blanqui Archive" .

Archived from the original on 5 June 2003 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Engels, Friedrich (26 June 1874).

"The Program of the Blanquist Fugitives from the Paris Commune" .

Der Volksstaat . Retrieved 25 April 2007 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Lenin, V.I.

(1917).

"VI: The Vulgarisation of Marxism by Opportunists" .

The State and Revolution – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Luxemburg, Rosa .

Organizational Questions of the Russian Social Democracy . Retrieved 25 April 2007 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Lenin is alluding to the cat's-paw allegory.

^ Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich (6 May 1906).

The Congress Summed Up . Retrieved 25 April 2007 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

v t e Revolutionary socialism Concepts Class conflict Communist revolution Communization Foco Impossibilism People's war Permanent revolution Platformism Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Revolutionary base area Revolutionary terror Situationist prank Social revolution United front Vanguardism World revolution Tendencies Blanquism De Leonism Insurrectionary anarchism Mao-spontex Syndicalism Groups The Invisible Committee Situationist International People Mikhail Bakunin Louis Auguste Blanqui Daniel De Leon Régis Debray Friedrich Engels Che Guevara Abimael Guzmán Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Vladimir Lenin Karl Liebknecht Rosa Luxemburg Mao Zedong Karl Marx Thomas Sankara Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Related topics Anarchist communism Anarcho-pacifism Collectivist anarchism General strike Popular front Radical feminism Reformism Refusal of work Socialism portal Authority control databases : National France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blanquism&oldid=1295861417 " Categories : Communism Eponymous political ideologies Political science terminology Revolution terminology Socialism in France Political terminology in France Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from June 2025 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 08:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blanquism 32 languages Add topic

