Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Marxist political theorists and revolutionaries on religion Toggle Marxist political theorists and revolutionaries on religion subsection 1.1 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels on religion 1.2 Vladimir Lenin on religion 1.3 Joseph Stalin on religion 1.4 Nikolai Bukharin and Evgenii Preobrazhensky on religion 1.5 Anatoly Lunacharsky on religion 1.6 Kim Il-Sung on religion 2 In Marxist–Leninist states Toggle In Marxist–Leninist states subsection 2.1 Religion in the Soviet Union 2.2 Religion in the Socialist People's Republic of Albania 2.3 Religion in the People's Republic of China 2.4 Religion in Cambodia 2.4.1 Democratic Kampuchea 2.4.2 People's Republic of Kampuchea 2.5 Religion in Laos 2.6 Religion in North Korea 2.7 Religion in the Socialist Republic of Romania 3 Communism and Abrahamic religions Toggle Communism and Abrahamic religions subsection 3.1 Communism and Christianity 3.1.1 Liberation theology 3.2 Communism and Islam 3.3 Communism and Judaism 3.4 Communism and the Baháʼí Faith 4 Communism and Buddhism 5 Religious criticism of communism Toggle Religious criticism of communism subsection 5.1 "Godless communism" 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Marxism and religion 13 languages العربية Български Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 19th-century German philosopher Karl Marx , the founder and primary theorist of Marxism , viewed religion as "the soul of soulless conditions" or the " opium of the people ". According to Marx, religion in this world of exploitation is an expression of distress and at the same time it is also a protest against the real distress. In other words, religion continues to survive because of oppressive social conditions. When this oppressive and exploitative condition is destroyed, religion will become unnecessary. At the same time, Marx saw religion as a form of protest by the working classes against their poor economic conditions and their alienation.

[ 1 ] Denys Turner , a scholar of Marx and historical theology , classified Marx's views as adhering to Post-Theism , a philosophical position that regards worshipping deities as an eventually obsolete, but temporarily necessary, stage in humanity's historical spiritual development.

[ 2 ] In the Marxist–Leninist interpretation, all modern religions and churches are considered as "instruments of bourgeois reaction" used to "defend exploitation and to befuddle the working class." [ 3 ] A number of Marxist–Leninist governments in the 20th century such as the Soviet Union after Vladimir Lenin and the People's Republic of China under Mao Zedong implemented rules introducing state atheism .

Marxist political theorists and revolutionaries on religion [ edit ] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels on religion [ edit ] See also: Opium of the people Karl Marx 's religious views have been the subject of much interpretation. In the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right of 1843, Marx famously stated: The foundation of irreligious criticism is: Man makes religion, religion does not make man. Religion is, indeed, the self-consciousness and self-esteem of man who has either not yet won through to himself, or has already lost himself again. But man is no abstract being squatting outside the world. Man is the world of man – state, society. This state and this society produce religion, which is an inverted consciousness of the world, because they are an inverted world. Religion is the general theory of this world, its encyclopaedic compendium, its logic in popular form, its spiritual point d’honneur, its enthusiasm, its moral sanction, its solemn complement, and its universal basis of consolation and justification. It is the fantastic realization of the human essence since the human essence has not acquired any true reality. The struggle against religion is, therefore, indirectly the struggle against that world whose spiritual aroma is religion.

Religious suffering is, at one and the same time, the expression of real suffering and a protest against real suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people.

The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness. To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition that requires illusions. The criticism of religion is, therefore, in embryo, the criticism of that vale of tears of which religion is the halo.

Criticism has plucked the imaginary flowers on the chain not in order that man shall continue to bear that chain without fantasy or consolation, but so that he shall throw off the chain and pluck the living flower. The criticism of religion disillusions man, so that he will think, act, and fashion his reality like a man who has discarded his illusions and regained his senses, so that he will move around himself as his own true Sun. Religion is only the illusory Sun which revolves around man as long as he does not revolve around himself.

[ 4 ] According to Howard Zinn , "[t]his helps us understand the mass appeal of the religious charlatans of the television screen, as well as the work of Liberation Theology in joining the soulfulness of religion to the energy of revolutionary movements in miserably poor countries".

[ 5 ] Some recent scholarship has suggested that "opium of the people" is itself a dialectical metaphor, a "protest" and an "expression" of suffering.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] There are those who view that the early Christian Church such as that one described in the Acts of the Apostles was an early form of communism and religious socialism . The view is that communism was just Christianity in practice and Jesus as the first communist.

[ 8 ] This link was highlighted in one of Marx's early writings which stated that "[a]s Christ is the intermediary unto whom man unburdens all his divinity, all his religious bonds, so the state is the mediator unto which he transfers all his Godlessness, all his human liberty".

[ 8 ] Furthermore, Thomas Müntzer led a large Anabaptist communist movement during the German Peasants' War which Friedrich Engels analysed in The Peasant War in Germany . The Marxist ethos that aims for unity reflects the Christian universalist teaching that humankind is one and that there is only one God who does not discriminate among people.

[ 9 ] Tristram Hunt attributes a religious persuasion to Engels.

[ 10 ] Roland Boer asserts that Marx's depiction of religion as 'opium', while suspicious of religion's addictive potential, also emphasizes religion's medicinal properties akin to those of opium in Western medicine .

[ 11 ] Vladimir Lenin on religion [ edit ] In The Attitude of the Workers’ Party to Religion , Lenin wrote: Religion is the opium of the people —this dictum by Marx is the corner-stone of the whole Marxist outlook on religion. Marxism has always regarded all modern religions and churches, and each and every religious organisation, as instruments of bourgeois reaction that serve to defend exploitation and to befuddle the working class.

[ 3 ] Nonetheless, Lenin initially allowed Christians and other religious people in the Bolshevik Party . While critical of religion, Lenin also specifically made a point to not include it in Our Programme or his ideological goals, arguing: But under no circumstances ought we to fall into the error of posing the religious question in an abstract, idealistic fashion, as an "intellectual" question unconnected with the class struggle, as is not infrequently done by the radical-democrats from among the bourgeoisie. It would be stupid to think that, in a society based on the endless oppression and coarsening of the worker masses, religious prejudices could be dispelled by purely propaganda methods. It would be bourgeois narrow-mindedness to forget that the yoke of religion that weighs upon mankind is merely a product and reflection of the economic yoke within society. No number of pamphlets and no amount of preaching can enlighten the proletariat, if it is not enlightened by its own struggle against the dark forces of capitalism. Unity in this really revolutionary struggle of the oppressed class for the creation of a paradise on earth is more important to us than unity of proletarian opinion on paradise in heaven.

[ 12 ] Later, in 1919 after the October Revolution , Lenin would partially reverse this stance. In response to the question of whether persons who took part in religious ceremonies could be allowed to remain in the Party , Lenin wrote: I am for expulsion from the Party of people who take part in religious ceremonies.

[ 13 ] Joseph Stalin on religion [ edit ] Joseph Stalin 's public statements on religion throughout his years serving as General Secretary of the CPSU were scarce. In 1927, answering the question of an American trade union delegate, Stalin affirmed that the Communist Party must have an anti-religious policy: [ 14 ] We carry on and will continue to carry on propaganda against religious prejudices. Our legislation guaranteed to citizens the right to adhere to any religion. This is a matter for the conscience of each individual. That is precisely why we carried out the separation of the Church from the State. But in separating the Church from the State and proclaiming religious liberty we at the same time guaranteed the right of every citizen to combat by argument, by propaganda and agitation any and all religion.

The Party cannot be neutral towards religion and does conduct anti-religious propaganda against all and every religious prejudice because it stands for science, while religious prejudices run counter to science, because all religion is something opposite to science. Cases such as recently occurred in America in which Darwinists were prosecuted in court, cannot occur here because the Party carries out a policy of the general defense of science. The Party cannot be neutral towards religious prejudices and it will continue to carry on propaganda against these prejudices because this is one of the best means of undermining the influence of the reactionary clergy who support the exploiting classes and who preach submission to these classes. The Party cannot be neutral towards the bearers of religious prejudices, towards the reactionary clergy who poison the minds of the toiling masses. Have we suppressed the reactionary clergy? Yes, we have. The unfortunate thing is that it has not been completely liquidated.

Anti-religious propaganda is a means by which the complete liquidation of the reactionary clergy must be brought about. Cases occur when certain members of the Party hamper the complete development of anti-religious propaganda. If such members are expelled it is a good thing because there is no room for such "Communists" in the ranks of our Party.

[ 14 ] Nikolai Bukharin and Evgenii Preobrazhensky on religion [ edit ] In their influential book The ABC of Communism , Nikolai Bukharin and Evgenii Preobrazhensky spoke out strongly against religion, writing that "Communism is incompatible with religious faith".

[ 15 ] However, importance was placed on secularism and non-violence towards the religious: But the campaign against the backwardness of the masses in this matter of religion, must be conducted with patience and considerateness, as well as with energy and perseverance. The credulous crowd is extremely sensitive to anything which hurts its feelings. To thrust atheism upon the masses, and in conjunction therewith to interfere forcibly with religious practices and to make mock of the objects of popular reverence, would not assist but would hinder the campaign against religion. If the church were to be persecuted, it would win sympathy among the masses, for persecution would remind them of the almost forgotten days when there was an association between religion and the defence of national freedom; it would strengthen the antisemitic movement; and in general it would mobilize all the vestiges of an ideology which is already beginning to die out.

[ 15 ] Anatoly Lunacharsky on religion [ edit ] Main article: God-Building God-Building was an idea proposed by some prominent early Marxists of the Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party . Inspired by Ludwig Feuerbach 's "religion of humanity", it had some precedent in the French Revolution with the " cult of reason ". The idea proposed that in place of the abolition of religion , there should be a meta-religious context in which religions were viewed primarily in terms of the psychological and social effect of ritual , myth and symbolism in an attempt to harness this force for pro- communist aims, both by creating new ritual and symbolism and by re-interpreting existing ritual and symbolism in a socialist context. In contrast to the atheism of Lenin, the God-Builders took an official position of agnosticism .

[ 16 ] Kim Il-Sung on religion [ edit ] North Korean leader Kim Il Sung wrote about religion in the context of Korea's national liberation struggle against Japan. In that context, Kim criticized the Protestant Christian creed, stating that while "[t]here is no law preventing religious believers from making the revolution," their lack of action led to "non-resistance" and psalms alone could not block the Japanese guns when "decisive battles" were necessary.

[ 17 ] Kim's writings addressed the "opium of the people" metaphor twice, both in the context of responding to comrades who object to working with religious groups (Chonbulygo and Chondoism ).

[ 18 ] In the first instance, Kim replies that a person is "mistaken" if he or she believes the proposition that religion is the "opium of the people" can be applied in all instances, explaining that if a religion "prays for dealing out divine punishment to Japan and blessing the Korean nation" then it is a "patriotic religion" and its believers are patriots.

[ 18 ] In the second, Kim states that Marx's metaphor "must not be construed radically and unilaterally" because Marx was warning against "the temptation of a religious mirage and not opposing believers in general." [ 18 ] Because the communist movement in Korea was fighting a struggle for "national salvation" against Japan, Kim writes that anyone with a similar agenda can join the struggle and that "even a religionist ... must be enrolled in our ranks without hesitation." [ 18 ] In Marxist–Leninist states [ edit ] See also: Marxist–Leninist atheism and State atheism Religion in the Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Religion in the Soviet Union The Soviet Union was an atheist state [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] in which religion was largely discouraged and at times heavily persecuted.

[ 22 ] According to various Soviet and Western sources, over one-third of the country's people still professed religious belief ( Christianity and Islam had the most believers). Christians belonged to various churches: Orthodox , which had the largest number of followers; Catholic ; Oriental Orthodox (mainly Armenian Apostolic Church ) and Baptist and other Protestant denominations . The majority of the Islamic faithful were Sunni (with a notable Shia minority, mainly in Azerbaijan ), while Judaism also had many followers. Other religions, which were practiced by a relatively small number of believers, included Buddhism and Shamanism . After 1941 in the Stalin era, religious persecution was greatly reduced. To gather support from the masses during World War II, the Stalin government re-opened thousands of temples and extinguished the League of Militant Atheists . Atheist propaganda returned to a lesser extent during the Khrushchev government and continued in a less strict way during the Brezhnev years.

[ citation needed ] The role of religion in the daily lives of Soviet citizens varied greatly, but two-thirds of the Soviet population were irreligious. About half the people, including members of the ruling Communist Party and high-level government officials, professed atheism . For the majority of Soviet citizens, religion seemed irrelevant. Prior to its collapse in late 1991, official figures on religion in the Soviet Union were not available. State atheism in the Soviet Union was known as gosateizm .

[ 23 ] Religion in the Socialist People's Republic of Albania [ edit ] Further information: Religion in Albania and Enver Hoxha Albania was declared an atheist state by Enver Hoxha .

[ 24 ] Religion in Albania was subordinated in the interest of nationalism during periods of national revival, when it was identified as foreign predation to Albanian culture. During the late 19th century and also when Albania became a state, religions were suppressed in order to better unify Albanians. This nationalism was also used to justify the communist stance of state atheism between 1967 and 1991.

[ 25 ] This policy was mainly applied and felt within the borders of the present Albanian state, producing a nonreligious majority in the population.

[ citation needed ] Religion in the People's Republic of China [ edit ] Further information: Religion in China and Antireligious campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party The People's Republic of China was established in 1949 and for much of its early history maintained a hostile attitude toward religion which was seen as emblematic of feudalism and foreign colonialism . Mao Zedong struggled against traditional religions, describing them as superstition to be discarded.

[ 26 ] : 62 Houses of worship, including temples, mosques and churches, were converted into non-religious buildings for secular use. However, this attitude relaxed considerably in the late 1970s with the end of the Cultural Revolution .

[ citation needed ] The 1978 Constitution of the People's Republic of China guaranteed "freedom of religion" with a number of restrictions.

[ citation needed ] Since the mid-1990s, there has been a massive program to rebuild Buddhist and Taoist temples that were destroyed in the Cultural Revolution.

[ citation needed ] However, the Chinese Communist Party still remains explicitly atheist and religion is heavily regulated, with only specific state-operated churches, mosques and temples being allowed for worship.

[ citation needed ] Religion in Cambodia [ edit ] Democratic Kampuchea [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2024 ) Pol Pot , leader of the Khmer Rouge regime, suppressed Cambodia ’s Buddhist religion as monks were defrocked; temples and artifacts, including statues of the Buddha, were destroyed; and people praying or expressing other religious sentiments were often killed. The Christian and Muslim communities were among the most persecuted as well. The Roman Catholic cathedral of Phnom Penh was razed. The Khmer Rouge forced Muslims to eat pork, which they regard as an abomination . Many of those who refused were killed. Christian clergy and Muslim imams were executed.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] People's Republic of Kampuchea [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2024 ) After the overthrow of the Khmer Rouge, a socialist state more reflective of the values shared by Vietnam and allies of the Soviet Union was established. Oppression of religious groups was nearly totally ended and relations between religious groups and the People's Republic of Kampuchea were much more neutral throughout its existence until the restoration of the monarchy a decade later.

[ citation needed ] Religion in Laos [ edit ] In contrast with the brutal repression of the sangha undertaken in Cambodia , the Communist government of Laos has not sought to oppose or suppress Buddhism in Laos to any great degree, rather since the early days of the Pathet Lao communist officials have sought to use the influence and respect afforded to Buddhist clergy to achieve political goals while discouraging religious practices seen as detrimental to Marxist aims.

[ 29 ] Starting as early as the late 1950s, members of the Pathet Lao sought to encourage support for the communist cause by aligning members of the Lao sangha with the communist opposition.

[ 29 ] Though resisted by the Royal Lao Government , these efforts were fairly successful and resulted in increased support for the Pathet Lao, particularly in rural communities.

[ 29 ] Religion in North Korea [ edit ] Main article: Religion in North Korea North Korea's constitution guarantees freedom of religion in Article 68, although that principle is limited by the requirement that religion may not be used as a pretext to harm the state, introduce foreign forces, or harm the existing social order.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In North Korea, the state recognizes and favors Chondoism as a distinctly Korean revolutionary religion.

[ 31 ] Following the Korean War , Christians generally organized in house churches or small congregations.

[ 32 ] In the 1960, the government permitted two hundred informal congregations in former centers of Christianity.

[ 33 ] Religion in the Socialist Republic of Romania [ edit ] See also: Anti-religious campaign of Communist Romania and Freedom of religion in Romania § Socialist Republic of Romania During its Socialist era, the Romanian government exerted significant control over the Orthodox Church and closely monitored religious activity, as well as promoting atheism among the population.

[ 34 ] Dissident priests were censured, arrested, deported, and/or defrocked, but the Orthodox Church as a whole acquiesced to the government's demands and received support from it. Unlike other Eastern Bloc states where clergy were forced to rely on donations or subsistence wages, Orthodox clergy in Romania were paid a salary equivalent to the average received by the general population, and received significant state subsidies for the reconstruction of churches destroyed in the war.

[ 35 ] Starting in the 1960s, the state used religious officials of the Orthodox Church as ambassadors to the West, engaging in dialogue with religious organizations in the United Kingdom.

[ 36 ] This relatively favorable attitude towards the church continued until the death of Patriarch Justinian of Romania in 1977, at which point the state began a new anti-church campaign, engaging in urban renewal projects that entailed the destruction of churches.

[ 37 ] Communism and Abrahamic religions [ edit ] Communism and Christianity [ edit ] Main article: Christian communism See also: Materialism and Christianity See also: Catholicism and socialism Roland Boer argues that theological influences permeate the works of "Biblical Marxists" Ernst Bloch and Walter Benjamin , "Catholic Marxists" Althusser , Henri Lefebvre , Antonio Gramsci and Terry Eagleton , and the Marxists of the 'Protestant Turn' in Žižek and Adorno .

[ 38 ] In The Communist Manifesto , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels wrote: "Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist tinge. Has not Christianity declaimed against private property, against marriage, against the State? Has it not preached in place of these, charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic life and Mother Church? Christian Socialism is but the holy water with which the priest consecrates the heart-burnings of the aristocrat." [ 39 ] In Socialism: Utopian and Scientific , Engels drew a certain analogy between the sort of utopian communalism of some of the early Christian communities and the modern-day communist movement, the scientific communist movement representing the proletariat in this era and its world historic transformation of society. Engels noted both certain similarities and certain contrasts.

[ 40 ] Christian communism can be seen as a radical form of Christian socialism . It is a theological and political theory based upon the view that the teachings of Jesus Christ compel Christians to support communism as the ideal social system. Although there is no universal agreement on the exact date when Christian communism was founded, many Christian communists assert that evidence from the Bible suggests that the first Christians, including the Apostles , created their own small communist society in the years following Jesus' death and resurrection. Advocates of Christian communism argue that it was taught by Jesus and practiced by the Apostles themselves.

[ 8 ] [ 41 ] Contemporary communism, including contemporary Christian communism, owes much to Marxist thought —particularly Marxian economics. While not all communists are in full agreement with Marxism, communists share the Marxist critique of capitalism. Marxism includes a complex array of views that cover several different fields of human knowledge and one may easily distinguish between Marxist philosophy , Marxist sociology and Marxist economics . Marxist sociology and Marxist economics have no connection to religious issues and make no assertions about such things. On the other hand, Marxist philosophy is famously atheistic, although some Marxist scholars, both Christian and non-Christian, have insisted that Marxist philosophy and the philosophy of Marx and Engels are significantly different from one another and that this difference needs recognition. In particular, Jose Porfirio Miranda found Marx and Engels to be consistently opposed to deterministic materialism and broadly sympathetic towards Christianity and towards the text of the Bible, although disbelieving in a supernatural deity.

[ 42 ] In the 20th century, many analysts of Marx's works began to believe that Marx did not condemn religion in its entirety, but rather the Prussian Protestantism he encountered in Germany specifically: [ 43 ] Like most of the revisions of orthodox Marxism-Leninism in those years, this transformed critique of religion was first presented as a return to the real Marx. The master had defined religion not only as an opium but also as a protest; that is, religion was not only a drug which the believer used to stomach the hopelessness of his social status but also as a sign of protest and of mute resistance against this status. Using this distinction between opiate and protest functions, many writers contended that Marx did not condemn religion as such but a very specific form thereof, namely the Protestantism of the Prussia of Wilhelm IV. Marx's definition of religion as an opiate would, on this reading, be not a "metaphysical specification of religion," but the expression of experience within a certain historical period and in a certain geographical area. Even Christian participants in dialogue picked up on this statement and made it a ground for approaching Marxism.

[ 43 ] An attempt to reconciliate religion with communism has been made by the followers of Eurocommunism .  The Eurocommunists of Italy, France and Spain considered it essential to reach out to the Catholic population and secure their help in construction of socialism. This entailed abandoning state atheism in favor of secularism and allowing a greater tolerance of Catholicism, as well as toning down the critique of religion in favor of praising specific aspects of religion, such as the solidarity and camaraderie of Catholics, especially in the context of anomie .

[ 43 ] This shift was particularly noticeable in the Italian Communist Party , which included several left-leaning Catholics as "independents" on its electoral lists. Many Italian communists such as Lucio Lombardo-Radice and Cesare Luporini started advocating for greater cooperation with Catholics, which led Enrico Berlinguer to highlight that the PCI "does not espouse atheism" at the 15th Congress of the party in 1979.

[ 43 ] Liberation theology [ edit ] Main article: Liberation theology This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: The sweeping statement glittering generality that the entire Liberation theology movement, such a vast topic, relies on Marxist tenets, is WP:LIBEL , and insinuates it as heresy. Furthermore, WP:OPINION . Instead, perhaps we could say, "Someone XYZ argues that Liberation theo is dialectical-materialist in outlook". Citing someone's opinion is not an opinion, but a fact. Next, Torres having humanist, rather than, say, Structural Marxist underpinnings is WP:OPINION - but saying, "ACCORDING TO person XYZ Torres has humanistic drives" is okay. Adding Citations is paramount.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the 1950s and the 1960s, liberation theology was the political praxis of Latin American theologians, such as Gustavo Gutiérrez of Peru, Leonardo Boff of Brazil, Juan Luis Segundo of Uruguay and Jon Sobrino of Spain, who made popular the phrase the " Preferential option for the poor ". While liberation theology was most influential in Latin America, it has also been developed in other parts of the world such as black theology in the United States and South Africa, Palestinian liberation theology , Dalit theology in India and Minjung theology in South Korea. Consisting of a synthesis of Christian theology and Marxist socioeconomic analyses, liberation theology stresses social concern for the poor and advocates for liberation for oppressed peoples. In addition to being a theological matter, liberation theology was often tied to concrete political practice.

[ 44 ] Camilo Torres Restrepo was one of the key thinkers of liberation theology. After his death, Torres became an icon in Colombia and in the rest of Latin America, as well as among many Catholics worldwide.

[ 45 ] Torres argued that Christians had fought socioeconomic inequalities in the past, and while the Gospel was not intended to change society, it influenced important changes like the abolition of slavery, the democratic valorization of the human being and Marxist humanism . Because of that, Torres considered Marxist humanism a product of the Christian humanist movement . Torres expressed his disappointment with the Church for its exclusively spiritual approach to social problems, arguing that a spiritual approach shouldn't exclude a socioeconomic one. He saw an alliance between Marxists and Catholics as necessary, arguing that they are the only movements that could bring about political change, and that both are devoted to fighting social inequality.

[ 45 ] He believed in the necessity of a revolution, seeing the poverty in Colombia as proof that the hitherto peaceful ways of the Catholic Church to bring about change have failed.

[ 45 ] Communism and Islam [ edit ] See also: Anarchism and Islam and Islamic socialism From the 1940s through the 1960s, communists, socialists and Islamists sometimes joined forces in opposing colonialism and seeking national independence . The communist Tudeh Party of Iran was allied with the Islamists in their ultimately successful rebellion against the Shah Pahlavi in 1979, although after the Shah was overthrown the Islamists turned on their one-time allies. The Organization of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class , an extinct political party which opposed the Islamic Republic, once advocated communist ideals.

[ 46 ] Communist philosopher Mir-Said (Mirza) Sultan-Galiev , Joseph Stalin 's protégé at the People's Commissariat for Nationalities (Narkomnats), wrote in The Life of Nationalities , the Narkomnats' journal.

[ 47 ] Communism and Judaism [ edit ] See also: Anarchism and Orthodox Judaism , Jewish left , and Labor Zionism During the Russian Civil War , Jews were seen as Communist sympathizers and thousands were murdered in pogroms by the White Army . During the Red Scare in the United States in the 1950s, a representative of the American Jewish Committee assured the powerful House Committee on Un-American Activities that " Judaism and Communism are utterly incompatible".

[ 48 ] On the other hand, some Orthodox Jews , including a number of prominent religious figures, actively supported either anarchist or Marxist versions of communism. Examples include Rabbi Yehuda Ashlag , an outspoken libertarian communist , Russian revolutionary and territorialist leader Isaac Steinberg and Rabbi Abraham Bik, an American Communist activist.

[ 49 ] Communism and the Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] Analysis reveals that the Baháʼí Faith as both a doctrinal manifest and as a present-day emerging organised community is highly cooperative in nature with elements that correspond to various threads of Marxist thought, anarchist thought and more recent liberational thought innovations. Such elements include, for example, no clergy and themes that relate to mutualism , libertarian socialism and democratic confederalism . There are many similarities and differences between the schools of thought, but one of the most common things they share are the time frame within which both ideologies were founded as well as some social and economic perspective.

[ 50 ] A book by the Association for Baháʼí Studies was written as a dialogue between the two schools of thought.

[ 51 ] Communism and Buddhism [ edit ] See also: Buddhist socialism and Persecution of Buddhists under communism Buddhism has been said to be compatible with communism given that both can be interpreted as atheistic and arguably share some similarities regarding their views of the world of nature and the relationship between matter and mind.

[ 52 ] Regardless, Buddhists have still been persecuted in some Communist states , [ 53 ] notably China, Mongolia and Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge.

[ citation needed ] Many supporters of the Viet Cong were Buddhists, [ citation needed ] strongly believing in the unification of Vietnam, with many opposing South Vietnam due to former President Ngo Dinh Diem 's persecution of Buddhism during the early 1960s. The current Dalai Lama Tenzin Gyatso speaks positively of Marxism despite the heavy persecution of the Tibetan people by the post- Mao Zedong and post-Cultural Revolution Chinese government. The Dalai Lama further stated that "[o]f all the modern economic theories, the economic system of Marxism is founded on moral principles, while capitalism is concerned only with gain and profitability. [...] The failure of the regime in the former Soviet Union was, for me, not the failure of Marxism but the failure of totalitarianism. For this reason I still think of myself as half-Marxist, half-Buddhist".

[ 54 ] In India, B. R. Ambedkar wrote in his essay Buddha or Karl Marx that "[t]he Russians are proud of their Communism. But they forget that the wonder of all wonders is that the Buddha established Communism so far as the Sangh was concerned without dictatorship. It may be that it was a communism on a very small scale but it was communism without dictatorship a miracle which Lenin failed to do." [ 55 ] Religious criticism of communism [ edit ] Because of the perceived atheistic nature of communism, some have accused communism of persecuting religion.

[ 56 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Another criticism suggests that communism – despite its own claims for a scientific basis in dialectical materialism , and disregarding Marxism's open and evolving canon of scriptures from Marx to Mao and beyond – is in itself a religion [ 57 ] [ 58 ] – or at least a " caricature of religion".

[ 59 ] "Godless communism" [ edit ] See also: Communism and atheism Throughout the Second Red Scare of the late 1940s and 1950s, the fear of the "Godless communist" rooted itself as an epithet and a warning to the United States in a changing global environment. As the perceived threat of the "Godless communist" and of materialism to the American way of life grew, "the choice between Americanism and Communism was vital, without room for compromise".

[ 60 ] See also [ edit ] Anarchism and religion Antireligion Christian atheism Jewish atheism Liberation theology Marxist–Leninist atheism Red Terror Religious communism Religious persecution State Secretary for Church Affairs Jewish Communist Party References [ edit ] ^ Raines, John. 2002. "Introduction".

Marx on Religion (Marx, Karl). Philadelphia: Temple University Press. pp. 5–6.

^ D. Turner, "Religion: Illusions and liberation", in: Terrell Carver (ed), The Cambridge Companion to Marx (1991), ISBN 978-0521366946 , p. 337.

^ a b Lenin, V. I.

"Lenin Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 1973,Moscow, Volume 15, pp. 402-413" (PDF) .

^ Marx, Karl.

"Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right" . Marxist Internet Archive . Retrieved 19 January 2012 .

^ Zinn, Howard.

"Howard Zinn: On Marx and Marxism" . Archived from the original on 2014-10-29.

^ McKinnon, AM. (2005). 'Reading 'Opium of the People': Expression, Protest and the Dialectics of Religion'. Critical Sociology, vol 31, no. 1–2, pp. 15–38 "Opium as Dialectics of Religion: Metaphor, Expression and Protest" .

^ Roland Boer in International Socialism. Issue 123 "The full story: on Marxism and religion" .

^ a b c Houlden, Leslie; Minard, Antone (2015).

Jesus in History, Legend, Scripture, and Tradition: A World Encyclopedia: A World Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 357.

ISBN 9781610698047 .

^ Halfin, Igal (2000).

From Darkness to Light: Class, Consciousness, and Salvation in Revolutionary Russia . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 46.

ISBN 0822957043 .

^ Hunt, Tristram (2009).

The Frock-Coated Communist: The Revolutionary Life of Friedrich Engels . Metropolitan/Henry Holt & Co.

ISBN 9780805080254 .

OCLC 263983621 .

^ "Left of his field" .

newcastle.edu.au . Newcastle University. 13 December 2013. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 28 November 2022 .

^ Lenin, V. I.

"Socialism and Religion" .

Lenin Collected Works, v 10, p. 83–87 . Retrieved 9 November 2014 .

^ Lenin, V. I.

"To: The Organising Bureau of the Central Committee" .

Lenin Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 1975, Moscow, Volume 44, p. 239 . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ a b Stalin, Joseph.

"Questions & Answers to American Trade Unionists: Stalin's Interview With the First American Trade Union Delegation to Soviet Russia" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2022-06-06 .

^ a b Bukharin, Nikolai; Preobrazhensky, Evgenii (1920).

"Chapter 11: Communism and Religion" .

The ABC of Communism . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 9780472061129 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Anatoly Lunacharsky (1908).

Religion and Socialism . Moscow. p. 20.

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 225.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ a b c d Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 221.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Kowalewski, David (1980). "Protest for Religious Rights in the USSR: Characteristics and Consequences".

The Russian Review .

39 (4): 426– 441.

doi : 10.2307/128810 .

JSTOR 128810 .

^ Sabrina Petra Ramet, Ed., Religious Policy in the Soviet Union. Cambridge University Press (1993). p. 4 ^ John Anderson, Religion, State and Politics in the Soviet Union and Successor States, Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp 3 ^ "Anti-religious Campaigns" .

^ Protest for Religious Rights in the USSR: Characteristics and Consequences , David Kowalewski, Russian Review , Vol. 39, No. 4 (Oct., 1980), pp. 426–441, Blackwell Publishing on behalf of The Editors and Board of Trustees of the Russian Review ^ Sang M. Lee writes that Albania was "[o]fficially an atheist state under Hoxha..." Restructuring Albanian Business Education Infrastructure [ dead link ] August 2000 (Accessed 6 June 2007) ^ Representations of Place: Albania , Derek R. Hall, The Geographical Journal , Vol. 165, No. 2, The Changing Meaning of Place in Post-Socialist Eastern Europe: Commodification, Perception and Environment (Jul., 1999), pp. 161–172, Blackwell Publishing on behalf of The Royal Geographical Society (with the Institute of British Geographers) ^ Marquis, Christopher ; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022).

Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of Chinese Enterprise . Kunyuan Qiao. New Haven: Yale University Press .

doi : 10.12987/9780300268836 .

ISBN 978-0-300-26883-6 .

JSTOR j.ctv3006z6k .

OCLC 1348572572 .

^ "Pol Pot – MSN Encarta" . Archived from the original on 2003-12-28.

^ Cambodia – Society under the Angkar ^ a b c Savada, Andrea Matles (1994).

Laos: A Country Study . Washington, D.C.: GPO for the Library of Congress.

^ "DPRK Socialist Constitution" .

www.naenara.com.kp . Archived from the original on 15 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 .

^ a b Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 216.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books .

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 222.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Lavinia Stan and Lucian Turcescu. The Romanian Orthodox Church and Post-Communist Democratisation. Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 52, No. 8 (Dec., 2000), pp. 1467–1488 ^ Lucian N. Leustean. Between Moscow and London: Romanian Orthodoxy and National Communism, 1960–1965. The Slavonic and East European Review, Vol. 85, No. 3 (Jul., 2007), pp. 491–521 ^ Lucian N. Leustean. Constructing Communism in the Romanian People's Republic. Orthodoxy and State, 1948–49. Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 59, No. 2 (Mar., 2007), pp. 303–329 ^ Lavinia Stan and Lucian Turcescu. Politics, National Symbols and the Romanian Orthodox Cathedral. Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 58, No. 7 (Nov., 2006), pp. 1119–1139 ^ Boer, R. (24 Oct. 2013). "The Criticism of Heaven and Earth (5 Vols.)". In The Criticism of Heaven and Earth (5 Vols.). Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill. Retrieved Dec 13, 2022, from https://brill.com/view/package/9789004261358 Archived on the Wayback Machine on 13 December 2022.

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Friedrich (2002). "3. I. a. Feudal Socialism". In Jones, Gareth Stedman (ed.).

The Communist Manifesto (paperback) (New ed.). London: Penguin Group. pp.

246– 247.

ISBN 978-0140447576 . Retrieved 10 March 2015 .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1970) [1880].

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific .

Marx/Engels Selected Works .

III . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 95–151. Retrieved 1 October 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Kautsky, Karl (1953) [1908].

"IV.II. The Christian Idea of the Messiah. Jesus as a Rebel." .

Foundations of Christianity . Russell and Russell.

Christianity was the expression of class conflict in Antiquity.

^ Miranda, Jose Porfirio (1980).

Marx Against the Marxists: The Christian Humanism of Karl Marx . London: SCM Press.

ISBN 0334009758 .

^ a b c d Spieker, Manfred; Blakeley, Thomas (1983). "Eurocommunism and Christianity: On the Limits of the Dialogue".

The Review of Politics .

45 . Cambridge University Press for the University of Notre Dame du lac on behalf of Review of Politics: 2– 19.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500040699 .

S2CID 144435142 .

^ Liberation Theology Archived March 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ., Canada & the World, February 10, 2010 ^ a b c Gabbas, Marco (2021).

"Camilo Torres, Liberation Theology, and Marxism" (PDF) .

Short Essays and Comments . Corvinus University of Budapest.

^ "Communism and Islam" . Oxford Islamic Studies Online. Archived from the original on August 6, 2009 . Retrieved 15 November 2008 .

^ Byrne, Gerry (17 March 2004).

"Bolsheviks and Islam Part 3: Islamic communism" . Retrieved 15 November 2008 .

^ Diner, Hasia R.

(2004).

Jews of the United States, 1654 to 2000 . University of California Press. pp.

279 .

ISBN 9780520227736 .

^ "The Seforim Blog – All about Seforim – New and Old, and Jewish Bibliography" . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ "Baháʼí Faith and Marxism" .

bahai-library.com . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ Studies, Association for Baháʼí (1987).

The Baháʼí Faith and Marxism . Association for Baháʼí Studies.

ISBN 978-0920904183 .

^ Sharma, Arvind (1995).

Our Religions: The Seven World Religions Introduced by Preeminent Scholars from Each Tradition . HarperCollins. pp.

82 –83.

ISBN 9780060677008 .

^ Mongolia .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

^ "Dalai Lama Answers Questions on Various Topics" .

hhdl.dharmakara.net .

^ "Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-04-12.

^ Communism Persecutes Religion . NoCommunism.com. Accessed 15 November 2008.

^ The Hidden Link Between Communism and Religion Archived 2007-07-01 at archive.today , by Gaither Stewart, World Prout Assembly 12/08/07 – "Though Communism always proclaimed itself godless and anti-religious, its adherents have been compared to Jesuits as a result of the rigorous dogma of their faith, the iron discipline, their passionate loyalty and confidence in the future. Therefore the historical tendency, especially among ex-Communists, to label Communism a religion and the Manifesto a holy book." ^ Defining Religion in Operational and Institutional Terms , by A Stephen Boyan, Jr., Accessed 4-1-2010 – " The term 'religion' as used today might include almost any kind of ultimate concern with or without an act of personal commitment.

The Communist, certainly, is grasped by an ultimate concern which for him is a matter of life or seath, not only personally but also theoretically in terms of his own insignificance, his not-being and worthlessness except [as] he participate[s] in the realization of his Messianic age, his classless society." — Quoting Harold Stahmer: "Defining Religion: Federal Aid and Academic Freedom", in Religion and the Public Order , pp. 116, 128–129 (edited by Donald A. Gianella, 1963).

^ Whyte, Jessica (June 2016). " 'Man Produces Universally': Praxis and Production in Agemben and Marx". In McLoughlin, Daniel (ed.).

Agamben and Radical Politics . Critical Connections. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press (published 2016). p. 72.

ISBN 978-1474402651 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

[...] Leszek Kolakowski's attack on Marxism as a caricature of religion which 'presents its temporal eschatology as a scientific system' [...].

^ Aiello, Thomas.

"Constructing 'Godless Communism': Religion, Politics, and Popular Culture, 1954–1960." Americana: The Journal of American Popular Culture (1900–present) 4.1 (2005).

Further reading [ edit ] Roland Boer .

Criticism of heaven and earth . 5 vols. Chicago: Haymarket Books; Leiden: Brill, 2007-2013.

vol. 1: Criticism of heaven: on Marxism and theology . 2007.

vol. 2: Criticism of religion: on Marxism and theology . 2009.

vol. 3: Criticism of theology: on Marxism and theology . 2011.

vol. 4: Criticism of earth: on Marx, Engels, and theology . 2012.

vol. 5: In the vale of tears: on Marxism and theology . 2013.

Roland Boer.

Lenin, religion, and theology . NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.

Bruno Bosteels.

Marx and Freud in Latin America: politics, psychoanalysis, and religion in times of terror . London: Verso, 2012.

Day, Matthew.

No bosses, no gods: Marx, Engels, and the twenty-first century study of religion . Berlin: De Gruyter, 2023.

Kirkpatrick, Graeme, Peter McMylor, & Simin Fadaee, eds.

Marxism, religion, and emancipatory politics . Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2022.

Jan Milič. Lochman.

Encountering Marx: bonds and barriers between Christians and Marxists . Philadelphia, Penn.: Fortress, 1977.

Mauricio Vieira Martins.

Marx, Spinoza and Darwin: materialism, subjectivity and critique of religion . Trans. by Jeffrey Hoff. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2022.

Marx, Karl & Friedrich Engels.

On Religion . Compiled by Saul Kussiel Padover. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1957. 384 p. (repr. Chico, Cal.: Scholars Press, 1964 & 1982; Mineola, NY: Dover, 2008) David McLellan.

Marxism and religion: a description and assessment of the Marxist critique of Christianity . Houndmills: Macmillan Press, 1987.

José Porfirio Miranda.

Marx and the Bible: a critique of the philosophy of oppression . Trans. by John Eagleson. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1974.

Myles, Robert J. (2019).

Class Struggle in the New Testament . Lanham: Fortress Academic.

ISBN 978-1978702097 .

Ronald E. Osborn.

Humanism and the death of God: searching for the good after Darwin, Marx, and Nietzsche . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.

Raines, John, ed.

Marx on Religion . Philadelphia, Penn.: Temple University Press, 2002.

Smolkin, Victoria.

A Sacred Space is Never Empty: A History of Soviet Atheism . Princeton UP, 2018.

online reviews External links [ edit ] On Religion , a collection of writings by Marx and Engels On Religion , a collection of writings by Lenin History Is on Our Side by Joseph Needham Marxism and Christianity: A Symposium The Urgency of Marxist-Christian Dialogue by Herbert Aptheker Dialogue of Christianity and Marxism What Kind of Revolution? A Christian-Communist Dialogue For a dramatic criticism see the radio drama "Citizen Whitney" , a presentation from Destination Freedom v t e ... and religion ( Some topic...

) and religion Anarchism Astronomy Cannabis Disability Fertility Gender Homosexuality Hittite mythology Intersex people Law Magic Marxism Morality Slavery Subud Transgender people Vaccination Vegetarianism Women World War I Religion and ( some topic ) abortion agriculture AIDS alcohol animal rights authoritarianism birth control business capital punishment child marriage children climate change communism coping with trauma coronavirus corruption crime death penalty disability divorce domestic violence drugs education in Pakistan environmentalism ethics ethnicity executions gambling gender geography government happiness health HIV/AIDS human migration identity intelligence the internet LGBTQ people mental health mental illness schizophrenia morality mythology negotiations pacifism peacebuilding personality politics in the United States ritual sexuality adolescent bestiality heterosexuality polygamy polygyny pornography superstition terror torture vaccination video games violence warfare Category:... and religion Adoption African Americans Cannabis Economics Economy Environment Evolution Films about LGBTQ Freemasonry Gender Hellenistic philosophy LGBTQ Liberalism Marriage Mythology Aztec Maya Mesoamerican Mixtec Muisca Olmec Pre-Columbian Nature Psychedelics Sexual abstinence Sexuality Slavery Tamils Tobacco Transgender topics Vegetarianism Water Wealth Women Category:Religion and ...

the arts abortion alcohol atheism capital punishment children death drugs education euthanasia the French Revolution geography government health mental health HIV/AIDS law medicine music peace race science society by country in France in the United States spirituality podcasts sports suicide technology Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hctnk
Cached time: 20250812023815
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.985 seconds
Real time usage: 1.180 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6138/1000000
Revision size: 56494/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 204934/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17044/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 196344/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.592/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9267550/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  967.868      1 -total
 36.83%  356.474      1 Template:Reflist
 13.06%  126.380      1 Template:Marxism
 12.72%  123.086      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.21%  118.167     18 Template:Cite_book
 10.28%   99.540     15 Template:Cite_web
 10.19%   98.636      9 Template:Citation_needed
  9.48%   91.755     11 Template:Fix
  9.32%   90.201      4 Template:Ambox
  8.63%   83.505      1 Template:Over-quotation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20224767:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023815 and revision id 1304828277. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxism_and_religion&oldid=1304828277 " Categories : Marxism Religion and politics Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2017 Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2024 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles to be expanded from December 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles needing cleanup from November 2022 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2022 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from December 2021 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 11:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxism and religion 13 languages Add topic

