Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Air quality monitoring Toggle Air quality monitoring subsection 1.1 Air sampling 2 Soil monitoring Toggle Soil monitoring subsection 2.1 Soil sampling 2.2 Monitoring programmes 2.2.1 Soil contamination monitoring 2.2.2 Soil erosion monitoring 2.2.3 Soil salinity monitoring 3 Water quality monitoring Toggle Water quality monitoring subsection 3.1 Fresh-water monitoring 3.1.1 Parameters 3.1.2 Chemical parameters 3.1.3 Biological parameters 3.1.4 Radiological parameters 3.1.5 Microbiological parameters 3.1.6 Populations 3.2 Marine monitoring 4 Design of environmental monitoring programmes Toggle Design of environmental monitoring programmes subsection 4.1 Monitoring programmes 4.2 Environmental monitoring data management systems 4.3 Sampling methods 4.3.1 Judgmental sampling 4.3.2 Simple random sampling 4.3.3 Stratified sampling 4.3.4 Systematic and grid sampling 4.3.5 Adaptive cluster sampling 4.3.6 Grab samples 4.3.7 Semi-continuous monitoring and continuous 4.3.8 Passive sampling 4.3.9 Remote surveillance 4.3.10 Remote sensing 4.3.11 Biomonitoring 4.3.12 Other sampling methods 4.4 Data interpretations 4.5 Environmental quality indices 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Environmental monitoring 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Igbo Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Norsk bokmål Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Monitoring of the quality of the environment This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( July 2024 ) Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Environmental monitoring is the scope of processes and activities that are done to characterize and describe the state of the environment. It is used in the preparation of environmental impact assessments , and in many circumstances in which human activities may cause harmful effects on the natural environment .
Monitoring strategies and programmes are generally designed to establish the current status of an environment or to establish a baseline and trends in environmental parameters. The results of monitoring are usually reviewed, analyzed statistically , and published. A monitoring programme is designed around the intended use of the data before monitoring starts.

Environmental monitoring includes monitoring of air quality , soils and water quality .

Many monitoring programmes are designed to not only establish the current state of the environment but also predict future conditions. In some cases this may involve collecting data related to events in the distant past such as gasses trapped in ancient glacier ice.

Air quality monitoring [ edit ] Air quality monitoring station in Italy Further information: Air pollution measurement , Air quality index , Continuous emissions monitoring system , Particulate matter sampler , and Portable emissions measurement system Air pollutants are atmospheric substances—both naturally occurring and anthropogenic —which may potentially have a negative impact on the environment and organism health. With the evolution of new chemicals and industrial processes has come the introduction or elevation of pollutants in the atmosphere, as well as environmental research and regulations, increasing the demand for air quality monitoring.

[ 1 ] Air quality monitoring is challenging to enact as it requires the effective integration of multiple environmental data sources, which often originate from different environmental networks and institutions.

[ 2 ] These challenges require specialized observation equipment and tools to establish air pollutant concentrations, including sensor networks, geographic information system (GIS) models, and the Sensor Observation Service (SOS), a web service for querying real-time sensor data.

[ 2 ] Air dispersion models that combine topographic, emissions, and meteorological data to predict air pollutant concentrations are often helpful in interpreting air monitoring data. Additionally, consideration of anemometer data in the area between sources and the monitor often provides insights on the source of the air contaminants recorded by an air pollution monitor.

Air quality monitors are operated by citizens, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] regulatory agencies, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] non-governmental organisations [ 8 ] and researchers [ 9 ] to investigate air quality and the effects of air pollution. Interpretation of ambient air monitoring data often involves a consideration of the spatial and temporal representativeness [ 10 ] of the data gathered, and the health effects associated with exposure to the monitored levels.

[ 11 ] If the interpretation reveals concentrations of multiple chemical compounds, a unique "chemical fingerprint" of a particular air pollution source may emerge from analysis of the data.

[ 12 ] Air sampling [ edit ] Passive or "diffusive" air sampling depends on meteorological conditions such as wind to diffuse air pollutants to a sorbent medium. Passive samplers, such as diffusion tubes , have the advantage of typically being small, quiet, and easy to deploy, and they are particularly useful in air quality studies that determine key areas for future continuous monitoring.

[ 13 ] Air pollution can also be assessed by biomonitoring with organisms that bioaccumulate air pollutants, such as lichens , mosses, fungi, and other biomass.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] One of the benefits of this type of sampling is how quantitative information can be obtained via measurements of accumulated compounds, representative of the environment from which they came. However, careful considerations must be made in choosing the particular organism, how it's dispersed, and relevance to the pollutant.

[ 15 ] Other sampling methods include the use of a denuder , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] needle trap devices, and microextraction techniques.

[ 18 ] Soil monitoring [ edit ] Collecting a soil sample in Mexico for pathogen testing Further information: Environmental soil science Soil monitoring involves the collection and/or analysis of soil and its associated quality , constituents , and physical status to determine or guarantee its fitness for use. Soil faces many threats, including compaction , contamination , organic material loss, biodiversity loss , slope stability issues, erosion , salinization , and acidification . Soil monitoring helps characterize these threats and other potential risks to the soil, surrounding environments, animal health, and human health.

[ 19 ] Assessing these threats and other risks to soil can be challenging due to a variety of factors, including soil's heterogeneity and complexity, scarcity of toxicity data, lack of understanding of a contaminant's fate, and variability in levels of soil screening.

[ 19 ] This requires a risk assessment approach and analysis techniques that prioritize environmental protection, risk reduction, and, if necessary, remediation methods.

[ 19 ] Soil monitoring plays a significant role in that risk assessment, not only aiding in the identification of at-risk and affected areas but also in the establishment of base background values of soil.

[ 19 ] Soil monitoring has historically focused on more classical conditions and contaminants, including toxic elements (e.g., mercury , lead , and arsenic ) and persistent organic pollutants (POPs).

[ 19 ] Historically, testing for these and other aspects of soil, however, has had its own set of challenges, as sampling in most cases is of a destructive in nature, requiring multiple samples over time. Additionally, procedural and analytical errors may be introduced due to variability among references and methods, particularly over time.

[ 20 ] However, as analytical techniques evolve and new knowledge about ecological processes and contaminant effects disseminate, the focus of monitoring will likely broaden over time and the quality of monitoring will continue to improve.

[ 19 ] Soil sampling [ edit ] The two primary types of soil sampling are grab sampling and composite sampling. Grab sampling involves the collection of an individual sample at a specific time and place, while composite sampling involves the collection of a homogenized mixture of multiple individual samples at either a specific place over different times or multiple locations at a specific time.

[ 21 ] Soil sampling may occur both at shallow ground levels or deep in the ground, with collection methods varying by level collected from. Scoops, augers, core barrel, and solid-tube samplers, and other tools are used at shallow ground levels, whereas split-tube, solid-tube, or hydraulic methods may be used in deep ground.

[ 22 ] Monitoring programmes [ edit ] A portable X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analyzer can be used in the field for testing soils for metal contamination.

Soil contamination monitoring [ edit ] Further information: Soil contamination Soil contamination monitoring helps researchers identify patterns and trends in contaminant deposition, movement, and effect. Human-based pressures such as tourism, industrial activity, urban sprawl , construction work, and inadequate agriculture/forestry practices can contribute to and make worse soil contamination and lead to the soil becoming unfit for its intended use. Both inorganic and organic pollutants may make their way to the soil, having a wide variety of detrimental effects. Soil contamination monitoring is therefore important to identify risk areas, set baselines, and identify contaminated zones for remediation. Monitoring efforts may range from local farms to nationwide efforts, such as those made by China in the late 2000s, [ 19 ] providing details such as the nature of contaminants, their quantity, effects, concentration patterns, and remediation feasibility.

[ 23 ] Monitoring and analytical equipment will ideally will have high response times, high levels of resolution and automation, and a certain degree of self-sufficiency.

[ 24 ] Chemical techniques may be used to measure toxic elements and POPs using chromatography and spectrometry , geophysical techniques may assess physical properties of large terrains, and biological techniques may use specific organisms to gauge not only contaminant level but also byproducts of contaminant biodegradation. These techniques and others are increasingly becoming more efficient, and laboratory instrumentation is becoming more precise, resulting in more meaningful monitoring outcomes.

[ 25 ] Soil erosion monitoring [ edit ] Further information: Soil erosion Soil erosion monitoring helps researchers identify patterns and trends in soil and sediment movement. Monitoring programmes have varied over the years, from long-term academic research on university plots to reconnaissance-based surveys of biogeoclimatic areas. In most methods, however, the general focus is on identifying and measuring all the dominant erosion processes in a given area.

[ 26 ] Additionally, soil erosion monitoring may attempt to quantify the effects of erosion on crop productivity, though challenging "because of the many complexities in the relationship between soils and plants and their management under a variable climate." [ 27 ] Soil salinity monitoring [ edit ] Further information: Soil salinity Soil salinity monitoring helps researchers identify patterns and trends in soil salt content. Both the natural process of seawater intrusion and the human-induced processes of inappropriate soil and water management can lead to salinity problems in soil, with up to one billion hectares of land affected globally (as of 2013).

[ 28 ] Salinity monitoring at the local level may look closely at the root zone to gauge salinity impact and develop management options, whereas at the regional and national level salinity monitoring may help with identifying areas at-risk and aiding policymakers in tackling the issue before it spreads.

[ 28 ] The monitoring process itself may be performed using technologies such as remote sensing and geographic information systems (GIS) to identify salinity via greenness, brightness, and whiteness at the surface level. Direct analysis of soil up close, including the use of electromagnetic induction techniques, may also be used to monitor soil salinity.

[ 28 ] Water quality monitoring [ edit ] Electrofishing survey methods use a mild electric shock to temporarily stun fish for capture, identification and counting. The fish are then returned to the water unharmed.

The water environment on Earth includes the seas and oceans, the rivers lakes, marshes, streams and the frozen waters in ice-caps and glaciers. Because of the importance of water to life, monitoring of water wherever it occurs is critical to the environmental well-being of the earth biome .

[ 29 ] Fresh-water monitoring [ edit ] Fresh water in the environment provides drinking water to the human population and for most animals and plants.  Tracking any deterioration in quality is essential for the health of the human population and for the health of ecosystems reliant on water. Typically such monitoring programme cover rivers, lakes, ground-waters and precipitation .

Parameters [ edit ] see also Freshwater environmental quality parameters Chemical parameters [ edit ] Analyzing water samples for pesticides The range of chemical parameters that have the potential to affect any ecosystem is very large and in all monitoring programmes it is necessary to target a suite of parameters based on local knowledge and past practice for an initial review. The list can be expanded or reduced based on developing knowledge and the outcome of the initial surveys.

Freshwater environments have been extensively studied for many years and there is a robust understanding of the interactions between chemistry and the environment across much of the world. However, as new materials are developed and new pressures come to bear, revisions to monitoring programmes will be required. In the last 20 years acid rain , synthetic hormone analogues, halogenated hydrocarbons , greenhouse gases and many others have required changes to monitoring strategies.

Biological parameters [ edit ] In ecological monitoring, the monitoring strategy and effort is directed at the plants and animals in the environment under review and is specific to each individual study.

However, in more generalised environmental monitoring, many animals act as robust indicators of the quality of the environment that they are experiencing or have experienced in the recent past.

[ 30 ] One of the most familiar examples is the monitoring of numbers of Salmonid fish such as brown trout or Atlantic salmon in river systems and lakes to detect slow trends in adverse environmental effects. The steep decline in salmonid fish populations was one of the early indications of the problem that later became known as acid rain .

A rosette sampler used for ocean monitoring In recent years much more attention has been given to a more holistic approach in which the ecosystem health is assessed and used as the monitoring tool itself.

[ 31 ] It is this approach that underpins the monitoring protocols of the Water Framework Directive in the European Union .

Radiological parameters [ edit ] Radiation monitoring involves the measurement of radiation dose or radionuclide contamination for reasons related to the assessment or control of exposure to ionizing radiation or radioactive substances, and the interpretation of the results.

[ 32 ] The 'measurement' of dose often means the measurement of a dose equivalent quantity as a proxy (i.e. substitute) for a dose quantity that cannot be measured directly. Also, sampling may be involved as a preliminary step to measurement of the content of radionuclides in environmental media. The methodological and technical details of the design and operation of monitoring programmes and systems for different radionuclides, environmental media and types of facility are given in IAEA Safety Guide RS–G-1.8 [ 33 ] and in IAEA Safety Report No. 64.

[ 34 ] Radiation monitoring is often carried out using networks of fixed and deployable sensors such as the US Environmental Protection Agency 's Radnet and the SPEEDI network in Japan. Airborne surveys are also made by organizations like the Nuclear Emergency Support Team .

Microbiological parameters [ edit ] Bacteria and viruses are the most commonly monitored groups of microbiological organisms and even these are only of great relevance where water in the aquatic environment is subsequently used as drinking water or where water contact recreation such as swimming or canoeing is practised.

Although pathogens are the primary focus of attention, the principal monitoring effort is almost always directed at much more common indicator species such as Escherichia coli , [ 35 ] supplemented by overall coliform bacteria counts. The rationale behind this monitoring strategy is that most human pathogens originate from other humans via the sewage stream. Many sewage treatment plants have no sterilisation final stage and therefore discharge an effluent which, although having a clean appearance, still contains many millions of bacteria per litre, the majority of which are relatively harmless coliform bacteria. Counting the number of harmless (or less harmful) sewage bacteria allows a judgement to be made about the probability of significant numbers of pathogenic bacteria or viruses being present. Where E. coli or coliform levels exceed pre-set trigger values, more intensive monitoring including specific monitoring for pathogenic species is then initiated.

Populations [ edit ] Monitoring strategies can produce misleading answers when relaying on counts of species or presence or absence of particular organisms if there is no regard to population size. Understanding the populations dynamics of an organism being monitored is critical.

As an example if presence or absence of a particular organism within a 10 km square is the measure adopted by a monitoring strategy, then a reduction of population from 10,000 per square to 10 per square may go unnoticed despite the very significant impact experienced by the organism.

Marine monitoring [ edit ] Monitoring the status of marine waters poses special challenges because of the size and depth of the water , the distance from land and the geo-politocal issues in trying to identify the sources of pollutants.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] For many countries, monitoring efforts are limited to their own coastal waters, and even then are often specifically aimed  at  marine areas deemed to be of special value such as marine conservation areas.

[ 38 ] Design of environmental monitoring programmes [ edit ] Water quality monitoring is of little use without a clear and unambiguous definition of the reasons for the monitoring and the objectives that it will satisfy. Almost all monitoring (except perhaps remote sensing ) is in some part invasive of the environment under study and extensive and poorly planned monitoring carries a risk of damage to the environment. This may be a critical consideration in wilderness areas or when monitoring very rare organisms or those that are averse to human presence. Some monitoring techniques, such as gill netting fish to estimate populations, can be very damaging, at least to the local population and can also degrade public trust in scientists carrying out the monitoring.

Almost all mainstream environmentalism monitoring projects form part of an overall monitoring strategy or research field, and these field and strategies are themselves derived from the high levels objectives or aspirations of an organisation. Unless individual monitoring projects fit into a wider strategic framework, the results are unlikely to be published and the environmental understanding produced by the monitoring will be lost.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Monitoring programmes [ edit ] All scientifically reliable environmental monitoring is performed in line with a published programme. The programme may include the overall objectives of the organisation, references to the specific strategies that helps deliver the objective and details of specific projects or tasks within those strategies the key feature of any programme is the listing of what is being monitored and how that monitoring is to take place and the time-scale over which it should all happen. Typically, and often as an appendix, a monitoring programme will provide a table of locations, dates and sampling methods that are proposed and which, if undertaken in full, will deliver the published monitoring programme.

There are a number of commercial software packages which can assist with the implementation of the programme, monitor its progress and flag up inconsistencies or omissions but none of these can provide the key building block which is the programme itself.

Environmental monitoring data management systems [ edit ] Given the multiple types and increasing volumes and importance of monitoring data, commercial software Environmental Data Management Systems (EDMS) or E-MDMS are increasingly in common use by regulated industries. They provide a means of managing all monitoring data in a single central place.  Quality validation, compliance checking, verifying all data has been received, and sending alerts are generally automated. Typical interrogation functionality enables comparison of data sets both temporarily and spatially. They will also generate regulatory and other reports.

One formal certification scheme exists specifically for environmental data management software. This is provided by the Environment Agency in the U.K. under its Monitoring Certification Scheme (MCERTS).

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Sampling methods [ edit ] There are a wide range of sampling methods which depend on the type of environment, the material being sampled and the subsequent analysis of the sample. At its simplest a sample can be filling a clean bottle with river water and submitting it for conventional chemical analysis. At the more complex end, sample data may be produced by complex electronic sensing devices taking sub-samples over fixed or variable time periods.

Sampling methods include judgmental sampling, simple random sampling, stratified sampling , systematic and grid sampling, adaptive cluster sampling , grab samples, semi-continuous monitoring and continuous, passive sampling , remote surveillance, remote sensing , biomonitoring and other sampling methods.

Judgmental sampling [ edit ] In judgmental sampling, the selection of sampling units (i.e., the number and location and/or timing of collecting samples) is based on knowledge of the feature or condition under investigation and on professional judgment. Judgmental sampling is distinguished from probability-based sampling in that inferences are based on professional judgment, not statistical scientific theory. Therefore, conclusions about the target population are limited and depend entirely on the validity and accuracy of professional judgment; probabilistic statements about parameters are not possible. As described in subsequent chapters, expert judgment may also be used in conjunction with other sampling designs to produce effective sampling for defensible decisions.

[ 44 ] Simple random sampling [ edit ] In simple random sampling, particular sampling units (for example, locations and/or times) are selected using random numbers, and all possible selections of a given number of units are equally likely. For example, a simple random sample of a set of drums can be taken by numbering all the drums and randomly selecting numbers from that list or by sampling an area by using pairs of random coordinates. This method is easy to understand, and the equations for determining sample size are relatively straightforward. Simple random sampling is most useful when the population of interest is relatively homogeneous; i.e., no major patterns of contamination or “hot spots” are expected. The main advantages of this design are: It provides statistically unbiased estimates of the mean, proportions, and variability.

It is easy to understand and easy to implement.

Sample size calculations and data analysis are very straightforward.

In some cases, implementation of a simple random sample can be more difficult than some other types of designs (for example, grid samples) because of the difficulty of precisely identifying random geographic locations. Additionally, simple random sampling can be more costly than other plans if difficulties in obtaining samples due to location causes an expenditure of extra effort.

[ 44 ] Stratified sampling [ edit ] In stratified sampling , the target population is separated into non-overlapping strata, or subpopulations that are known or thought to be more homogeneous (relative to the environmental medium or the contaminant), so that there tends to be less variation among sampling units in the same stratum than among sampling units in different strata. Strata may be chosen on the basis of spatial or temporal proximity of the units, or on the basis of preexisting information or professional judgment about the site or process. Advantages of this sampling design are that it has potential for achieving greater precision in estimates of the mean and variance, and that it allows computation of reliable estimates for population subgroups of special interest. Greater precision can be obtained if the measurement of interest is strongly correlated with the variable used to make the strata.

[ 44 ] Systematic and grid sampling [ edit ] In systematic and grid sampling, samples are taken at regularly spaced intervals over space or time. An initial location or time is chosen at random, and then the remaining sampling locations are defined so that all locations are at regular intervals over an area (grid) or time (systematic). Examples Systematic Grid Sampling - Square Grid Systematic Grid Sampling - Triangular Grids of systematic grids include square, rectangular, triangular, or radial grids.
Cressie, 1993. In random systematic sampling, an initial sampling location (or time) is chosen at random and the remaining sampling sites are specified so that they are located according to a regular pattern. Random systematic sampling is used to search for hot spots and to infer means, percentiles, or other parameters and is also useful for estimating spatial patterns or trends over time. This design provides a practical and easy method for designating sample locations and ensures uniform coverage of a site, unit, or process.

[ 44 ] Ranked set sampling is an innovative design that can be highly useful and cost efficient in obtaining better estimates of mean concentration levels in soil and other environmental media by explicitly incorporating the professional judgment of a field investigator or a field screening measurement method to pick specific sampling locations in the field. Ranked set sampling uses a two-phase sampling design that identifies sets of field locations, utilizes inexpensive measurements to rank locations within each set, and then selects one location from each set for sampling. In ranked set sampling, m sets (each of size r) of field locations are identified using simple random sampling. The locations are ranked independently within each set using professional judgment or inexpensive, fast, or surrogate measurements. One sampling unit from each set is then selected (based on the observed ranks) for subsequent measurement using a more accurate and reliable (hence, more expensive) method for the contaminant of interest. Relative to simple random sampling, this design results in more representative samples and so leads to more precise estimates of the population parameters. Ranked set sampling is useful when the cost of locating and ranking locations in the field is low compared to laboratory measurements. It is also appropriate when an inexpensive auxiliary variable (based on expert knowledge or measurement) is available to rank population units with respect to the variable of interest. To use this design effectively, it is important that the ranking method and analytical method are strongly correlated.

[ 44 ] Adaptive cluster sampling [ edit ] In adaptive cluster sampling , samples are taken using simple random sampling, and additional samples are taken at locations where measurements exceed some threshold value. Several additional rounds of sampling and analysis may be needed. Adaptive cluster sampling tracks the selection probabilities for later phases of sampling so that an unbiased estimate of the population mean can be calculated despite oversampling of certain areas. An example application of adaptive cluster sampling is delineating the borders of a plume of contamination. Adaptive sampling is useful for estimating or searching for rare characteristics in a population and is appropriate for inexpensive, rapid measurements. It enables delineating the boundaries of hot spots, while also using all data collected with appropriate weighting to give unbiased estimates of the population mean.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Grab samples [ edit ] Collecting a grab sample on a stream Grab samples are samples taken of a homogeneous material, usually water , in a single vessel. Filling a clean bottle with river water is a very common example. Grab samples provide a good snap-shot view of the quality of the sampled environment at the point of sampling and at the time of sampling. Without additional monitoring, the results cannot be extrapolated to other times or to other parts of the river, lake or ground-water.

[ 45 ] : 3 In order to enable grab samples or rivers to be treated as representative, repeat transverse and longitudinal transect surveys taken at different times of day and times of year are required to establish that the grab-sample location is as representative as is reasonably possible. For large rivers such surveys should also have regard to the depth of the sample and how to best manage the sampling locations at times of flood and drought.

[ 45 ] : 8–9 In lakes grab samples are relatively simple to take using depth samplers which can be lowered to a pre-determined depth and then closed trapping a fixed volume of water from the required depth. In all but the shallowest lakes, there are major changes in the chemical composition of lake water at different depths, especially during the summer months when many lakes stratify into a warm, well oxygenated upper layer ( epilimnion ) and a cool de-oxygenated lower layer ( hypolimnion ).

In the open seas marine environment grab samples can establish a wide range of base-line parameters such as salinity and a range of cation and anion concentrations. However, where changing conditions are an issue such as near river or sewage discharges, close to the effects of volcanism or close to areas of freshwater input from melting ice, a grab sample can only give a very partial answer when taken on its own.

Semi-continuous monitoring and continuous [ edit ] An automated sampling station and data logger (to record temperature, specific conductance, and dissolved oxygen levels) There is a wide range of specialized sampling equipment available that can be programmed to take samples at fixed or variable time intervals or in response to an external trigger. For example, an autosampler can be programmed to start taking samples of a river at 8-minute intervals when the rainfall intensity rises above 1 mm / hour. The trigger in this case may be a remote rain gauge communicating with the sampler by using cell phone or meteor burst [ 46 ] technology. Samplers can also take individual discrete samples at each sampling occasion or bulk up samples into composite so that in the course of one day, such a sampler might produce 12 composite samples each composed of 6 sub-samples taken at 20-minute intervals.

Continuous or quasi-continuous monitoring involves having an automated analytical facility close to the environment being monitored so that results can, if required, be viewed in real time. Such systems are often established to protect important water supplies such as in the River Dee regulation system but may also be part of an overall monitoring strategy on large strategic rivers where early warning of potential problems is essential. Such systems routinely provide data on parameters such as pH , dissolved oxygen , conductivity , turbidity and ammonia using sondes.

[ 47 ] It is also possible to operate gas liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry technologies (GLC/MS) to examine a wide range of potential organic pollutants. In all examples of automated bank-side analysis there is a requirement for water to be pumped from the river into the monitoring station. Choosing a location for the pump inlet is equally as critical as deciding on the location for a river grab sample. The design of the pump and pipework also requires careful design to avoid artefacts being introduced through the action of pumping the water. Dissolved oxygen concentration is difficult to sustain through a pumped system and GLC/MS facilities can detect micro-organic contaminants from the pipework and glands .

Passive sampling [ edit ] Main article: Passive sampling The use of passive samplers greatly reduces the cost and the need of infrastructure on the sampling location. Passive samplers are semi-disposable and can be produced at a relatively low cost, thus they can be employed in great numbers, allowing for a better cover and more data being collected. Due to being small the passive sampler can also be hidden, and thereby lower the risk of vandalism. Examples of passive sampling devices are the diffusive gradients in thin films (DGT) sampler, Chemcatcher , polar organic chemical integrative sampler (POCIS), semipermeable membrane devices (SPMDs), stabilized liquid membrane devices (SLMDs), and an air sampling pump .

Remote surveillance [ edit ] Although on-site data collection using electronic measuring equipment is common-place, many monitoring programmes also use remote surveillance and remote access to data in real time. This requires the on-site monitoring equipment to be connected to a base station via either a telemetry network, land-line, cell phone network or other telemetry system such as Meteor burst. The advantage of remote surveillance is that many data feeds can come into a single base station for storing and analysis. It also enable trigger levels or alert levels to be set for individual monitoring sites and/or parameters so that immediate action can be initiated if a trigger level is exceeded. The use of remote surveillance also allows for the installation of very discrete monitoring equipment which can often be buried, camouflaged or tethered at depth in a lake or river with only a short whip aerial protruding. Use of such equipment tends to reduce vandalism and theft when monitoring in locations easily accessible by the public.

Remote sensing [ edit ] Main article: Remote sensing Environmental remote sensing uses UAV , aircraft or satellites to monitor the environment using multi-channel sensors.

There are two kinds of remote sensing. Passive sensors detect natural radiation that is emitted or reflected by the object or surrounding area being observed. Reflected sunlight is the most common source of radiation measured by passive sensors and in environmental remote sensing, the sensors used are tuned to specific wavelengths from far infrared through visible light frequencies to the far ultraviolet . The volumes of data that can be collected are very large and require dedicated computational support. The output of data analysis from remote sensing are false colour images which differentiate small differences in the radiation characteristics of the environment being monitored. With a skilful operator choosing specific channels it is possible to amplify differences which are imperceptible to the human eye. In particular it is possible to discriminate subtle changes in chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b concentrations in plants and show areas of an environment with slightly different nutrient regimes.

Active remote sensing emits energy and uses a passive sensor to detect and measure the radiation that is reflected or backscattered from the target.

LIDAR is often used to acquire information about the topography of an area, especially when the area is large and manual surveying would be prohibitively expensive or difficult.

Remote sensing makes it possible to collect data on dangerous or inaccessible areas. Remote sensing applications include monitoring deforestation in areas such as the Amazon Basin , the effects of climate change on glaciers and Arctic and Antarctic regions, and depth sounding of coastal and ocean depths.

Orbital platforms collect and transmit data from different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum , which in conjunction with larger scale aerial or ground-based sensing and analysis, provides information to monitor trends such as El Niño and other natural long and short term phenomena. Other uses include different areas of the earth sciences such as natural resource management , land use planning and conservation.

[ 48 ] Biomonitoring [ edit ] Main article: Aquatic biomonitoring The use of living organisms as monitoring tools has many advantages. Organisms living in the environment under study are constantly exposed to the physical, biological and chemical influences of that environment. Organisms that have a tendency to accumulate chemical species can often accumulate significant quantities of material from very low concentrations in the environment.

Mosses have been used by many investigators to monitor heavy metal concentrations because of their tendency to selectively adsorb heavy metals.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Similarly, eels have been used to study halogenated organic chemicals, as these are adsorbed into the fatty deposits within the eel.

[ 51 ] Other sampling methods [ edit ] Ecological sampling requires careful planning to be representative and as noninvasive as possible. For grasslands and other low growing habitats the use of a quadrat – a 1-metre square frame – is often used with the numbers and types of organisms growing within each quadrat area counted [ 52 ] Sediments and soils require specialist sampling tools to ensure that the material recovered is representative. Such samplers are frequently designed to recover a specified volume of material and may also be designed to recover the sediment or soil living biota as well [ 53 ] such as the Ekman grab sampler.

Data interpretations [ edit ] The interpretation of environmental data produced from a well designed monitoring programme is a large and complex topic addressed by many publications. Regrettably it is sometimes the case that scientists approach the analysis of results with a pre-conceived outcome in mind and use or misuse statistics to demonstrate that their own particular point of view is correct.

Statistics remains a tool that is equally easy to use or to misuse to demonstrate the lessons learnt from environmental monitoring.

Environmental quality indices [ edit ] Since the start of science-based environmental monitoring, a number of quality indices have been devised to help classify and clarify the meaning of the considerable volumes of data involved. Stating that a river stretch is in "Class B" is likely to be much more informative than stating that this river stretch has a mean BOD of 4.2, a mean dissolved oxygen of 85%, etc. In the UK the Environment Agency formally employed a system called General Quality Assessment (GQA) which classified rivers into six quality letter bands from A to F based on chemical criteria [ 54 ] and on biological criteria.

[ 55 ] The Environment Agency and its devolved partners in Wales (Countryside Council for Wales, CCW) and Scotland (Scottish Environmental Protection Agency, SEPA) now employ a system of biological, chemical and physical classification for rivers and lakes that corresponds with the EU Water Framework Directive.

[ 56 ] See also [ edit ] Agricultural burning Agricultural waste Biodiversity Monitoring Switzerland Carbon monitoring Carbon profiling Citizen science , research projects that non-scientists can take part in Crowdmapping Environmental technology Project Grab Bag Unmanned aerial vehicle § Applications : drones can be used for various types of environmental monitoring References [ edit ] ^ Forbes, P.B.C. (2015).

"Chapter 1: Perspectives on the Monitoring of Air Pollutants" . In Barcelo, D. (ed.).

Monitoring of Air Pollutants: Sampling, Sample Preparation and Analytical Techniques . Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry. Vol. 70. Elsevier. pp.

3– 9.

ISBN 9780444635532 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ a b Rada, E.C.; Ragazzi, M.; Brini, M.; et al. (2016).

"Chapter 1: Perspectives of Low-Cost Sensors Adoption for Air Quality Monitoring" . In Ragazzi, M. (ed.).

Air Quality: Monitoring, Measuring, and Modeling Environmental Hazards . CRC Press.

ISBN 9781315341859 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Williams, R.; Kilaru, V.; Snyder, E.; et al. (June 2014).

"Air Sensor Guidebook" . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. p. 65. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2015 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "GO 3 Project" . GO3 Foundation. Archived from the original on 29 May 2018 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "Louisiana Bucket Brigade" . Louisiana Bucket Brigade . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "List of Designated Reference and Equivalent Methods" (PDF) . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 17 December 2016 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland) (2017).

National Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Programme 2017–2022 . Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland). p. 30.

ISBN 9781840957501 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "Centre for Science and Environment" . CSE, New Delhi . Retrieved 7 Oct 2023 .

^ "AS&T Journal" . American Association for Aerosol Research . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Righini, G.; Cappalletti, A.; Cionno, I.; et al. (April 2013).

"Methodologies for the evaluation of spatial representativeness of air quality monitoring stations in Italy" . ENEA. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "National Ambient Air Quality Standards" . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "Receptor Modeling" .

Air Quality Management Online Portal . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Pienaar, J.J.; Beukes, J.P.; Zyl, P.G.V.; et al. (2015).

"Chapter 2: Passive Diffusion Sampling Devices for Monitoring Ambient Air Concentrations" . In Barcelo, D. (ed.).

Monitoring of Air Pollutants: Sampling, Sample Preparation and Analytical Techniques . Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry. Vol. 70. Elsevier. pp.

13– 52.

ISBN 9780444635532 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Garty, J (2001). "Biomonitoring Atmospheric Heavy Metals with Lichens: Theory and Application".

Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences .

20 (4): 309– 371.

Bibcode : 2001CRvPS..20..309G .

doi : 10.1080/20013591099254 .

S2CID 59062166 .

^ a b Forbes, P.B.C.; van der Wat, L.; Kroukamp, E.M. (2015).

"Chapter 3: Biomonitors" . In Barcelo, D. (ed.).

Monitoring of Air Pollutants: Sampling, Sample Preparation and Analytical Techniques . Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry. Vol. 70. Elsevier. pp.

53– 107.

ISBN 9780444635532 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Forbes, P.B.C.; Rohwer, E.R. (2015).

"Chapter 5: Denuders" . In Barcelo, D. (ed.).

Monitoring of Air Pollutants: Sampling, Sample Preparation and Analytical Techniques . Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry. Vol. 70. Elsevier. pp.

155– 181.

ISBN 9780444635532 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "Elemental, Particulate, and Reactive Gaseous Mercury Monitoring" . NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory, Global Monitoring Division . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Grandy, J.; Asl-Hariri, S.; Paliszyn, J. (2015).

"Chapter 7: Novel and Emerging Air-Sampling Devices" . In Barcelo, D. (ed.).

Monitoring of Air Pollutants: Sampling, Sample Preparation and Analytical Techniques . Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry. Vol. 70. Elsevier. pp.

208– 237.

ISBN 9780444635532 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g Cachada, A.; Rocha-Santos, T.; Duarte, A.C. (2017). "Chapter 1: Soil and Pollution: An Introduction to the Main Issues".

Soil Pollution: From Monitoring to Remediation . Academic Press. pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 9780128498729 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Dubois, J.P.; Schulin, R.

(1993).

"Sampling and Analytical Techniques as Limiting Factors in Soil Monitoring" . In Schulin, R.; Webster, R.; Desaules, A.; von Steiger, B. (eds.).

Soil Monitoring: Early Detection and Surveying of Soil Contamination and Degradation . Springer Basel. pp.

271– 6.

ISBN 9783034875424 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Harter, T. (2008).

"Chapter 8: Water Sampling and Monitoring" . In Harter, T.; Rollins, L. (eds.).

Watersheds, Groundwater and Drinking Water: A Practical Guide . UCANR Publications. pp.

113– 38.

ISBN 9781879906815 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Byrnes, M.E. (2008).

Field Sampling Methods for Remedial Investigations . CRC Press. pp.

128– 148.

ISBN 9781420059151 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Mirsal, I. (2013).

Soil Pollution: Origin, Monitoring & Remediation . Springer Science+Business Media. pp.

172– 4.

ISBN 9783662054000 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Kot-Wasik, A.; Namieśnik, J. (2007).

"Some Advances in Environmental Analytics and Monitoring" . In Twardowska, I.; Allen, H.E.; Häggblom, M.M. (eds.).

Soil and Water Pollution Monitoring, Protection and Remediation . Springer Science+Business Media. pp.

161– 174.

ISBN 9781402047282 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Aelion, C.M. (2009).

"Soil Contamination Monitoring" . In Inyang, H.I.; Daniels, J.L. (eds.).

Environmental Monitoring . Vol. 2. EOLSS Publications. pp.

148– 74.

ISBN 9781905839766 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Owens, P.N.; Collins, A.J. (2006).

"Chapter 28: Soil Erosion and Sediment Redistribution in River Catchments: Summary, Outlook and Future Requirements" .

Soil Erosion and Sediment Redistribution in River Catchments: Measurement, Modelling And Management . CABI International. pp.

297– 318.

ISBN 9780851990507 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Pierce, F.J.; Lai, R. (1994).

"Chapter 10: Monitoring soil erosion's impact on crop productivity" . In Lai, R. (ed.).

Soil Erosion Research Methods . Soil and Water Conservation Society and St. Lucie Press.

ISBN 9781351415965 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ a b c Shahid, S.A. (2013).

"Chapter 1: Developments in Soil Salinity Assessment, Modeling, Mapping, and Monitoring from Regional to Submicroscopic Scales" . In Shahid, S.A.; Abdelfattah, M.A.; Taha, F.K. (eds.).

Developments in Soil Salinity Assessment and Reclamation: Innovative Thinking and Use of Marginal Soil and Water Resources in Irrigated Agriculture . Springer Science+Business Media. pp.

3– 44.

ISBN 9789400756847 . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Chapman, Deborah V.; Sullivan, Timothy (18 February 2022).

"The role of water quality monitoring in the sustainable use of ambient waters" .

One Earth .

5 (2). Elsevier: 132– 137.

Bibcode : 2022OEart...5..132C .

doi : 10.1016/j.oneear.2022.01.008 .

hdl : 10468/13138 . Retrieved 13 February 2025 .

^ Hart, C.W.; Fuller, Samuel F.J. (1974).

Pollution Ecology of Freshwater Invertebrates . New York: Academic Press.

ISBN 0-12-328450-3 .

^ Wrona, Frederick J. & Cash, Kevin J. (May 1996).

"The ecosystem approach to environmental assessment: moving from theory to practice" .

Journal of Aquatic Ecosystem Health .

5 (2). Springer: 89– 97.

doi : 10.1007/BF00662797 .

^ International Atomic Energy Agency (2007).

IAEA Safety Glossary: Terminology Used in Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection (PDF) . Vienna: IAEA.

ISBN 978-92-0-100707-0 .

^ International Atomic Energy Agency (2005).

Environmental and Source Monitoring for Purposes of Radiation Protection, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. RS–G-1.8 (PDF) . Vienna: IAEA.

^ International Atomic Energy Agency (2010).

Programmes and Systems for Source and Environmental Radiation Monitoring. Safety Reports Series No. 64 . Vienna: IAEA. p. 234.

ISBN 978-92-0-112409-8 .

^ "A Guide to Environmental DNA (eDNA) by Biomeme" .

Biomeme .

^ "Challenges for the marine environment" . New Zealand Government . Retrieved 13 February 2025 .

^ "Challenges for Marine Ecological Assessments: Completeness of Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable Biodiversity Data in European Seas" . Retrieved 13 February 2025 .

^ "Marine Monitoring and Reporting Framework" . New Zealand Department of Conservation . Retrieved 13 February 2025 .

^ United Nations Environment Programme. Mineral Resources Forum.

"General guideline for an environmental monitoring programme." ^ Stribling J. B. & Davie S.R., "Design of an environmental monitoring programme for the Lake Allatoona/Upper Etowah river watershed." Proceedings of the 2005 Georgia Water Resources Conference, April 25–27, 2005.

^ Environment Agency (December 2017).

"MCERTS: Quality and performance standards for environmental data management software" .

GOV.UK . p. 55 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Environment Agency (9 February 2017).

"Monitoring emissions to air, land and water (MCERTS)" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ "MCERTS Certified Products" . CSA Group . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ a b c d e f "Guidance on Choosing a Sampling Design for Environmental Data Collection for Use in Developing a Quality Assurance Project Plan EPA QA/G-5S" (PDF) .

United States Environmental Protection Agency . October 2002 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c Nollet, Leo M.L., ed. (2000).

Handbook of Water Analysis . New York: Marcel Dekker.

ISBN 0-8247-8433-2 .

^ Shaw, Elizabeth M. (1984).

"Book reviews: 'Proceedings of the International Symposium on Hydrometeorology' edited by A.I. Johnson & R.A. Clark" (PDF) .

Hydrological Sciences Journal .

29 (4): 462– 463.

ISSN 0262-6667 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-21 . Retrieved 2009-10-22 .

^ Environment Agency (29 September 2015).

"The Sonde of Music" .

Environment Agency Creating a Better Place Blog . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ Short, Nicholas M. Sr.

"Remote Sensing Tutorial." Archived 2009-10-27 at the Wayback Machine U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Greenbelt, MD. 2009-09-23.

^ Pott, U. & Turpin, D. H. (1998). "Assessment of Atmospheric Heavy Metals by Moss Monitoring with Isothecium Stoloniferum Brid. in the Fraser Valley, B.C., Canada." Water, Air, & Soil Pollution.

Vol. 101, Nos. 1–4, January 1998, ISSN 0049-6979 .

^ Bragazzaa, Marchesinia, Alberb, Bonettic, Lorenzonic, Achillid, Buffonid, De Marcoe, Franchif, Pisonf, Giaquintag, Palmierih Spezzano (2000). "Monitoring of heavy metal deposition in Northern Italy by moss analysis." Environmental Pollution, Vol. 108, No. 2, pp 201–208.

^ C. Belpaire and G. Goemans, "Eels: contaminant cocktails pinpointing environmental contamination." ICES J. Mar. Sci. 64: 1423–1436.

^ Offwell Woodland & Wildlife Trust. Devon, UK.

"Ecological Sampling Methods." Accessed 2009-10-21.

^ Csuros, Csaba; Csuros, Maria (2002).

Environmental sampling and analysis for metals . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. p. 219.

ISBN 978-1-56670-572-1 .

^ Environment Agency, UK.

Chemistry classification method Archived 2014-10-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ Environment Agency.

General quality assessment of rivers – biology Archived 2014-10-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ European Union Water Framework Directive, EU WFD v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Authority control databases National Czech Republic Latvia Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lsw2b
Cached time: 20250812021633
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.809 seconds
Real time usage: 0.961 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4363/1000000
Revision size: 59791/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 226511/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1357/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 223570/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.493/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7926472/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  757.855      1 -total
 46.39%  351.577      1 Template:Reflist
 26.32%  199.480     23 Template:Cite_book
 14.15%  107.227      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
 13.91%  105.436      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.19%   77.201     19 Template:Cite_web
  8.17%   61.886      1 Template:Aquatic_ecosystem_topics
  7.82%   59.248      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.28%   55.158      1 Template:Short_description
  5.29%   40.115      1 Template:Lead_too_short Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22228846:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021633 and revision id 1300959178. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_monitoring&oldid=1300959178 " Categories : Environmental monitoring Environmental data Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Source attribution Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from July 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 09:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental monitoring 22 languages Add topic

