Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Ancient philosophy 2.1.1 The Academy 2.1.2 The Skeptical Academy 2.1.3 Middle Platonism 2.1.4 Neoplatonism 2.2 Medieval philosophy 2.2.1 Christianity and Platonism 2.3 Modern philosophy 2.3.1 Renaissance 2.4 Contemporary philosophy 2.4.1 Modern Platonism 2.4.1.1 Analytic 2.4.1.2 Continental 3 Influence on religions 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 People 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Platonism 62 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical system Head of Plato , Roman copy. The original was exhibited at the Academy after the death of the philosopher (348/347 BC).

Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Platonism is the philosophy of Plato and philosophical systems closely derived from it, though contemporary Platonists do not necessarily accept all doctrines of Plato.

[ 1 ] Platonism has had a profound effect on Western thought . At the most fundamental level, Platonism affirms the existence of abstract objects , which are asserted to exist in a third realm distinct from both the sensible external world and from the internal world of consciousness, and is the opposite of nominalism .

[ 1 ] This can apply to properties , types , propositions , meanings , numbers , sets , truth values , and so on (see abstract object theory ). Philosophers who affirm the existence of abstract objects are sometimes called Platonists; those who deny their existence are sometimes called nominalists. The terms "Platonism" and "nominalism" also have established senses in the history of philosophy. They denote positions that have little to do with the modern notion of an abstract object.

[ 2 ] In a narrower sense, the term might indicate the doctrine of Platonic realism , a form of mysticism.

[ citation needed ] The central concept of Platonism, a distinction essential to the Theory of Forms , is the distinction between the reality which is perceptible but unintelligible, associated with the flux of Heraclitus and studied by the likes of physical science , and the reality which is imperceptible but intelligible, associated with the unchanging being of Parmenides and studied by the likes of mathematics .

Geometry was the main motivation of Plato, and this also shows the influence of Pythagoras . The Forms are typically described in dialogues such as the Phaedo , Symposium and Republic as perfect archetypes of which objects in the everyday world are imperfect copies.

Aristotle 's Third Man Argument is its most famous criticism in antiquity.

In the Republic the highest form is identified as the Form of the Good , the source of all other Forms, which could be known by reason. In the Sophist , a later work, the Forms being , sameness and difference are listed among the primordial "Great Kinds". Plato established the academy , and in the 3rd century BC, Arcesilaus adopted academic skepticism , which became a central tenet of the school until 90 BC when Antiochus added Stoic elements, rejected skepticism, and began a period known as Middle Platonism .

In the 3rd century AD, Plotinus added additional mystical elements, establishing Neoplatonism , in which the summit of existence was the One or the Good, the source of all things; in virtue and meditation the soul had the power to elevate itself to attain union with the One. Many Platonic notions were adopted by the Christian church which understood Plato's Forms as God's thoughts (a position also known as divine conceptualism), while Neoplatonism became a major influence on Christian mysticism in the West through Saint Augustine , Doctor of the Catholic Church , who was heavily influenced by Plotinus' Enneads , [ 3 ] and in turn were foundations for the whole of Western Christian thought.

[ 4 ] Many ideas of Plato were incorporated by the Roman Catholic Church .

[ 5 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Plato holding his Timaeus , detail from the Vatican fresco The School of Athens The primary concept is the Theory of Forms . The only true being is founded upon the forms, the eternal, unchangeable, perfect types, of which particular objects of moral and responsible sense are imperfect copies. The multitude of objects of sense, being involved in perpetual change, are thereby deprived of all genuine existence.

[ 6 ] The number of the forms is defined by the number of universal concepts which can be derived from the particular objects of sense.

[ 6 ] The following excerpt may be representative of Plato's middle period metaphysics and epistemology: [Socrates:] "Since the beautiful is opposite of the ugly, they are two." [Glaucon:] "Of course." "And since they are two, each is one?" "I grant that also." "And the same account is true of the just and unjust, the good and the bad, and all the forms. Each of them is itself one, but because they manifest themselves everywhere in association with actions, bodies, and one another, each of them appears to be many." "That's right." "So, I draw this distinction: On one side are those you just now called lovers of sights, lovers of crafts, and practical people; on the other side are those we are now arguing about and whom one would alone call philosophers." "How do you mean?" "The lovers of sights and sounds like beautiful sounds, colors, shapes, and everything fashioned out of them, but their thought is unable to see and embrace the nature of the beautiful itself." "That's for sure." "In fact, there are very few people who would be able to reach the beautiful itself and see it by itself. Isn't that so?" "Certainly." "What about someone who believes in beautiful things, but doesn't believe in the beautiful itself and isn't able to follow anyone who could lead him to the knowledge of it? Don't you think he is living in a dream rather than a wakened state? Isn't this dreaming: whether asleep or awake, to think that a likeness is not a likeness but rather the thing itself that it is like?" "I certainly think that someone who does that is dreaming." "But someone who, to take the opposite case, believes in the beautiful itself, can see both it and the things that participate in it and doesn't believe that the participants are it or that it itself is the participants—is he living in a dream or is he awake?

"He's very much awake." ( Republic Bk. V, 475e-476d, translation G. M. A. Grube) Book VI of the Republic identifies the highest form as the Form of the Good , the cause of all other Ideas , and that on which the being and knowing of all other Forms is contingent. Conceptions derived from the impressions of sense can never give us the knowledge of true being, i.e., of the forms.

[ 6 ] It can only be obtained by the soul 's activity within itself, apart from the troubles and disturbances of sense; that is to say, by the exercise of reason .

[ 6 ] Dialectic , as the instrument in this process, leading us to knowledge of the forms, and finally to the highest form of the Good, is the first of sciences.

[ 6 ] Later Neoplatonism , beginning with Plotinus , identified the Good of the Republic with the transcendent , absolute One [ 7 ] of the first hypothesis of the Parmenides (137c-142a).

Platonist ethics is based on the Form of the Good .

Virtue is knowledge , the recognition of the supreme form of the good.

[ 6 ] And, since in this cognition , the three parts of the soul, which are reason, spirit, and appetite, all have their share, we get the three virtues, Wisdom, Courage, and Moderation.

[ 6 ] The bond which unites the other virtues is the virtue of Justice, by which each part of the soul is confined to the performance of its proper function.

[ 6 ] Platonism had a profound effect on Western thought . In many interpretations of the Timaeus Platonism, [ 8 ] like Aristotelianism , poses an eternal universe , as opposed to the nearby Judaic tradition that the universe had been created in historical time, with its continuous history recorded. Unlike Aristotelianism, Platonism describes idea as prior to matter and identifies the person with the soul . Many Platonic notions secured a permanent place in Christianity.

[ 9 ] At the heart of Plato's philosophy is the theory of the soul. Francis Cornford described the twin pillars of Platonism as being the theory of the Forms, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the doctrine of the immortality of the soul.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] Ancient philosophy [ edit ] The Academy [ edit ] Main article: Platonic Academy Site of Plato's Academy in Athens Platonism was originally expressed in the dialogues of Plato , in which the figure of Socrates is used to expound certain doctrines, that may or may not be similar to the thought of the historical Socrates , Plato's master. Plato delivered his lectures at the Platonic Academy, a precinct containing a sacred grove outside the walls of Athens . The school continued there long after Plato's death. There were three periods: the Old, Middle, and New Academy. The chief figures in the Old Academy were Speusippus (Plato's nephew), who succeeded him as the head of the school (until 339 BC), and Xenocrates (until 313 BC). Both of them sought to fuse Pythagorean speculations on number with Plato's theory of forms.

The Skeptical Academy [ edit ] Main article: Academic skepticism Around 266 BC, Arcesilaus became head of the academy. This phase, known as the Middle Academy , strongly emphasized philosophical skepticism . It was characterized by its attacks on the Stoics and their assertion of the certainty of truth and our knowledge of it . The New Academy began with Carneades in 155 BC, the fourth head in succession from Arcesilaus . It was still largely skeptical, denying the possibility of knowing an absolute truth ; both Arcesilaus and Carneades argued that they were maintaining a genuine tenet of Plato .

Middle Platonism [ edit ] Main article: Middle Platonism Around 90 BC, Antiochus of Ascalon rejected skepticism, making way for the period known as Middle Platonism , in which Platonism was fused with certain Peripatetic and many Stoic dogmas . In Middle Platonism, the Platonic Forms were not transcendent but immanent to rational minds, and the physical world was a living, ensouled being, the World-Soul . Pre-eminence in this period belongs to Plutarch . The eclectic nature of Platonism during this time is shown by its incorporation into Pythagoreanism ( Numenius of Apamea ) and into Jewish philosophy [ 11 ] ( Philo of Alexandria ).

Neoplatonism [ edit ] Main article: Neoplatonism Many Western churchmen, including Augustine of Hippo , have been influenced by Platonism.

In the third century, Plotinus recast Plato's system, establishing Neoplatonism , in which Middle Platonism was fused with mysticism . At the summit of existence stands the One or the Good, as the source of all things.

[ 12 ] It generates from itself, as if from the reflection of its own being, reason, the nous , wherein is contained the infinite store of ideas.

[ 12 ] The world-soul , the copy of the nous , is generated by and contained in it, as the nous is in the One, and, by informing matter in itself nonexistent, constitutes bodies whose existence is contained in the world-soul.

[ 12 ] Nature therefore is a whole, endowed with life and soul. Soul, being chained to matter, longs to escape from the bondage of the body and return to its original source.

[ 12 ] In virtue and philosophical thought it has the power to elevate itself above the reason into a state of ecstasy, where it can behold, or ascend to, that one good primary Being whom reason cannot know.

[ 12 ] To attain this union with the Good, or the One is the true function of human beings.

[ 12 ] Plotinus' disciple, Porphyry , followed by Iamblichus , developed the system in conscious opposition to Christianity —even as many influential early Christian writers took inspiration from it in their conceptions of monotheistic theology. The Platonic Academy was re-established during this period; its most renowned head was Proclus (died 485), a celebrated commentator on Plato's writings. The academy persisted until Roman emperor Justinian closed it in 529.

Medieval philosophy [ edit ] Christianity and Platonism [ edit ] Main article: Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism has had some influence on Christianity through Clement of Alexandria and Origen , [ 9 ] and the Cappadocian Fathers .

[ 13 ] St. Augustine was heavily influenced by Platonism as well, which he encountered through the Latin translations of Marius Victorinus of the works of Porphyry and/or Plotinus .

[ 9 ] Platonism was considered authoritative in the Middle Ages .

[ 9 ] Platonism also influenced both Eastern and Western mysticism .

[ 9 ] [ 14 ] Meanwhile, Platonism influenced various philosophers.

[ 9 ] While Aristotle became more influential than Plato in the 13th century, St. Thomas Aquinas 's philosophy was still in certain respects fundamentally Platonic.

[ 9 ] Modern philosophy [ edit ] Renaissance [ edit ] The Renaissance also saw a renewed interest in Platonic thought, including more interest in Plato himself.

[ 9 ] In 16th-, 17th-, and 19th-century England , Plato's ideas influenced many religious thinkers including the Cambridge Platonists .

[ 9 ] Orthodox Protestantism in continental Europe , however, distrusts natural reason and has often been critical of Platonism.

[ 9 ] An issue in the reception of Plato in early modern Europe was how to deal with the same-sex elements of his corpus.

[ 15 ] Christoplatonism is a term used to refer to a dualism opined by Plato, which holds spirit is good but matter is evil, [ 16 ] which influenced some Christian churches , though the Bible's teaching directly contradicts this philosophy and thus it receives constant criticism from many teachers in the Christian Church today. According to the Methodist Church , Christoplatonism directly "contradicts the Biblical record of God calling everything He created good." [ 16 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] Modern Platonism [ edit ] See also: Mathematical Platonism , Abstractionist Platonism , Abstract structuralism , and Platonized naturalism Apart from historical Platonism originating from thinkers such as Plato and Plotinus, we also encounter the theory of abstract objects in the modern sense.

Platonism is the view that there exist such things as abstract objects — where an abstract object is an object that does not exist in space or time and which is therefore entirely non-physical and non-mental. Platonism in this sense is a contemporary view.

[ 17 ] Most contemporary Platonists trace their views to those of Gottlob Frege .

This modern Platonism has been endorsed in one way or another at one time or another by numerous philosophers, such as Bernard Bolzano , who argue for anti- psychologism . Plato's works have been decisively influential for 20th century philosophers such as Alfred North Whitehead and his Process Philosophy ; and for the critical realism and metaphysics of Nicolai Hartmann .

Analytic [ edit ] In contemporary philosophy, most Platonists trace their ideas to Gottlob Frege 's influential paper "Thought", which argues for Platonism with respect to propositions, and his influential book, The Foundations of Arithmetic , which argues for Platonism with respect to numbers and is a seminal text of the logicist project.

[ 17 ] Contemporary analytic philosophers who espoused Platonism in metaphysics include Bertrand Russell , [ 17 ] Alonzo Church , [ 17 ] Kurt Gödel , [ 17 ] W. V. O. Quine , [ 17 ] David Kaplan , [ 17 ] Saul Kripke , [ 17 ] Edward Zalta [ 18 ] and Peter van Inwagen .

[ 19 ] Iris Murdoch espoused Platonism in moral philosophy in her 1970 book The Sovereignty of Good .

Paul Benacerraf 's epistemological challenge to contemporary Platonism has proved its most influential criticism.

Continental [ edit ] In contemporary Continental philosophy , Edmund Husserl 's arguments against psychologism are believed to derive from a Platonist conception of logic, influenced by Frege and his mentor Bolzano.

[ 20 ] —Husserl explicitly mentioned Bolzano, G. W. Leibniz and Hermann Lotze as inspirations for his position in his Logical Investigations (1900–1). Other prominent contemporary Continental philosophers interested in Platonism in a general sense include Leo Strauss , [ 21 ] Simone Weil , [ 22 ] and Alain Badiou .

[ 23 ] Influence on religions [ edit ] Platonism has not only influenced the tenets of Christianity [ 24 ] and Islam that are today classified as 'orthodox' teachings, but also the gnostic or esoteric 'heterodox' traditions of these religions that circulated in the ancient world, such as the former major world religion Manichaeism , [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Mandaeism , [ 27 ] and Hermeticism . Through European Renaissance scholarship on Hermeticism and direct Platonic philosophy (among other esoteric and philosophical scholarship of the time, such as Jewish magic and mysticism and Islamic alchemy ), the magic and alchemy of the period represents a culmination of several permutations of Platonic philosophy.

Julius Evola incorporated Platonic metaphysics into his vision of Roman pagan revival , aligning with his Traditionalist critique of modernity.

Arturo Reghini , an Italian esotericist and collaborator of Evola, also promoted Neoplatonic ideas in his efforts to revive ancient Roman religion .

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Innatism List of ancient Platonists Plato's unwritten doctrines , debates over Plato's esotericism Neoplatonism and Christianity Alchemy Hermeticism Marsilio Ficino Giovanni Pico della Mirandolla World Soul People [ edit ] Harold F. Cherniss , scholar of Plato's relation to Aristotle References [ edit ] ^ a b " Philosophers who affirm the existence of abstract objects are sometimes called platonists; those who deny their existence are sometimes called nominalists. The terms "platonism" and "nominalism" have established senses in the history of philosophy, where they denote positions that have little to do with the modern notion of an abstract object. In this connection, it is essential to bear in mind that modern platonists (with a small 'p') need not accept any of the doctrines of Plato, just as modern nominalists need not accept the doctrines of medieval Nominalists ." "Abstract Objects" Archived 2013-12-02 at the Wayback Machine , Gideon Rosen, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

^ Rosen, Gideon (2012), "Abstract Objects" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2012 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-09-29 ^ O'Connell SJ , RJ, The Enneads and St Augustine's Vision of Happiness . Vigiliae Christianae 17 (1963) 129–164 (JSTOR) ^ Pelikan, Jaroslav.

The Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine .

Vol 1 : The Emergence of the Catholic Tradition 100–600; Pelikan, Jaroslav.

The Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine .

Vol 3 : The Growth of Mediaeval Theology 600–1300 , section, "The Augustinian Synthesis".

^ The G. K. Chesterton Collection II [65 Books] . Catholic Way Publishing. 2014.

ISBN 9781783792108 .

Plato in some sense anticipated the Catholic realism, as attacked by the heretical nominalism, by insisting on the equally fundamental fact that ideas are realities; that ideas exist just as men exist.

G. K. Chesterton (2012).

St. Thomas Aquinas . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 9780486122267 .

The truth is that the historical Catholic Church began by being Platonist; by being rather too Platonist.

Peter Stanford (2010).

Catholicism: An Introduction: A comprehensive guide to the history, beliefs and practices of the Catholic faith . Hachette UK.

ISBN 9781444131031 .

Both Aristotle and Plato were crucial in shaping Catholic thinking Bob Gillespie (2009).

Machiavelli and the Mayflower: How to Understand the Europeans . La Rémige SARL. p. 14.

ISBN 9782953386707 .

Roman Church doctrine is founded on many platforms, such as Plato's concept of the soul and of life after death Between Past and Future . Penguin. 2006.

ISBN 9781101662656 .

To the extent that the Catholic Church incorporated Greek philosophy into the structure of its doctrines and dogmatic beliefs ^ a b c d e f g h Oskar Seyffert, (1894), Dictionary of Classical Antiquities , p. 481 ^ Brenk, Frederick (January 2016).

"Pagan Monotheism and Pagan Cult" .

"Theism" and Related Categories in the Study of Ancient Religions . SCS/AIA Annual Meeting. Vol. 75.

Philadelphia : Society for Classical Studies ( University of Pennsylvania ).

Archived from the original on 6 May 2017 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

Historical authors generally refer to "the divine" ( to theion ) or "the supernatural" ( to daimonion ) rather than simply "God." [...] The Stoics , believed in a God identifiable with the logos or hegemonikon (reason or leading principle) of the universe and downgraded the traditional gods , who even disappear during the conflagration ( ekpyrosis ). Yet, the Stoics apparently did not practice a cult to this God.

Middle and Later Platonists , who spoke of a supreme God, in philosophical discourse, generally speak of this God, not the gods, as responsible for the creation and providence of the universe. They, too, however, do not seem to have directly practiced a religious cult to their God.

^ cf. Proclus' commentary on the Timaeus ; Cornford 1937 ^ a b c d e f g h i j "Platonism." Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 ^ Cornford, Francis (1941).

The Republic of Plato . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. xxv.

^ "Platonism – Medieval Platonism" .

Archived from the original on 2020-07-21 . Retrieved 2020-04-22 .

^ a b c d e f Oskar Seyffert, (1894), Dictionary of Classical Antiquities , page 484 ^ Armstrong, A. H., ed., The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge, 1970.

^ Louth, Andrew. The Origins of the Christian Mystical Tradition: From Plato to Denys. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983.

^ Reeser, Todd W. 2016. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ a b Robin Russell (6 April 2009).

"Heavenly minded: It's time to get our eschatology right, say scholars, authors" . UM Portal. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 March 2011 .

Greek philosophers—who believed that spirit is good but matter is evil—also influenced the church, says Randy Alcorn , author of Heaven (Tyndale, 2004). He coined the term "Christoplatonism" to describe that kind of dualism, which directly contradicts God's biblical record calling everything he created "good." ^ a b c d e f g h Balaguer, Mark (2016), "Platonism in Metaphysics" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 2022-06-18 , retrieved 2022-07-10 .

^ Linsky, B., and Zalta, E.

, 1995, "Naturalized Platonism vs. Platonized Naturalism", The Journal of Philosophy , 92 (10): 525–555.

^ Van Inwagen, Peter (2009). "God and Other Uncreated Things", in Kevin Timpe & Eleonore Stump (eds.), Metaphysics and God: Essays in Honor of Eleonore Stump. Routledge.

^ Alfred Schramm, Meinongian Issues in Contemporary Italian Philosophy , Walter de Gruyter, 2009, p. 28.

^ Peter Graf Kielmansegg, Horst Mewes, Elisabeth Glaser-Schmidt (eds.), Hannah Arendt and Leo Strauss: German Émigrés and American Political Thought After World War II , Cambridge University Press, 1997, p. 97: "Many commentators think that [Strauss's] exposition of the true Platonist was meant as a self-description of Strauss." ^ Doering, E. Jane, and Eric O. Springsted, eds. (2004) The Christian Platonism of Simone Weil . University of Notre Dame Press. p. 29.

^ Sean Bowden, Badiou and Philosophy , Edinburgh University Press, 2012, p. 63.

^ Hampton, Alexander J. B.; Kenney, John Peter, eds. (2021).

Christian Platonism: a history . Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-108-49198-3 .

^ Corrigan, Kevin; Rasimus, Tuomas (2013).

Gnosticism, Platonism and the late ancient world: essays in honour of John D. Turner . Nag Hammadi and Manichaean studies. Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-22383-7 .

^ Dardagan, Amer (2017-05-13).

"Neoplatonism, The Response on Gnostic and Manichean ctiticism of Platonism" .

doi : 10.31235/osf.io/krj2n . Retrieved 2024-06-04 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Nasoraia, Brikha H. S. (2021). Trompf, Garry (ed.).

The Mandaean gnostic religion: worship practice and deep thought . Studies in world religions. New Delhi: Sterling.

ISBN 978-81-950824-1-4 .

^ Giudice, Christian.

Occult Imperium: Arturo Reghini, Roman Traditionalism, and the Anti-Modern Reaction in Fascist Italy . Oxford University Press, 2022. ISBN 978-0197610244.

Further reading [ edit ] Ackermann, C.

The Christian Element in Plato and the Platonic philosophy.

Translated by Asbury Samuel Ralph. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1861.

Cassirer, Ernst.

The Platonic Renaissance in England . Translated by James P. Pettegrove. Edinburgh: Nelson, 1953.

Dorter, Kenneth. 1982.

Plato's Phaedo: An Interpretation . Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press Crombie, Ian 1962.

An Examination of Plato's Doctrines , vol. 1. London: Routledge.

Frede, Dorothea. 1978. "The Final Proof of the Immortality of the Soul in Plato's Phaedo 102a–107a".

Phronesis , 23.1: 27–41.

Kristeller, Paul Oskar, "Renaissance Platonism." In Renaissance Thought: the Classic, Scholastic, and Humanistic Strains . New York: Harper, 1961.

Walker, Daniel Pickering.

The Ancient Theology: Studies in Christian Platonism from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century . London: Duckworth, 1972.

External links [ edit ] Christian Platonism and Christian Neoplatonism Islamic Platonists and Neoplatonists v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐qcdg4
Cached time: 20250817112431
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.846 seconds
Real time usage: 1.054 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3011/1000000
Revision size: 31358/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 251317/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1202/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 127980/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.476/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7785351/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  751.173      1 -total
 33.59%  252.348      1 Template:Reflist
 26.83%  201.517     26 Template:Navbox
 15.88%  119.292      1 Template:Platonism
 14.55%  109.324      2 Template:Citation
 11.10%   83.347     10 Template:Cite_book
 11.09%   83.306      1 Template:Short_description
  8.44%   63.378      1 Template:Greek_schools_of_philosophy
  6.00%   45.091      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.52%   41.457      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2221011:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817112431 and revision id 1303470141. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Platonism&oldid=1303470141 " Categories : Platonism Classical theism Philosophical schools and traditions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 05:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Platonism 62 languages Add topic

