Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 WMO sea state code 2 Sea states in marine engineering 3 See also 4 Citations 5 General and cited references Toggle the table of contents Sea state 16 languages العربية Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Bahasa Indonesia Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia General condition of the free surface on a large body of water "State of the sea" redirects here. For the Venetian Empire, see Stato da Màr .

NOAA ship Delaware II in foul weather on Georges Bank .

Sea State 5 and 8 range In oceanography , sea state is the general condition of the free surface on a large body of water—with respect to wind waves and swell —at a certain location and moment. A sea state is characterized by statistics , including the wave height , period , and spectrum . The sea state varies with time, as the wind and swell conditions change. The sea state can be assessed either by an experienced observer (like a trained mariner) or by using instruments like weather buoys , wave radar or remote sensing satellites .

[ 1 ] The short-term statistics describing the sea state are determined for a time interval in which the sea state is considered to be constant. This duration has to be much longer than the individual wave period, but shorter than the period in which the wind and swell conditions can be expected to vary significantly. Typically, the sea state is assumed to be constant for 15-30 minutes.

[ 1 ] The large number of variables involved in creating and describing the sea state cannot be quickly and easily summarized, so simpler scales are used to give an approximate but concise description of conditions for reporting in a ship's log or similar record.

WMO sea state code [ edit ] Winter, North Atlantic – Water over deck and hatches, storm with huge waves (1958) The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) sea state code largely adopts the 'wind sea' definition of the Douglas Sea Scale .

graphic of WMO sea state codes, descriptions, and wave heights in meters WMO Sea State Code Wave height Characteristics 0 0 metres (0 ft) Calm (glassy) 1 0 to 0.1 metres (0.0 to 3.9 in) Calm (rippled) 2 0.1 to 0.5 metres (3.9 in to 1 ft 7.7 in) Smooth (wavelets) 3 0.5 to 1.25 metres (1 ft 8 in to 4 ft 1 in) Slight 4 1.25 to 2.5 metres (4 ft 1 in to 8 ft 2 in) Moderate 5 2.5 to 4 metres (8 ft 2 in to 13 ft 1 in) Rough 6 4 to 6 metres (13 to 20 ft) Very rough 7 6 to 9 metres (20 to 30 ft) High 8 9 to 14 metres (30 to 46 ft) Very high 9 Over 14 metres (46 ft) Phenomenal Character of the sea swell 0. None Low 1. Short or average 2. Long Moderate 3. Short 4. Average 5. Long High 6. Short 7. Average 8. Long 9. Confused The direction from which the swell is coming should be recorded.

Sea states in marine engineering [ edit ] In engineering applications, sea states are often characterized by the following two parameters: The significant wave height H 1/3 — the mean wave height of the highest third of the waves.

[ 2 ] The mean wave period , T 1 .

In addition to the short-term wave statistics presented above, long-term sea state statistics are often given as a joint frequency table of the significant wave height and the mean wave period. From the long and short-term statistical distributions, it is possible to find the extreme values expected over a given number of years by fitting an extreme value distribution.

[ 3 ] The extreme value distribution can then inform an engineer about the most extreme significant wave height to be expected during a lifetime of a ship or offshore structure. Using the response amplitude operators of the ship, the engineer can then use the extremes in significant wave height and wave period to calculate the most extreme loads that the ship should be able to withstand. Withstanding significant wave heights that happen on average once in 100 years or once in 1000 years is a common demand for design of ships and offshore structures.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Beaufort scale Cross sea Douglas sea scale Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Holthuijsen, Leo H. (2007).

Waves in oceanic and coastal waters . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-511-27021-5 .

^ Munk, W.H. (1944).

Proposed uniform procedure for observing waves and interpreting instrument records . La Jolla, California: Wave Project at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography .

^ Aarnes, Ole Johan; Breivik, Øyvind; Reistad, Magnar (2012).

"Wave Extremes in the Northeast Atlantic" .

Journal of Climate .

25 (5): 1529– 1543.

doi : 10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00132.1 .

hdl : 1956/9253 .

ISSN 0894-8755 .

^ Jonathan, Philip; Ewans, Kevin (2013).

"Statistical modelling of extreme ocean environments for marine design: A review" .

Ocean Engineering .

62 : 91– 109.

doi : 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2013.01.004 .

General and cited references [ edit ] Bowditch, Nathaniel (1938), American Practical Navigator , H.O. publication No. 9 (revised ed.), United States Hydrographic Office, OCLC 31033357 Faltinsen, O. M. (1990), Sea Loads on Ships and Offshore Structures , [Cambridge University Press], ISBN 0-521-45870-6 v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sea_state&oldid=1298930646 " Categories : Marine meteorology Meteorological phenomena Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 16:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sea state 16 languages Add topic

