Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Cuban Revolution 1.2 Documenting the Cuban Revolution 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Rural guerrilla strategy 2.2 Guerrilla "new man" 3 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 3.1 Authoritarian reaction 3.2 Argentina's People's Revolutionary Army 4 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 4.1 Urban guerilla strategists 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Foco 17 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Shqip Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of revolution by way of guerrilla warfare Raúl Castro (left) and Che Guevara (right) in their Sierra de Cristal Mountain stronghold south of Havana , in 1958. It was during this time as a guerrilla commander in the Cuban Revolution , that Guevara would base his theory of a foco-centered revolution.

This article is part of a series about Che Guevara Personal Bibliography The Motorcycle Diaries Guerrilla Warfare Episodes of the Cuban Revolutionary War Cuban Revolution Landing of the Granma Battle of Alegría de Pío Battle of La Plata Battle of Santa Clara Political career La Coubre explosion Guanahacabibes camp Bay of Pigs Invasion Four Year Plan Cuban Missile Crisis Great Debate Ñancahuazú Guerrilla Legacy In fashion In popular culture Guevarism Foco Guerrillerismo Guerrillero Heroico Mausoleum Route of Che v t e A guerrilla foco is a small cadre of revolutionaries operating in a nation's countryside. This guerrilla organization was popularized by Che Guevara in his book Guerrilla Warfare , which was based on his experiences in the Cuban Revolution . Guevara would go on to argue that a foco was politically necessary for the success of a socialist revolution . Originally Guevara theorized that a foco was only useful in overthrowing personalistic military dictatorships and not liberal democratic capitalism where a peaceful overthrow was believed possible. Years later, Guevara would revise his thesis and argue all nations in Latin America , including liberal democracies, could be overthrown by a guerrilla foco. Eventually the foco thesis would be that political conditions would not even need to be ripe for revolutions to be successful, since the sheer existence of a guerrilla foco would create ripe conditions by itself. Guevara's theory of foco, known as foquismo ( Spanish: [foˈkizmo] ), was self-described as the application of Marxism-Leninism to Latin American conditions, and would later be further popularized by author Régis Debray . The proposed necessity of a guerrilla foco proved influential in Latin America, but was also heavily criticized by other socialists.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This theory of foco proved heavily influential among armed militants around the world. Che Guevara's success in the Cuban Revolution was seen as proof of his thesis and thus popularized foco theory. Some of the famous militant groups to adopt foco theory included the Red Army Faction , Irish Republican Army , and Weather Underground . The theory became especially popular in the New Left for its breaking with the strategy of incremental political change supported by the Soviet Union , while also encouraging the possibility of immediate revolution.

[ 3 ] Background [ edit ] Cuban Revolution [ edit ] Main article: Cuban Revolution Fidel Castro and his small band of rebels in 1956. This small rebel army would eventually win the Cuban Revolution .

Foco theory was originally based on Che Guevara's experiences in the Cuban Revolution, in which he was party of a guerrilla army of 82 members who landed in Cuba on board of the Granma in December 1956 and initiated a guerrilla war in the Sierra Maestra . During two years, the poorly armed escopeteros , at times fewer than 200 men, won victories against Fulgencio Batista 's army and police force, which numbered between 30,000 and 40,000 in strength.

[ 4 ] The 26th of July Movement (M-26-7) itself had a rural guerrilla army as well as an urban underground that participated in the revolution. Che Guevara often accused the urban section of the movement as being without proper radicalism, which stirred internal controversy.

[ 5 ] The urban wing was responsible for arming the rural guerrillas and engaged in its own urban warfare campaign. During the final months of the revolution an alliance of the Revolutionary Directorate of 13 March Movement , Popular Socialist Party , Authentic Party and 26th of July Movement was able to overthrow the Batista government. In their new provisional government the M-26-7 rebel army garnered the most popularity and influence.

[ 6 ] Documenting the Cuban Revolution [ edit ] Che Guevara played an integral role as one of the first historians of the Cuban Revolution. After the revolutionaries' victory, Guevara published various articles in Cuba of his experiences in the revolution. These articles helped formalize his foco theory and a history of the Cuban Revolution that stressed the role of the rural guerrillas as the main revolutionary force.

[ 5 ] This idea of the lone rural guerrillas deciding the revolution became immediately popular among the rebel army while consolidating their new government, and became a driving force in Cuban politics as a nation-building myth. Many early proponents saw the potential of repeating the model of the Cuban Revolution throughout Latin America, and often encouraged it.

[ 7 ] Theory [ edit ] Rural guerrilla strategy [ edit ] While foco theory drew from previous Marxist–Leninist ideas and the Maoist strategy of " protracted people's war ", it simultaneously broke with many of the mid- Cold War era's established communist parties . Despite Nikita Khrushchev 's eager support for " wars of national liberation " and the foco's own enthusiasm for Soviet Union patronage , Cuba 's own Popular Socialist Party had retreated from active confrontation with the Fulgencio Batista regime and Castroism / Guevarism substituted the foco militia for the more traditional vanguard party .

Like other communist and socialist theorists of his era (such as Mao Zedong and Ho Chi Minh ), Che Guevara believed that people living in countries still ruled by colonial powers , or living in countries subject to newer forms of economic exploitation , could best defeat colonial powers by taking up arms. Guevara also believed in fostering armed resistance not by concentrating one's forces in urban centers but rather through the accumulation of strength in mountainous and rural regions where the enemy had less presence.

[ 8 ] In Guerrilla Warfare ( La Guerra de Guerrillas ), Guevara did not count on a Leninist insurrection led by the proletariat , as had happened during the 1917 October Revolution , but on popular uprisings which would gain strength in rural areas and would overthrow the regime. The vanguard guerrilla was supposed to bolster the population's morale , not to take control of the state apparatus itself and this overthrow would occur without any external or foreign help. According to him, guerrillas were to be supported by conventional armed forces : It is well established that guerrilla warfare constitutes one of the phases of war; this phase can not, on its own, lead to victory.

[ 9 ] Guevara added that this theory was formulated for developing countries and that the guerrilleros had to look for support among both the workers and the peasants .

[ 10 ] Guerrilla "new man" [ edit ] The guerrilla foco will be able to draw the support of the rural peasantry by demonstrating impeccable moral character and self-sacrifice. In the armed struggle the guerrillas themselves would be shaped by hardship into individuals who had an affinity for solidarity and justice. Once the guerrillas overthrow the existing government and come into power, the moral spirit of the guerrillas would become the national ethos of the new government.

[ 11 ] Legacy [ edit ] Authoritarian reaction [ edit ] Many who opposed the formation of leftist guerrillas took a focused approach to extinguish rural rebel groups from forming who were inspired by foquismo. These measures were often supported by the United States and involved torturing and enforced disappearance of political enemies.

[ 12 ] The development of guerrilla focos in various Latin American countries has been a factor proposed by historians in legitimizing military takeovers of their respective nations in order to defend against guerrillas.

[ 13 ] Argentina's People's Revolutionary Army [ edit ] In Argentina , the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP), led by Roberto Santucho , attempted to create a foco in the Tucumán Province . The attempt failed after the government of Isabel Perón signed in February 1975 the secret presidential decree 261, which ordered the army to neutralize and/or annihilate the ERP. Destined to collapse without any external pressure, ERP was not supported by a foreign power and lacked support of the working class.

Operativo Independencia gave power to the Argentine Armed Forces to "execute all military operations necessary for the effects of neutralizing or annihilating the action of subversive elements acting in the Province of Tucumán." [ 14 ] Criticism [ edit ] Urban guerilla strategists [ edit ] See also: Abraham Guillén and Tupamaros Abraham Guillén was a writer who frequently made studies of urban warfare in European revolutions and a noted critic of foco theory. While he agreed with Guevara in their shared criticism of American imperialism , Guillén argued that the foco strategy was unideal compared to a strategy of urban warfare. Guillén regarded the foco as petit-bourgeois in origin. He regarded that very few peasants and workers actually joined these guerilla armies. He also argued that these rural guerillas only supplied for easy victories by the reigning state power who could easily defeat isolated rebels in the countryside who lacked connections to military resources. Guillén instead argued revolution was possible during dire political crisis, with a mass workers alliance, and taking place in urban centers where most modernized nations populations resided.

[ 15 ] The Tupamaros guerillas of Uruguay are also noted critics of foco theory. While the Tupamaros agreed with much of Guevara's theory of revolution, they argued that the rural theatre was inefficient for a rebel army. The urban setting houses a greater population which means more sympathizers to rely on. A rural setting is also open to military attack while a city is more populated and delicate which discourages open combat by the state.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] National Liberation Army (Bolivia) Araguaia Guerrilla War (Brazil) Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia National Liberation Army (Colombia) Oriental Revolutionary Movement (Uruguay) Paraguayan People's Army Fidel Castro Wars of national liberation Notes [ edit ] ^ Guevara, Che (1997).

Guerrilla Warfare . SR Books. pp.

9– 17.

ISBN 9780842026789 .

^ Women and Revolution Global Expressions . Springer Netherlands. 1998. p. 286.

ISBN 9780792351825 .

^ Katsiaficas, George (1987).

The Imagination of the New Left: A Global Analysis of 1968 . South End Press. pp.

35– 37.

ISBN 9780896082274 .

^ "Bockman" , Chapter 2.

^ a b Sweig, Julia (2009).

Inside the Cuban Revolution . Harvard University Press. pp.

1– 5.

ISBN 9780674044197 .

^ Kapcia, Antoni (2020).

A Short History of Revolutionary Cuba Revolution, Power, Authority and the State from 1959 to the Present Day . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

15– 20.

ISBN 9781786736475 .

^ Swing, Julia (2009).

Cuba: What Everyone Needs to Know . Oxford University Press, USA. p. 104.

ISBN 9780199740819 .

^ "The Legacy of Che Guevara: Internationalism Today" by Dr. Peter Custers, Sri Lanka Guardian , 24 February 2010.

^ Ernesto Che Guevara French ed.: Oeuvres I, Petite collection Maspero , 34, 1968, p. 32.

^ Guevara, Che. Guerrilla War: A Method .

^ Bustos, Ciro (2013).

Che Wants to See You: The Untold Story of Che Guevara . Verso.

ISBN 9781781684801 .

^ Doctrine, Practice, and Advocacy in the Inter-American Human Rights System . Oxford University Press. 2019. p. 230.

ISBN 9780190900861 .

^ Fowler, Will (2013).

Latin America Since 1780 . Taylor and Francis. p. 139.

ISBN 9781134631759 .

^ Decree No. 261/75 .

Archived 15 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine . NuncaMas.org, Decretos de aniquilamiento .

^ a b Wright, Thomas (2018).

Latin America in the Era of the Cuban Revolution and Beyond, 3rd Edition . ABC-CLIO. pp.

102– 105.

ISBN 9781440857683 .

References [ edit ] Guevara, Ernesto: Guerrilla Warfare , Souvenir Press Ltd, paperback, ISBN 978-0-285-63680-4 .

External links [ edit ] The strength of an idea Revolution in the Revolution.

Che Guevara's "Guerrilla Warfare" [ permanent dead link ] FROM CUBA TO BOLIVIA:GUEVARA’S FOCO THEORY IN PRACTICE - University of Calgary The Functionality of the Foco Theory v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal v t e Revolutionary socialism Concepts Class conflict Communist revolution Communization Foco Impossibilism People's war Permanent revolution Platformism Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Revolutionary base area Revolutionary terror Situationist prank Social revolution United front Vanguardism World revolution Tendencies Blanquism De Leonism Insurrectionary anarchism Mao-spontex Syndicalism Groups The Invisible Committee Situationist International People Mikhail Bakunin Louis Auguste Blanqui Daniel De Leon Régis Debray Friedrich Engels Che Guevara Abimael Guzmán Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Vladimir Lenin Karl Liebknecht Rosa Luxemburg Mao Zedong Karl Marx Thomas Sankara Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Related topics Anarchist communism Anarcho-pacifism Collectivist anarchism General strike Popular front Radical feminism Reformism Refusal of work Socialism portal v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Che Guevara Events Guatemalan Coup Cuban Revolution Landing of the Granma Battle of Alegría de Pío Battle of La Plata (1957) Battle of Santa Clara Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution La Coubre explosion Guanahacabibes camp Bay of Pigs Invasion Four Year Plan (Cuba) Cuban Missile Crisis Great Debate (Cuba) Congo Crisis Bolivian Campaign Ideas Foco Guerrillerismo New Man People Alberto Granado Hilda Gadea Aleida March Aleida Guevara Raúl Castro Fidel Castro Camilo Cienfuegos Tamara Bunke Simeon Cuba Sarabia Harry "Pombo" Villegas Régis Debray Félix Rodríguez Orlando Borrego Canek Sánchez Guevara Mario Terán Books The Motorcycle Diaries Guerrilla Warfare Episodes of the Cuban Revolutionary War Films The Motorcycle Diaries Che (Part 1 & Part 2) Che!

The Hands of Che Guevara Che: Rise and Fall Chevolution Theatre Che'r Cycle Iconography Guerrillero Heroico photo Legacy In popular culture In fashion Mausoleum Alberto Korda Jim Fitzpatrick Comics Vida del Che Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7hx25
Cached time: 20250814234009
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.599 seconds
Real time usage: 0.766 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1901/1000000
Revision size: 15356/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 114196/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4215/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 89788/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.360/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15887389/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  604.292      1 -total
 26.77%  161.743      1 Template:Reflist
 21.55%  130.213     10 Template:Cite_book
 20.26%  122.403      1 Template:Che_Guevara_series
 19.83%  119.843      1 Template:Sidebar_person
 19.08%  115.270      1 Template:IPA
 10.79%   65.203      1 Template:Short_description
  9.29%   56.129      1 Template:Marxism–Leninism
  6.38%   38.545      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.03%   24.379      4 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7973400:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234009 and revision id 1305933669. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foco&oldid=1305933669 " Categories : Che Guevara Marxism–Leninism Communist terminology Cuban Revolution Guerrilla warfare tactics Revolution terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with Spanish IPA All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 23:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foco 17 languages Add topic

