Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Statistics 2 Computer science 3 Microscopy 4 Econometrics 5 Remote sensing Toggle Remote sensing subsection 5.1 Medical imaging 5.2 Medical electrophysiological monitoring 5.3 Radar 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Artifact (error) 12 languages العربية Català Dansk Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Any error in the perception or representation of information Diffraction spikes and the Airy disk are optical artifacts caused by the diffraction of light through the aperture of an optical system.

In natural science and signal processing , an artifact or artefact [ 1 ] is any error in the perception or representation of any information introduced by the involved equipment or technique(s).

[ 2 ] Statistics [ edit ] In statistics , statistical artifacts are apparent effects that are introduced inadvertently by methods of data analysis rather than by the process being studied.

Computer science [ edit ] In computer science , digital artifacts are anomalies introduced into digital signals as a result of digital signal processing .

Microscopy [ edit ] In microscopy , visual artifacts are sometimes introduced during the processing of samples into slide form.

Econometrics [ edit ] In econometrics , which focuses on computing relationships between related variables , an artifact is a spurious finding, such as one based on either a faulty choice of variables or an over-extension of the computed relationship.  Such an artifact may be called a statistical artifact .  For instance, imagine a hypothetical finding that presidential approval rating is approximately equal to twice the percentage of citizens making more than $50,000 annually; if 60% of citizens make more than $50,000 annually, this would predict that the approval rating will be 120%.  This prediction is a statistical artifact, since it is spurious to use the model when the percentage of citizens making over $50,000 is so high, and gross error to predict an approval rating greater than 100%.

[ 3 ] Remote sensing [ edit ] Medical imaging [ edit ] Further information: MRI artifact In medical imaging , artifacts are misrepresentations of tissue structures produced by imaging techniques such as ultrasound , X-ray , CT scan , and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These artifacts may be caused by a variety of phenomena such as the underlying physics of the energy-tissue interaction as between ultrasound and air, susceptibility artifacts, data acquisition errors (such as patient motion), or a reconstruction algorithm 's inability to represent the anatomy. Physicians typically learn to recognize some of these artifacts to avoid mistaking them for actual pathology .

In ultrasound imaging, several assumptions are made from the computer system to interpret the returning echoes. These are: echoes originate only from the main ultrasound beam (while there are side lobes and grating lobes apart from the main ultrasound beam); echoes returns to transducer after a single reflection (while an echo can be reflected several times before reaching the transducer); depth of an object relates directly to the amount of time for an echo to reach the transducer (while an echo may reflect several times, delaying the time for the echo return to the transducer); speed of ultrasound in human tissue is constant, echoes travel in a straight path. and acoustic energy of an echo is uniformly attenuated. When these assumptions are not maintained, artifacts occur.

[ 4 ] Medical electrophysiological monitoring [ edit ] In medical electrophysiological monitoring, artifacts are anomalous (interfering) signals that originate from some source other than the electrophysiological structure being studied. These artifact signals may stem from, but are not limited to: light sources; monitoring equipment issues; utility frequency (50 Hz and 60 Hz); or undesired electrophysiological signals such as EMG presenting on an EEG -, EP -, ECG -, or EOG - signal. Offending artifacts may obscure, distort, or completely misrepresent the true underlying electrophysiological signal sought.

Radar [ edit ] Radar multipath echoes from a target cause ghosts to appear.

In radar signal processing , some echoes can be related to fixed objects ( clutter ), multipath returns, jamming , atmospheric effect ( brightband or attenuation ), anomalous propagation , and many other effects. All those echoes must be filtered in order to obtain the position, velocity and type of the real targets that may include aircraft, and weather.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Artifacts (errors) .

Compression artifact , in computer graphics, distortion of media by the data compression.

Digital artifact , any undesired alteration in data introduced during its digital processing Sonic artifact , in sound and music production, sonic material that is accidental or unwanted, resulting from the editing of another sound.

Visual artifact , in imaging, any unwanted visual alteration introduced by the imaging equipment.

References [ edit ] ^ "Oxford Languages | the Home of Language Data" . Archived from the original on 1 July 2017.

^ See Dictionary.com , definitions 4, 5, and 6. Accessed 2010.05.20.

^ John Scott; Gordon Marshall (2009), "statistical artefact", A Dictionary of Sociology , Oxford University Press, p. 112, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199533008.001.0001 , ISBN 9780191726842 ^ Feldman, Myra K.; Katyal, Sanjeev; Blackwood, Margaret S. (July 2009). "US Artifacts".

RadioGraphics .

29 (4): 1179– 1189.

doi : 10.1148/rg.294085199 .

ISSN 0271-5333 .

PMID 19605664 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artifact_(error)&oldid=1299148799 " Categories : Error Optical illusions Data compression Radar theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from July 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 20:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Artifact (error) 12 languages Add topic

