Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Air pollution Toggle Air pollution subsection 1.1 International disputes 1.1.1 Transboundary haze 2 Obscuration 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Haze 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) བོད་ཡིག Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dry particulates obscuring clarity of the sky "Hazy" redirects here. For other uses, see Haze (disambiguation) and Hazy (disambiguation) .

This article contains too many images for its overall length .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by removing indiscriminate collections of images or by adjusting images that are sandwiching text in accordance with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Harmattan Haze in Abuja Haze over the Mojave Desert from a brush fire in Santa Barbara, California , seen as the Sun descends on the 2016 June solstice , allows the Sun to be photographed without a filter .

Bushfire haze in Sydney , Australia Haze as smoke pollution over the Mojave from fires in the Inland Empire , June 2016, demonstrates the loss of contrast to the Sun , and the landscape in general.

Haze causing red sky, due to the scattering of light on smoke particles, also known as Rayleigh scattering during Mexico 's forest fire season Haze in Monterrey , Mexico, during grassland fires Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Haze is traditionally an atmospheric phenomenon in which dust, smoke, and other dry particulates suspended in air obscure visibility and the clarity of the sky. The World Meteorological Organization manual of codes includes a classification of particulates causing horizontal obscuration into categories of fog , ice fog , steam fog , mist , haze, smoke , volcanic ash , dust , sand , and snow .

[ 1 ] Sources for particles that cause haze include farming ( stubble burning , ploughing in dry weather), traffic, industry, windy weather, volcanic activity and wildfires .
Seen from afar (e.g. an approaching airplane) and depending on the direction of view with respect to the Sun, haze may appear brownish or bluish, while mist tends to be bluish grey instead. Whereas haze often is considered a phenomenon occurring in dry air, mist formation is a phenomenon in saturated, humid air. However, haze particles may act as condensation nuclei that leads to the subsequent vapor condensation and formation of mist droplets; such forms of haze are known as "wet haze".

In meteorological literature, the word haze is generally used to denote visibility-reducing aerosols of the wet type suspended in the atmosphere . Such aerosols commonly arise from complex chemical reactions that occur as sulfur dioxide gases emitted during combustion are converted into small droplets of sulfuric acid when exposed. The reactions are enhanced in the presence of sunlight, high relative humidity, and an absence of air flow (wind). A small component of wet-haze aerosols appear to be derived from compounds released by trees when burning, such as terpenes . For all these reasons, wet haze tends to be primarily a warm-season phenomenon. Large areas of haze covering many thousands of kilometers may be produced under extensive favorable conditions each summer.

Air pollution [ edit ] Main article: Smog Haze often occurs when suspended dust and smoke particles accumulate in relatively dry air. When weather conditions block the dispersal of smoke and other pollutants they concentrate and form a usually low-hanging shroud that impairs visibility and may become a respiratory health threat if excessively inhaled. Industrial pollution can result in dense haze, which is known as smog .

Since 1991, haze has been a particularly acute problem in Southeast Asia. The main source of the haze has been smoke from fires occurring in Sumatra and Borneo which dispersed over a wide area. In response to the 1997 Southeast Asian haze , the ASEAN countries agreed on a Regional Haze Action Plan (1997) as an attempt to reduce haze. In 2002, all ASEAN countries signed the Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution , but the pollution is still a problem there today. Under the agreement, the ASEAN secretariat hosts a co-ordination and support unit.

[ 2 ] During the 2013 Southeast Asian haze , Singapore experienced a record high pollution level, with the 3-hour Pollutant Standards Index reaching a record high of 401.

[ 3 ] In the United States, the Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments (IMPROVE) program was developed as a collaborative effort between the US EPA and the National Park Service in order to establish the chemical composition of haze in National Parks and establish air pollution control measures in order to restore the visibility of the air to pre-industrial levels.

[ 4 ] Additionally, the Clean Air Act requires that any current visibility problems be addressed and remedied, and future visibility problems be prevented, in 156 Class I Federal areas located throughout the United States.  A full list of these areas is available on EPA's website.

[ 5 ] In addition to the severe health issues caused by haze from air pollution, dust storm particles, and bush fire smoke, reduction in irradiance is the most dominant impact of these sources of haze and a growing issue for photovoltaic production as the solar industry grows.

[ 6 ] Smog also lowers agricultural yield and it has been proposed that pollution controls could increase agricultural production in China .

[ 7 ] These effects are negative for both sides of agrivoltaics (the combination of photovoltaic electricity production and food from agriculture).

International disputes [ edit ] Transboundary haze [ edit ] Haze is no longer just a confined as a domestic problem. It has become one of the causes of international disputes among neighboring countries. Haze can migrate to adjacent countries in the path of wind and thereby pollutes other countries as well, even if haze does not first manifest there. One of the most recent problems occur in Southeast Asia which largely affects the nations of Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. In 2013 , due to forest fires in Indonesia, Kuala Lumpur and surrounding areas became shrouded in a pall of noxious fumes dispersed from Indonesia, that brings a smell of ash and coal for more than a week, in the country's worst environmental crisis since 1997 .

The main sources of the haze are Indonesia's Sumatra Island, Indonesian areas of Borneo, and Riau, where farmers, plantation owners and miners have set hundreds of fires in the forests to clear land during dry weather. Winds blew most of the particulates and fumes across the narrow Strait of Malacca to Malaysia, although parts of Indonesia in the path are also affected.

[ 8 ] The 2015 Southeast Asian haze was another major crisis of air quality, although there were occasions such as the 2006 and 2019 haze which were less impactful than the three major Southeast Asian haze of 1997, 2013 and 2015.

Obscuration [ edit ] Haze causes issues in the area of terrestrial photography and imaging, where the penetration of large amounts of dense atmosphere may be necessary to image distant subjects. This results in the visual effect of a loss of contrast in the subject, due to the effect of light scattering and reflection through the haze particles . For these reasons, sunrise and sunset colors and possibly the sun itself appear subdued on hazy days, and stars may be obscured by haze at night. In some cases, attenuation by haze is so great that, toward sunset, the sun disappears altogether before even reaching the horizon.

[ 9 ] Haze can be defined as an aerial form of the Tyndall effect therefore unlike other atmospheric effects such as cloud, mist and fog , haze is spectrally selective in accordance to the electromagnetic spectrum : shorter (blue) wavelengths are scattered more, and longer (red/ infrared ) wavelengths are scattered less. For this reason, many super-telephoto lenses often incorporate yellow light filters or coatings to enhance image contrast.

[ 10 ] Infrared (IR) imaging may also be used to penetrate haze over long distances, with a combination of IR-pass optical filters and IR-sensitive detectors at the intended destination.

See also [ edit ] Arctic haze ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution Asian brown cloud Asian Dust Coefficient of haze Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution Fog Mist Saharan Air Layer Southeast Asian haze Smog Trail Smelter dispute Notes [ edit ] ^ "WMO Manual on Codes" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-12-22 . Retrieved 2017-10-19 .

^ ASEAN action hazeonline Archived 2005-02-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Singapore haze hits record high from Indonesia fires" . BBC News. 21 June 2013 . Retrieved 19 January 2014 .

^ "Improve – Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments" .

vista.cira.colostate.edu .

^ "Federal Class 1 Areas" . Archived from the original on April 12, 2006.

^ Sadat, Seyyed Ali; Hoex, Bram; Pearce, Joshua M. (2022).

"A Review of the Effects of Haze on Solar Photovoltaic Performance" .

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews .

167 : 112796.

Bibcode : 2022RSERv.16712796S .

doi : 10.1016/j.rser.2022.112796 .

S2CID 251430613 .

^ Chameides, W. L.; Yu, H.; Liu, S. C.

; Bergin, M.; Zhou, X.; Mearns, L.; Wang, G.; Kiang, C. S.; Saylor, R. D.; Luo, C.; Huang, Y.; Steiner, A.; Giorgi, F. (1999-11-23).

"Case study of the effects of atmospheric aerosols and regional haze on agriculture: An opportunity to enhance crop yields in China through emission controls?" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

96 (24): 13626– 13633.

Bibcode : 1999PNAS...9613626C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.96.24.13626 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 24115 .

PMID 10570123 .

^ "Hazardous haze shrouds Kuala Lumpur" .

NBC News . 11 August 2005.

^ Figure 1 . "The setting sun dimmed by dense haze over State College, Pennsylvania on 16 September 1992".

"Haze over the Central and Eastern United States" . The National Weather Digest. March 1996 . Retrieved April 26, 2011 .

^ "UV, Skylight and Haze Filters" .

pages.mtu.edu . Retrieved 2022-05-06 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Haze .

National Pollutant Inventory - Particulate matter fact sheet Those hazy days of summer Haze over the central and eastern United States Chemical Composition of Haze in US National Parks:  Views Visibility Database Archived 2009-12-15 at the Wayback Machine v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Asia pollution topics Air pollution Notable incidents Dust storm 2010 China dust storms Forest fires and haze 1997 SEA haze 1997 Indonesian forest fires 2005 Malaysian haze 2006 SEA haze 2009 SEA haze 2010 SEA haze 2013 SEA haze 2015 SEA haze 2016 Malaysian haze 2016 SEA haze 2017 SEA haze 2019 SEA haze 2019 Vietnam forest fires 2024 Indo-Pakistani smog Air radioactive contamination 1982 Bukit Merah radioactive pollution By countries China Hong Kong India Macau Malaysia Taiwan Recurrent issues Asian brown cloud Asian Dust Shamal Southeast Asian haze Counter-measures ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution Operation Haze Pollutant Standards Index Great Green Wall (China) Water pollution Notable incidents Water radioactive contamination 2011 Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster Marine pollution 2016 Vietnam marine life disaster 2019 Kim Kim River toxic pollution Pollution of the Pasig River By countries China Water crisis India Japan Philippines Vietnam v t e Aerosol terminology Aerosol types Bioaerosol Indoor Cloud Dust Mist Fog Fume Haze Nanoparticle Particle Particulates Smog Smoke Spray Aerosol terms Aerosol impaction Agglomerate Primary particle Flocculate Primary aerosol Secondary aerosol Deposition Dispersity Monodisperse Polydisperse Aerosol measurement Particle counters Condensation particle counter Laser particle counter Optical particle counter Particle sizers Scanning electrical mobility spectrometer Diffusion battery Inertial classifier Time-of-flight Time-of-flight mass spectrometer Time-of-flight particle sizer Cascade impactors Low pressure impactor Microorifice imapctor Andersen impactor Combination Scanning mobility particle sizer Microscopy Optical microscope Scanning electron microscope Transmission electron microscope Category Aerosol measurement Commons Aerosol measurement NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6vkqt
Cached time: 20250812023135
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.487 seconds
Real time usage: 0.625 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1670/1000000
Revision size: 12900/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 147872/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 801/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78364/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.290/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6751143/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  467.002      1 -total
 28.65%  133.804      1 Template:Reflist
 20.89%   97.549      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
 20.36%   95.099      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.23%   89.785      6 Template:Cite_web
 15.36%   71.728      9 Template:Navbox
 12.97%   60.583      1 Template:Short_description
 10.06%   47.001      1 Template:Pollution
  7.91%   36.931      1 Template:Too_many_images
  7.70%   35.963      1 Template:Commons Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:998156:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023135 and revision id 1299002267. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haze&oldid=1299002267 " Categories : Visibility Air pollution Atmospheric optical phenomena Psychrometrics Pollution Fog Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with too many photos Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haze 43 languages Add topic

