Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical use of collective consciousness 2 Theories of collective consciousness Toggle Theories of collective consciousness subsection 2.1 Durkheim 2.2 Gramsci 2.3 Zukerfield 3 Collective consciousness in society Toggle Collective consciousness in society subsection 3.1 Literary and oral tradition 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Collective consciousness 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shared beliefs and ideas in society Not to be confused with Collective unconscious or Social consciousness .

For the related philosophical term, see Higher consciousness .

For the track from the Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance soundtrack, see Music of Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Collective consciousness" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Collective consciousness , collective conscience ,  or collective conscious ( French : conscience collective ) is the set of shared beliefs, ideas, and moral attitudes which operate as a unifying force within society.

[ 1 ] In general, it does not refer to the specifically moral conscience,  but to a shared understanding of social norms.

[ 2 ] The modern concept of what can be considered collective consciousness includes solidarity attitudes, memes , extreme behaviors like group-think and herd behavior , and collectively shared experiences during collective rituals, dance parties, [ 3 ] and the discarnate entities which can be experienced from psychedelic use.

[ 4 ] Rather than existing as separate individuals, people come together as dynamic groups to share resources and knowledge. It has also developed as a way of describing how an entire community comes together to share similar values. This has also been termed " hive mind ", " group mind ", "mass mind", and "social mind".

[ 5 ] Historical use of collective consciousness [ edit ] The term was introduced by the French sociologist Émile Durkheim in his The Division of Labour in Society in 1893. The French word conscience generally means "conscience", "consciousness", "awareness", [ 6 ] or "perception".

[ 7 ] Given the multiplicity of definitions, translators of Durkheim disagree on which is most appropriate, or whether the translation should depend on the context.  Some prefer to treat the word 'conscience' as an untranslatable foreign word or technical term, without its normal English meaning.

[ 8 ] As for "collective", Durkheim makes clear that he is not reifying or hypostasizing this concept; for him, it is "collective" simply in the sense that it is common to many individuals; [ 9 ] cf.

social fact .

Scipio Sighele published ‘La Foule Criminele’ one year before Durkheim, in which he describes emergent characteristics of crowds that don’t appear in the individuals that form the crowd. He doesn’t call this collective consciousness, but ‘âme de la foule’ (soul of the crowd).

[ 10 ] This term returns in Sigmund Freud ’s book about mass psychology and essentially overlaps with Durkheims concept of collective consciousness.

Theories of collective consciousness [ edit ] Durkheim [ edit ] Durkheim used the term in his books The Division of Labour in Society (1893), The Rules of the Sociological Method (1895), Suicide (1897), and The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (1912). In The Division of Labour , Durkheim argued that in traditional/primitive societies (those based around clan, family or tribal relationships), totemic religion played an important role in uniting members through the creation of a common consciousness. In societies of this type, the contents of an individual's consciousness are largely shared in common with all other members of their society, creating a mechanical solidarity through mutual likeness.

The totality of beliefs and sentiments common to the average members of a society forms a determinate system with a life of its own. It can be termed the collective or common consciousness.

— Émile Durkheim [ 11 ] In Suicide , Durkheim developed the concept of anomie to refer to the social rather than individual causes of suicide. This relates to the concept of collective consciousness, as if there is a lack of integration or solidarity in society then suicide rates will be higher.

[ 12 ] Gramsci [ edit ] Antonio Gramsci states, “A collective consciousness, which is to say a living organism, is formed only after the unification of the multiplicity through friction on the part of the individuals; nor can one say that ‘silence’ is not a multiplicity.” [ 13 ] A form of collective consciousness can be formed from Gramsci's conception that the presence of a hegemony can mobilize the collective consciousness of those oppressed by the ruling ideas of society , or the ruling hegemony. Collective consciousness can refer to a multitude of different individual forms of consciousness coalescing into a greater whole. In Gramsci's view, a unified whole is composed of solidarity among its different constituent parts, and therefore, this whole cannot be uniformly the same. The unified whole can embrace different forms of consciousness (or individual experiences of social reality), which coexist to reflect the different experiences of the marginalized peoples in a given society. This agrees with Gramsci's theory of Marxism and class struggle applied to cultural contexts.

Cultural Marxism (as distinguished from the right-wing use of the term) embodies the concept of collective consciousness. It incorporates social movements that are based on some sort of collective identity; these identities can include, for instance, gender , sexual orientation , race , and ability , and can be incorporated by collective-based movements into a broader historical material analysis of class struggle.

According to Michelle Filippini, “The nature and workings of collective organisms – not only parties, but also trade unions, associations and intermediate bodies in general – represent a specific sphere of reflection in the Prison Notebooks, particularly in regard to the new relationship between State and society that in Gramsci's view emerged during the age of mass politics.” [ 14 ] Collective organisms can express collective consciousness. Whether this form of expression finds itself in the realm of the state or the realm of society is up to the direction that the subjects take in expressing their collective consciousness. In Gramsci's Prison Notebooks , the ongoing conflict between civil society , the bureaucracy , and the state necessitates the emergence of a collective consciousness that can often act as an intermediary between these different realms. The public organizations of protest, such as labor unions and anti-war organizations, are vehicles that can unite multiple types of collective consciousness. Although identity-based movements are necessary for the progress of democracy and can generate collective consciousness, they cannot completely do so without a unifying framework. This is why anti-war and labor movements provide an avenue that has united various social movements under the banner of a multiple collective consciousness. This is also why future social movements need to have an ethos of collective consciousness if they are to succeed in the long-term.

Zukerfield [ edit ] Zukerfield states that “The different disciplines that have studied knowledge share an understanding of it as a product of human subjects – individual, collective, etc.” [ 15 ] Knowledge in a sociological sense is derived from social conditions and social realities . Collective consciousness also reflects social realities, and sociological knowledge can be gained through the adoption of a collective consciousness. Many different disciplines such as philosophy and literature examine collective consciousness from different lenses. These different disciplines reach a similar understanding of a collective consciousness despite their different approaches to the subject. The inherent humanness in the idea of collective consciousness refers to a shared way of thinking among human beings in the pursuit of knowledge.

Collective consciousness can provide an understanding of the relationship between self and society.  As Zukerfeld states, “Even though it impels us, as a first customary gesture, to analyse the subjective (such as individual consciousness) or intersubjective bearers (such as the values of a given society), in other words those which Marxism and sociology examine, now we can approach them in an entirely different light.” [ 16 ] “Cognitive materialism” [ 15 ] is presented in the work by Zukerfeld as a sort of ‘third way’ between sociological knowledge and Marxism. Cognitive materialism is based on a kind of collective consciousness of the mind . This consciousness can be used, with cognitive materialism as a guiding force, by human beings in order to critically analyze society and social conditions.

Collective consciousness in society [ edit ] Society is made up of various collective groups, such as the family, community, organizations, regions, nations which as Burns and Egdahl state " can be considered to possess agential capabilities : to think, judge, decide, act, reform; to conceptualize self and others as well as self's actions and interactions; and to reflect.".

[ 17 ] It is suggested that these different national behaviors vary according to the different collective consciousness between nations. This illustrates that differences in collective consciousness can have practical significance.

According to a theory, the character of collective consciousness depends on the type of mnemonic encoding used within a group (Tsoukalas, 2007). The specific type of encoding used has a predictable influence on the group's behavior and collective ideology. Informal groups, that meet infrequently and spontaneously, have a tendency to represent significant aspects of their community as episodic memories. This usually leads to strong social cohesion and solidarity, an indulgent atmosphere, an exclusive ethos and a restriction of social networks. Formal groups, that have scheduled and anonymous meetings, tend to represent significant aspects of their community as semantic memories which usually leads to weak social cohesion and solidarity, a more moderate atmosphere, an inclusive ethos and an expansion of social networks.

[ 18 ] Literary and oral tradition [ edit ] In a case study of a Serbian folk story, Wolfgang Ernst examines collective consciousness in terms of forms of media , specifically collective oral and literary traditions. "Current discourse analysis drifts away from the 'culturalist turn' of the last two or three decades and its concern with individual and collective memory as an extended target of historical research".

[ 19 ] There is still a collective consciousness present in terms of the shared appreciation of folk stories and oral traditions . Folk stories enable the subject and the audiences to come together around a common experience and a shared heritage. In the case of the Serbian folk “gusle”, [ 20 ] the Serbian people take pride in this musical instrument of epic poetry and oral tradition and play it at social gatherings. Expressions of art and culture are expressions of a collective consciousness or expressions of multiple social realities.

See also [ edit ] Society portal Abilene paradox Agenda 21 Anonymous (group) Antonio Gramsci Borg Collective Collective effervescence Collective identity Collective intelligence Collective memory Collective unconscious Communal reinforcement Crowd psychology Deep social mind Práńa Dharma [ 21 ] Egregor Global brain Global goals Group behaviour Group mind Groupthink Higher consciousness Human spirit Infodemic Materialism Noosphere Paradigm Paradigm shift Peer pressure Presence (telepresence) Reality tunnel Schema (psychology) Shared intentionality Social justice Social representation Superorganism Unanimism United Nations Völkerpsychologie Zeitgeist Notes [ edit ] ^ Collins Dictionary of Sociology , p93.

^ Thomas E. Wren, Conceptions of Culture: What Multicultural Educators Need to Know , p. 64 ^ Combs, A., & Krippner, S. (2008). "Collective consciousness and the social brain".

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

15 : 264– 276.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Luke, David (2011).

"Discarnate entities and dimethyltryptamine (DMT): Psychopharmacology, phenomenology and ontology" .

Journal of the Society for Psychical Research . 75(902[1])[1]: 26– 42.

^ John D. Greenwood The Disappearance of the Social in American Social Psychology 2004, p. 110 ^ Collins French-English Dictionary s.v.

^ Best, Shaun (2002).

A Beginner's Guide to Social Theory . SAGE Publications. p. 28.

ISBN 9781848608634 .

^ Simpson, George (Trans.) in Durkheim, Emile "The Division of Labour in Society" The Free Press, New York, 1993. pp. ix ^ Warren Schmaus, Durkheim's Philosophy of Science and the Sociology of Knowledge: Creating an Intellectual Niche , 1994, ISBN 0226742512 , p. 50-51 ^ Scipio Sighele (1892).

La foule criminelle: Essai de Psychologie Collective . University of Michigan. F. Alcan.

^ Kenneth Allan; Kenneth D. Allan (2 November 2005).

Explorations in Classical Sociological Theory: Seeing the Social World . Pine Forge Press. p.

108 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-0572-5 .

^ Durkheim, E. Suicide, 1897.

^ Filippini, Michele; Barr, Patrick J. (2017), "Collective organisms" , Using Gramsci , A New Approach, Pluto Press, pp.

43– 64, ISBN 978-0-7453-3569-8 , JSTOR j.ctt1h64kxd.9 , retrieved 2024-11-22 ^ Filippini, Michele; Barr, Patrick J. (2017), "Collective organisms" , Using Gramsci , A New Approach, Pluto Press, pp.

43– 64, ISBN 978-0-7453-3569-8 , JSTOR j.ctt1h64kxd.9 , retrieved 2024-11-22 ^ a b Zukerfield, M. (2017). "How to Know Knowledge? Introducing Cognitive Materialism".

Knowledge in the Age of Digital Capitalism: An Introduction to Cognitive Materialism . Vol. 2. London: University of Westminster Press. pp.

31– 52.

ISBN 9781911534242 .

JSTOR j.ctv6zd9v0.6 .

^ Zukerfeld, M. (2017). "How to Know Knowledge? Introducing Cognitive Materialism".

Knowledge in the Age of Digital Capitalism: An Introduction to Cognitive Materialism . Vol. 2. London: University of Westminster Press. p. 36.

ISBN 9781911534242 .

JSTOR j.ctv6zd9v0.6 .

^ Burns, T.R. Engdahl, E. (1998) The Social Construction of Consciousness. Part 1: Collective Consciousness and its Socio-Cultural Foundations, Journal of Consciousness Studies , 5 (1) p 72.

^ Tsoukalas, I. (2007). Exploring the Microfoundations of Group Consciousness.

Culture and Psychology , 13(1), 39-81.

^ Ernst, Wolfgang (2017). " 'Electrified Voices': Non-Human Agencies of Socio-Cultural Memory" ". In Blom, Ina; Lundemo, Trond; Røssaak, Eivind (eds.).

Memory in Motion . Amsterdam University Press. pp.

41– 60.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1jd94f0.5 .

ISBN 9789462982147 .

JSTOR j.ctt1jd94f0.5 .

^ Ernst, Wolfgang (2017). " 'Electrified Voices': Non-Human Agencies of Socio-Cultural Memory" ". In Blom, Ina; Lundemo, Trond; Røssaak, Eivind (eds.).

Memory in Motion . Amsterdam University Press. p. 45.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1jd94f0.5 .

ISBN 9789462982147 .

JSTOR j.ctt1jd94f0.5 .

^ Sarkar, Prabhat Ranjan (16 February 1967).

"Práńa Dharma-The Sine Qua Non of Human Existence" .

PROUT in a Nutshell Part 6 .

Ranchi , India: Ánanda Márga Publications. Archived from the original on 2015-04-03 . Retrieved 2015-03-02 .

References [ edit ] Works by Durkheim The Division of Labour in Society (1893) The Rules of the Sociological Method (1895) Suicide (1897) The Elementary Forms of Religious Life (1912) Works by others Gad Barzilai , Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities University of Michigan Press, 2003.

ISBN 978-0-472-03079-8 Ernst, Wolfgang (2017). Ina Blom; Trond Lundemo; Eivind Røssaak (eds.).

Memory in Motion . Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press . pp.

41– 59.

Filippini, Michelle (2017).

Using Gramsci . London: Pluto Press . pp.

43– 64.

Zukerfeld, Mariano (2017).

Knowledge in the Age of Digital Capitalism: An Introduction to Cognitive Materialism . London: University of Westminster Press . pp.

32– 51.

Jary, David; Julia Jary (1991).

Collins Dictionary of Sociology . Glasgow: HarperCollins . p.

774 .

ISBN 978-0-00-470804-1 .

Williams, Swatos, ed. (1998).

"Émile Durkheim" (Web and Print) .

Encyclopedia of Religion and Society . Altamira Press . Retrieved 2007-02-03 .

Lloyd, Annemaree (2007).

"Guarding Against Collective Amnesia? Making Significance Problematic: An Exploration of Issues" .

Library Trends . Archived from the original (Web and Print) on 2011-05-20 . Retrieved 2008-04-25 .

v t e Émile Durkheim Books The Division of Labour in Society (1893) The Rules of Sociological Method (1895) Suicide (1897) The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (1912) Founded Academic sociology L'Année Sociologique Conceptualized and defined Social integration Collective consciousness Mechanical and organic solidarity Social fact Sociology of knowledge Sacred–profane dichotomy Quantitative methods in criminology Statistical social research Collective effervescence Anomie Related Positivism Totemism History of sociology v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases National Czech Republic Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Collective_consciousness&oldid=1291145669 " Categories : Collective intelligence Consciousness Crowd psychology Émile Durkheim Public opinion Sociological terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2020 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 10:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Collective consciousness 22 languages Add topic

