Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Interpretations 2 Proletarian revolutions in history 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Proletarian revolution 20 languages العربية Català Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social revolution in which the working class attempts to overthrow the bourgeoisie Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Anarchism Glossary History Outline Schools of thought Black Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Total liberation Individualist Egoist Market Philosophical Mutualist Queer Religious Christian Jewish Social Collectivist Parecon Communist Magonism Without adjectives Methodology Counter-economics Illegalism Insurrectionary Pacifist Platformism Relationship Syndicalist Synthesis Theory and practice Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e A proletarian revolution or proletariat revolution is a social revolution in which the working class attempts to overthrow the bourgeoisie and change the previous political system.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Proletarian revolutions are generally advocated by socialists , communists and anarchists .

[ 3 ] Interpretations [ edit ] The concept of a revolutionary proletariat was first put forward by the French revolutionary socialist and radical Auguste Blanqui .

[ 4 ] The Paris Commune , contemporary to Blanqui and Karl Marx , being viewed by some as the first attempt at a proletarian revolution.

[ 5 ] Marx wrote of the class conscious proletariat being the active agent of revolution, which distinguished him from Blanqui who viewed a selective revolutionary conspiracy among all the lower classes as being the driving force of a proletarian revolution.

[ 6 ] This was also in contrast to the views of the communist William Weitling and the anarchist Mikhail Bakunin who viewed the lumpenproletariat as the driver of the proletarian revolution.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Through Marx and Friedrich Engels ' work they write that if the proletariat does not make up a majority, it must at least occupy an important position among the popular mass to achieve a proletarian revolution.

[ 8 ] Some later Marxists , such as Georgi Plekhanov , emphasized the need for a majority of the population to be proletarianized for a proletarian revolution to occur.

[ 9 ] Marxists believe proletarian revolutions can and will likely happen in all capitalist countries, [ 6 ] [ 10 ] related to the concept of world revolution .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The objective of a proletarian revolution, according to Marxists, is to transform the bourgeois state into a workers' state .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] A traditional Marxist belief was that a proletarian revolution could only occur in a country where capitalism had fully developed, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] though this changed with Russian Revolution .

The Leninist branch of Marxism argues that a proletarian revolution must be led by a vanguard of " professional revolutionaries ", men and women who are fully dedicated to the communist cause and who form the nucleus of the communist revolutionary movement. This vanguard is meant to provide leadership and organization to the working class before and during the revolution, which aims to prevent the government from successfully ending it.

[ 17 ] Vladimir Lenin believed that it was imperative to arm the working class to secure their leverage over the bourgeoisie. Lenin's words were printed in an article in German on the nature of pacifism and said "In every class society, whether based on slavery, serfdom, or, as at present, on wage-labour, the oppressor class is always armed." [ 18 ] [ 19 ] It was under such conditions that the first successful proletarian revolution, the Russian Revolution , occurred.

[ 20 ] [ 18 ] [ 21 ] Other Marxists, such as Luxemburgists [ 22 ] [ 23 ] and left communists , [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] disagree with the Leninist idea of a vanguard and insist that the entire working class—or at least a large part of it—must be deeply involved and equally committed to the socialist or communist cause for a proletarian revolution to be successful. To this end, they seek to build mass working class movements with a very large membership. The Situationists ' view is that as well as the standard proletariat being a driving force for revolution, other oppressed classes would also act as drivers.

[ 27 ] Finally, there are socialist anarchists and libertarian socialists . Their view is that the revolution must be a bottom-up social revolution which seeks to transform all aspects of society and the individuals which make up the society (see Revolutionary Catalonia ). The anarchist view also holds that the proletarian revolution must abolish all aspects of the state, and that a "workers' state" should not be formed.

[ 14 ] Alexander Berkman said "there are revolutions and revolutions. Some revolutions change only the governmental form by putting a new set of rulers in place of the old. These are political revolutions , and as such they often meet with little resistance. But a revolution that aims to abolish the entire system of wage slavery must also do away with the power of one class to oppress another . That is, it is not any more a mere change of rulers, of government, not a political revolution, but one that seeks to alter the whole character of society. That would be a social revolution." [ 28 ] Proletarian revolutions in history [ edit ] Paris Commune (1871) October Revolution (1917) Finnish Civil War (1918) German Revolution (1918–1919) September Uprising (1923) Indonesian Communist Party uprising (1926) Canton Uprising (1927) Nghệ-Tĩnh Revolt (1930–1931) Austrian Civil War (1934) Spanish Revolution (1936) August Revolution (1945) Telegana Rebellion (1946) March Intifada (1965) May 68 (1968) Nepalese Civil War (1996–2006) See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Proletarian revolution .

Bourgeois revolution Communist revolution Free association of producers , the ultimate goal of communist and anarchist revolutions Labour revolt October Revolution Asturian miners' strike of 1934 List of peasant revolts Revolution of 1934 Proletarian Revolutionary Organisation, Nepal Social revolution World revolution References [ edit ] ^ Liulevicius, Vejas (13 July 2020).

"Russia: The Unlikely Place for a Proletarian Revolution" .

The Great Courses Daily .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ Lenin, V. I.

(1918).

"Chapter I: Class Society and the State" .

The State and Revolution – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Haupt, Georges (1979). "In What Sense and to What Degree Was the Russian Revolution a Proletarian Revolution?".

Review .

3 (1).

Fernand Braudel Center : 21– 33.

JSTOR 40240824 .

^ Blake, William James (1939).

An American Looks at Karl Marx . Cordon Company. p. 622 – via Google Books .

^ Spector, Maurice (15 March 1934).

"The Paris Commune and the Proletarian Revolution" .

The Militant . Vol. III, no. 11. p. 3 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b c Blackburn 1976 .

^ Eagles 2017 , pp. 23–24.

^ Ree, Erik van (2012).

"German Marxism and the Decline of the Permanent Revolution, 1870–1909" (PDF) .

History of European Ideas .

38 (4): 570–589 [574–575].

doi : 10.1080/01916599.2011.652474 .

^ Ree 2013 , p. 32.

^ Engels, Friedrich (October–November 1847).

The Principles of Communism – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Further, it has co-ordinated the social development of the civilized countries to such an extent that, in all of them, bourgeoisie and proletariat have become the decisive classes, and the struggle between them the great struggle of the day. It follows that the communist revolution will not merely be a national phenomenon but must take place simultaneously in all civilized countries – that is to say, at least in England, America, France, and Germany.

^ Bukharin, Nikolai (1933).

"Chapter 4: The Theory of Proletarian Dictatorship and Scientific Communism" .

Marx's Teaching and its Historical Importance – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Lenin, V. I.

(1918).

"Chapter 5: The Economic Basis for the Withering Away of the State" .

The State and Revolution – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Goichbarg, Alexander [in German] .

Revolução Proletária e Direito Civil [ Proletarian Revolution and Civil Law ] (in Portuguese).

^ a b Guérin 1981 , p. 14.

^ Lane 2020a ; Filho 2007 ; Ree 2013 , p. 35 ^ Lenin, V. I.

(1918).

"How Kautsky Turned Marx Into A Common Liberal" .

The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Lenin, V. I.

(1918).

"Bourgeois And Proletarian Democracy" .

The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Dunayevskaya 2017 .

^ Lenin, V. I.

(1916).

"II" .

The Military Programme of the Proletarian Revolution – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (May–June 1967).

"The Unfinished Revolution: 1917–67" (PDF) .

New Left Review .

I (43).

^ Chácon, Justin Akers (2018). "Introduction".

Radicals in the Barrio: Magonistas, Socialists, Wobblies, and Communists in the Mexican American Working Class . Chicago, IL.: Haymarket Books . p. 38.

ISBN 978-1-60846-776-1 .

^ Várnagy, Tomás (19 April 2021).

"A Central European Revolutionary" .

Rosa Luxemburg Foundation . Archived from the original on 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ D'Amato, Paul (2014).

"Marx, Lenin, and Luxemburg" .

International Socialist Review . Archived from the original on 4 June 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ Mattick, Paul (August 1938).

"The Masses & The Vanguard" .

Living Marxism . Vol. 4, no. 4. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Pannekoek, Anton (1941).

"The Party and Class" .

Modern Socialism . Vol. 2. pp.

7– 10. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Chomsky, Noam (12 March 2013).

"Noam Chomsky on Revolutionary Violence, Communism and the American Left" .

Pax Marxista (Interview). Interviewed by Christopher Helali. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015 – via chomsky.info.

^ Eagles 2017 , pp. 24, 27.

^ Berkman, Alexander (1929). "25".

Now and After: The ABC of Communist Anarchism .

Works cited [ edit ] Blackburn, Robin (May–June 1976).

"Marxism: Theory of Proletarian Revolution" .

New Left Review .

I (97).

Dunayevskaya, Raya (5 June 2017).

"Lenin on Self-determination of Nations and on Organization After His Philosophic Notebooks" . In Gogol, Eugene; Dmitryev, Franklin (eds.).

Russia: From Proletarian Revolution to State-Capitalist Counter-Revolution .

Brill . pp.

125– 141.

doi : 10.1163/9789004347618_005 .

ISBN 978-90-04-34761-8 . Retrieved 21 April 2022 .

Eagles, Julian (2017). "Marxism, Anarchism and the Situationists' Theory of Revolution".

Critical Sociology .

43 (1).

SAGE Publications : 13– 36.

doi : 10.1177/0896920514547826 .

Filho, Almir Cezar (5 April 2007).

"Moreno e os 80 anos do debate sobre a Revolução Permanente" [Moreno and the 80 years of the debate on the Permanent Revolution] (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 16 December 2007 . Retrieved 20 January 2011 .

Guérin, Daniel (1981).

Anarchism and Marxism .

Lane, David (22 April 2020a).

"Revisiting Lenin's theory of socialist revolution on the 150th anniversary of his birth" .

European Politics and Policy .

London School of Economics . Archived from the original on 26 February 2024.

Ree, Erik van (2013).

"Georgii Plekhanov and the Communist Manifesto: The Proletarian Revolution Revisited" (PDF) .

Revolutionary Russia .

26 (1): 32– 51.

doi : 10.1080/09546545.2013.787807 .

v t e Revolutionary socialism Concepts Class conflict Communist revolution Communization Foco Impossibilism People's war Permanent revolution Platformism Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Revolutionary base area Revolutionary terror Situationist prank Social revolution United front Vanguardism World revolution Tendencies Blanquism De Leonism Insurrectionary anarchism Mao-spontex Syndicalism Groups The Invisible Committee Situationist International People Mikhail Bakunin Louis Auguste Blanqui Daniel De Leon Régis Debray Friedrich Engels Che Guevara Abimael Guzmán Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Vladimir Lenin Karl Liebknecht Rosa Luxemburg Mao Zedong Karl Marx Thomas Sankara Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Related topics Anarchist communism Anarcho-pacifism Collectivist anarchism General strike Popular front Radical feminism Reformism Refusal of work Socialism portal v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proletarian_revolution&oldid=1291067062 " Categories : Marxist terminology Revolution terminology Revolutions by type Socialism Working-class culture Proletariat Hidden categories: CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Use dmy dates from May 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 21:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Proletarian revolution 20 languages Add topic

