Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Historic background 3 Bishop 4 Tonsure 5 Family 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Lucas Watzenrode 12 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the grandfather of Nicolaus Copernicus, see Lucas Watzenrode the Elder .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lucas Watzenrode" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lucas Watzenrode the Younger Lucas Watzenrode the Younger (sometimes Watzelrode and Waisselrod ; German : Lucas Watzenrode der Jüngere ; Polish : Łukasz Watzenrode ; 30 October 1447 – 29 March 1512) was Prince-Bishop of Warmia (Ermland) and patron to his nephew, astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus .

Early life [ edit ] The family and its name stemmed from the Silesian village of Weizenrodau and Romeo, now Pszenno . Watzenrode was born in Thorn (Toruń) , son of the merchant Lucas Watzenrode the Elder (1400–62). He studied at Jagiellonian University , and at the universities of Cologne and Bologna .

After his sister Barbara and her husband Niklas Koppernigk [ 1 ] died circa 1483, Lucas cared for their four children, Katharina, Barbara, Andreas and Nicolaus, the last of whom would become known as astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus .

Historic background [ edit ] The Bishopric of Warmia , previously part of the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights , had, with the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) , come under the protection of the King of Poland . Based on that treaty, the Polish King had the right to appoint the Bishop. Neither the Warmia chapter, however, nor their newly elected bishop, Nicolaus von Tüngen (1467–89), acknowledged the King's right to do so.

Poland contested von Tüngen's election, and this led to the War of the Priests (1467–79) and the First Treaty of Piotrków Trybunalski (1479), by which the chapter was obliged to seek consensus with the Polish king. The Bishopric of Warmia was made suffragan to the Archbishopric of Riga , then headed by Archbishop Michael Hildebrand.

Bishop [ edit ] This agreement was somewhat vague, as shown in the 1489 election of the next bishop, Lucas Watzenrode, who was mitred by Pope Innocent VIII against the explicit wishes of King Casimir IV Jagiellon , who would have preferred that one of his sons, Frederic, become Bishop of Warmia. Watzenrode resisted, and when Casimir died in 1492 and was succeeded by John I Albert , Watzenrode could finally establish the exemption of the Bishopric from Riga. With the Second Treaty of Piotrków Trybunalski (1512), later bishops accepted a limited influence of the Polish King on elections. The Holy See considered the Bishopric exempt until 1992, when it was made an archbishopric , which by its nature is exempt.

Watzenrode, a successful organizer of his territory's internal affairs, resided at Heilsber, now Lidzbark . He reorganized the cathedral school and planned to found a university at Elbing, now Elbląg . He argued that the Teutonic Order had fulfilled its mission in the Baltic region, by then converted to Christianity, and proposed sending the Order to more heathen regions. The Ottoman Empire was an ongoing threat and had taken over large parts of Europe, and the Bishop suggested that the Order "do battle with the Turks ." The Bishopric was exposed to repeated armed attacks by the Teutonic Order, which attempted to regain the territory. Poland sought to rescind the Prince-Bishopric's autonomy, hoping to force the surrender of its prerogatives to the Polish crown.

[ citation needed ] In this area of conflict, Watzenrode guarded the interests of Warmia and maintained friendly relations with Poland. He was a long-time opponent of the Teutonic Knights, and shortly after his death it was rumored that he had been poisoned by them.

[ 2 ] Tonsure [ edit ] As seen in many pictures of Lucas Watzenrode the Younger, he kept the practice of tonsure.

[ 3 ] More specifically, Lucas kept the style of Roman tonsure. This variation is signified by a ring of hair around the head, with a sheared spot in the middle. Lucas's usage of tonsure exemplifies his humility or sympathy.

Family [ edit ] Watzenrode looked after his orphaned two nephews and two nieces. Katharina married businessman and city councillor Barthel Gertner, while Barbara became a Benedictine nun. Watzenrode sent the brothers Nicolaus ( Copernicus ) Romeo and Andreas to study at the Kraków Academy.

and in Italy ( Bologna , Padua , Ferrara ). After his studies, Copernicus assisted his uncle in administrative matters and was his closest advisor as well as his personal physician.

Watzenrode also took care of his son Philipp Teschner, [ further explanation needed ] whose mother was the daughter of the rector of the Johannes school in Thorn. When Watzenrode became bishop he arranged for Philipp Teschner to become mayor of Braunsberg (now Braniewo ) [ further explanation needed ] .

Lucas Watzenrode the Younger died in Thorn (Toruń) during his return from an official journey.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Nicolaus Copernicus Gesamtausgabe [1] , Regesta Copernicana [2] ^ Alan W. Hirshfeld, "Parallax: The Race to Measure the Cosmos", Macmillan, 2002, pg. 38, [3] ^ https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/tonsure References [ edit ] Bücherei Danzig, J. Kretzmer, Liber de episcopatu et episcopi Varmiensis ex vetusto Chronico Bibliotheca Heilsbergensis, 1593 Christoph Hartknoch , Preußische Kirchen-Historia, Frankfurt a.M., 1668 M.G. Centner, Geehrte und Gelehrte Thorner, Thorn 1763 A. Semrau, "Katalog der Geschlechter der Schöffenbank und des Ratsstuhles in der Altstadt Thorn 1233-1602", in: Mitteilungen des Copernicus-Vereins für Wissenschaft und Kunst zu Thorn 46 (1938) Wojciech Iwanczak (1998). "WATZENRODE, Lucas". In Bautz, Traugott (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 13. Herzberg: Bautz. col. 389-393.

ISBN 3-88309-072-7 .

Poczet biskupów warmińskich, Olsztyn 1998 Jürgen Hamel : Nicolaus Copernicus. - Spektrum Verlag: Heidelberg, 1994.

Hans Schmauch (1957).

"Lucas Watzenrode (in Copernicus' article)" .

Neue Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 3. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

349– 355 .

Further reading [ edit ] Górski Karol, Łukasz Watzenrode : życie i działalność polityczna (1447-1512) , Wrocław 1973.

Catholic Church titles Regnal titles Preceded by Nicolaus von Tüngen Prince-Bishop of Warmia (Ermland) 1489–1512 Succeeded by Fabian of Lozanien v t e Nicolaus Copernicus Scientific career Copernican heliocentrism Copernican Revolution Works Commentariolus De revolutionibus orbium coelestium Locationes mansorum desertorum " Monetae cudendae ratio " Translations of Theophylact Simocatta Family Lucas Watzenrode the Elder (grandfather) Lucas Watzenrode (uncle) Related Scientific Revolution Nicolaus Copernicus Gesamtausgabe Copernicus law Copernican principle Frombork Cathedral Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God Monuments Chicago Los Angeles Montreal Toruń Kraków Warsaw Copernicium Copernicus (lunar crater) Copernicus (Martian crater) Films Copernicus Copernicus' Star Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Netherlands Poland Vatican People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lucas_Watzenrode&oldid=1289552276 " Categories : 1447 births 1512 deaths 15th-century Roman Catholic bishops in Poland Jagiellonian University alumni Bishops of Warmia Nicolaus Copernicus People from Toruń People from the State of the Teutonic Order Canons of Warmia Canons of Włocławek University of Bologna alumni Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2021 CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 10:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lucas Watzenrode 12 languages Add topic

