Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Selected publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents George Furnas 3 languages العربية Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American academic George William Furnas (born 1954) is an American academic, Professor and Associate Dean for Academic Strategy at the School of Information of the University of Michigan , known for his work on semantic analysis [ 1 ] and on human-system communication.

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Furnas obtained his AB in Psychology in 1974 from Harvard University , and his PhD in Psychology in 1980 from Stanford University .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Furnas started his academic career as graduate student teaching assistant at Stanford University in 1975. After his graduation in 1980 he started at Bell Labs , where he was a distinguished member of technical staff for 15 years. In the last two years he was Director of Computer Graphics and Interactive Media research. In 1995 he moved to the University of Michigan, where he was appointed Professor of Psychology, Professor of Computer Science and Engineering, and Professor at the School of Information. From 2002 to 2008 he was also Associate Dean for Academic Strategy, School of Information.

[ 3 ] Furnas was elected into the CHI Academy , an honorary group of individuals who have made substantial contributions to the field of human-computer interaction, in 2004 for his work in the field. In 2011 he was inducted as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery .

[ 5 ] Work [ edit ] During his time at Bell Labs he earned the moniker "Fisheye Furnas" while working with fisheye visualizations. A pioneer of latent semantic analysis , Furnas is also considered a pioneer in the concept of MoRAS (Mosaic of Responsive Adaptive Systems).

The body of Furnas' research, and its primacy in the field, is aptly précised by the delineation of his work in his SIGCHI bio: A principal focus of his research is in advanced information access and visualization. His early role in the analysis of the "Vocabulary Disagreement" problem lead to his co-invention of Latent Semantic Analysis for indexing and text processing. His classic "Generalized Fisheye Views" paper inspired a sea of focus+context research in information visualization.

[ 6 ] And furthermore George's BITPICT graphical rewrite system is well known novel contribution to diagrammatic reasoning , visual languages and visual programming communities. George was also an early researcher in the areas of collaborative filtering and graph visualization. His "Space-Scale Diagrams in the Pad++ Zooming User Interface " advanced the analysis of zoomable user interfaces, and View Navigation theory has helped motivate much subsequent research in Information Scent. Recently he has been working on consolidating theories of design and use at multiple levels of aggregation.

[ 6 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Furnas, George W.

Objects and their features, 1980 Articles, a selection: Furnas, George W. " Generalized fisheye views ." in Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ‘86 Conference Proceedings, 16-23. 1986.

Furnas, George W., et al. "The vocabulary problem in human-system communication." Communications of the ACM 30.11 (1987): 964-971.

Deerwester, Scott C., et al. " Indexing by latent semantic analysis ." JAsIs 41.6 (1990): 391-407.

References [ edit ] ^ Krippendorff, Klaus.

Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology .

Sage, 2012.

^ Nielsen, Jakob.

Usability engineering.

Elsevier, 1994.

^ a b CURRICULUM VITAE George W. Furnas , at furnas.people.si.umich.edu. Accessed 14-04-2015.

^ Furnas, George William (1980).

Objects and their features: The metric representation of two-class data . Stanford University . Retrieved 5 June 2023 .

^ "Dr. George W Furnas - Award Winner" .

acm.org .

^ a b George Furnas Archived 2008-08-31 at the Wayback Machine at www.sigchi.org/about/awards/awards-2004.

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Academics Association for Computing Machinery Scopus Google Scholar DBLP v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Furnas&oldid=1158634231 " Categories : 1954 births Living people American cognitive scientists Human–computer interaction researchers Harvard College alumni Stanford University alumni Stanford University faculty University of Michigan faculty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 June 2023, at 08:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Furnas 3 languages Add topic

