Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Physical interpretation 2 Weather and climate relevance 3 In acoustics 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pressure gradient 13 languages Català Español فارسی Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pressure gradient (atmospheric) ) Space rate of variation of pressure in a given direction This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In hydrodynamics and hydrostatics , the pressure gradient (typically of air but more generally of any fluid ) is a physical quantity that describes in which direction and at what rate the pressure increases the most rapidly around a particular location. The pressure gradient is a dimensional quantity expressed in units of pascals per metre (Pa/m). Mathematically, it is the gradient of pressure as a function of position. The gradient of pressure in hydrostatics is equal to the body force density (generalised Stevin's Law ).

In petroleum geology and the petrochemical sciences pertaining to oil wells , and more specifically within hydrostatics , pressure gradients refer to the gradient of vertical pressure in a column of fluid within a wellbore and are generally expressed in pounds per square inch per foot (psi/ft). This column of fluid is subject to the compound pressure gradient of the overlying fluids. The path and geometry of the column is totally irrelevant; only the vertical depth of the column has any relevance to the vertical pressure of any point within its column and the pressure gradient for any given true vertical depth .

Physical interpretation [ edit ] The concept of a pressure gradient is a local characterisation of the air (more generally of the fluid under investigation). The pressure gradient is defined only at these spatial scales at which pressure (more generally fluid dynamics ) itself is defined.

Within planetary atmospheres (including the Earth's ), the pressure gradient is a vector pointing roughly downwards, because the pressure changes most rapidly vertically, increasing downwards (see vertical pressure variation ). The value of the strength (or norm ) of the pressure gradient in the troposphere is typically of the order of 9 Pa/m (or 90 hPa/km).

The pressure gradient often has a small but critical horizontal component, which is largely responsible for wind circulation in the atmosphere. The horizontal pressure gradient is a two-dimensional vector resulting from the projection of the pressure gradient onto a local horizontal plane. Near the Earth's surface , this horizontal pressure gradient force is directed from higher toward lower pressure. Its particular orientation at any one time and place depends strongly on the weather situation. At mid- latitudes , the typical horizontal pressure gradient may take on values of the order of 10 −2 Pa/m (or 10 Pa/km), although rather higher values occur within meteorological fronts .

Weather and climate relevance [ edit ] Interpreting differences in air pressure between different locations is a fundamental component of many meteorological and climatological disciplines, including weather forecasting . As indicated above, the pressure gradient constitutes one of the main forces acting on the air to make it move as wind. Note that the pressure gradient force points from high towards low pressure zones. It is thus oriented in the opposite direction from the pressure gradient itself.

In acoustics [ edit ] In acoustics , the pressure gradient is proportional to the sound particle acceleration according to Euler's equation .

Sound waves and shock waves can induce very large pressure gradients, but these are oscillatory, and often transitory disturbances.

See also [ edit ] Adverse pressure gradient Force density Isobar Geopotential height Geostrophic wind Primitive equations Temperature gradient References [ edit ] Conner A. Perrine (1967) The nature and theory of the general circulation of atmosphere , World Meteorological Organization, Publication No. 218, Geneva, Switzerland.

Robert G. Fleagle and Joost A. Businger (1980) An Introduction to Atmospheric Physics , Second Edition, Academic Press, International Geophysics Series, Volume 25 , ISBN 0-12-260355-9 .

John S. Wallace and Peter V. Hobbs (2006) Atmospheric Science: An Introductory Survey , Second Edition, Academic Press, International Geophysics Series, ISBN 0-12-732951-X .

External links [ edit ] IPCC Third Assessment Report v t e Meteorological data and variables General Adiabatic processes Advection Buoyancy Lapse rate Lightning Surface solar radiation Surface weather analysis Visibility Vorticity Wind Wind shear Condensation Cloud Cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) Fog Convective condensation level (CCL) Lifting condensation level (LCL) Precipitable water Precipitation Water vapor Convection Convective available potential energy (CAPE) Convective inhibition (CIN) Convective instability Convective momentum transport Conditional symmetric instability Convective temperature ( T c ) Equilibrium level (EL) Free convective layer (FCL) Helicity K Index Level of free convection (LFC) Lifted index (LI) Maximum parcel level (MPL) Bulk Richardson number (BRN) Temperature Dew point ( T d ) Dew point depression Dry-bulb temperature Equivalent temperature ( T e ) Forest fire weather index Haines Index Heat index Humidex Humidity Relative humidity (RH) Mixing ratio Potential temperature ( θ ) Equivalent potential temperature ( θ e ) Sea surface temperature (SST) Temperature anomaly Thermodynamic temperature Vapor pressure Virtual temperature Wet-bulb temperature Wet-bulb globe temperature Wet-bulb potential temperature Wind chill Pressure Atmospheric pressure Baroclinity Barotropicity Pressure gradient Pressure-gradient force (PGF) Velocity Maximum potential intensity Authority control databases National Germany Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pressure_gradient&oldid=1211109855 " Categories : Atmospheric dynamics Pressure Spatial gradient Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 29 February 2024, at 22:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pressure gradient 13 languages Add topic

