Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location 2 Central Topics 3 Vallabhacharya Toggle Vallabhacharya subsection 3.1 Initiating mantra 4 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 4.1 Metaphysics 4.2 Moksha (liberation) 4.3 Everything is Krishna's Leela 4.4 Atma-nivedana 4.5 Ashta-chhaap 5 Shuddhadwait Martand 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Shuddhadvaita 7 languages বাংলা Français हिन्दी Italiano Русский தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy propounded by Vallabhacharya Vallabhacharya , who propounded the philosophy of Shuddadvaita Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Shuddadvaita ( Sanskrit : śuddhādvaita "pure non-dualism") is the "purely non-dual" philosophy propounded by the Hindu philosopher Vallabha (1479-1531 CE), the founder of Puṣṭimārga ("The path of grace"), a Vaishnava tradition focused on the worship of the deity Krishna . Vallabhacharya's pure form ( nondualist ) philosophy is different from Advaita .

The Shrinathji temple at Nathdwara , and compositions of eight poets ( aṣṭasakha ), including Surdas , are central to the worship by the followers of the sect.

[ 1 ] Location [ edit ] The tradition is founded by Vishnu swamy in Southern India . He is known as the early founder of the Rudra sampradaya , one of the four main traditions of Vaishnavaites .

[ 2 ] Vallabhacharya founded the Krishna-centered Pushti-Marga sect of Vaishnavism in the Braj(Vraj) region of India.

[ 3 ] In modern times followers of Shuddadvaita are concentrated in the states of Rajasthan and Gujarat .

[ 4 ] Central Topics [ edit ] In the ancient Vedic tradition of knowledge and comprehension of reality, the central theme would be experiencing the Supreme Entity or Brahman .

Vedas primarily contain references to the advaita nature of Brahman. However, depending on how a scholar perceives those verses, they might see duality— dvaita aspect as well. This ambiguity has led to several philosophical traditions in the Indian history , such as: Advaita vāda of Adi Shankaracharya Vishistadvaita vāda of Ramanujacharya Dvaita vāda or Bhedavāda of Madhvacharya Dvaitadvaita vāda of Nimbarkacharya Achintya Bheda Abheda vāda of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Shuddhadvaita vāda of Vallabhacharya Vallabhacharya [ edit ] Main article: Vallabhacharya Vallabhacharya was a devotional philosopher, who founded the Pushti sect in India. He won the title of acharya by traveling and debating advaita scholars from a young age.

In 1493-94 Vallabhacharya is said to have identified an image of Krishna at the Govardhan hill at Braj . This image, now called Shrinathji and located at Nathdwara , Rajasthan , is central to the worship by Vallabha followers.

[ 5 ] Initiating mantra [ edit ] According to Vallabha tradition, one night in 1494, Vallabhacharya received the Brahmasambandha mantra (the mantra that binds one with Brahman , or Krishna) from Krishna himself (hence the name, mukhāvatāra ) at Gokula . The eight-syllable mantra, śri kṛṣṇaḥ śaraṇaṃ mama (Lord Krishna is my refuge), is passed onto new initiates in Vallabh sampradaya. It is believed that the divine name has the power to cleanse the recipient of all impurities of the soul ( doṣas ).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Vaishnavism Supreme deity Vishnu / Krishna / Rama Important deities Dashavatara Matsya Kurma Varaha Narasimha Vamana Parasurama Rama Balarama Krishna Buddha Kalki Other forms Dhanvantari Guruvayurappan Hayagriva Jagannath Mohini Nara-Narayana Prithu Shrinathji Venkateshvara Vithoba Consorts Lakshmi Bhumi Sita Radha Rukmini Alamelu Related Garuda Hanuman Shesha Shasta Holy scriptures Vedas Upanishads Vaikhanasa Pancharatra Bhagavad Gita Mahabharata Ramayana Harivamsa Divya Prabandha Gita Govinda Puranas Vishnu Bhagavata Naradiya Garuda Padma Agni Sampradayas Sri ( Vishishtadvaita , Akshar Purushottam Darshan ) Rudra ( Śuddhādvaita ) Kumara ( Dvaitadvaita ) Brahma ( Tattvavada or ( Dvaita )), Acintyabhedabheda ) Others Ekasarana Dharma Mahanubhava Pranami Radha Vallabha Ramsnehi Sant Mat Vaishnava-Sahajiya Warkari Teachers—acharyas Chaitanya Chakradhara Dadu Dayal Harivansh Jayatirtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvara Kabir Madhavdev Madhvacharya Manavala Mamunigal Namadeva Nammalvar Nathamuni Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Padmanabha Tirtha Pillai Lokacharya Purandara Dasa Raghuttama Tirtha Raghavendra Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ravidas Satyanatha Tirtha Satyabhinava Tirtha Satyabodha Tirtha Satyadharma Tirtha Satyadhyana Tirtha Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Swaminarayan Sripadaraja Tukaram Tulsidas Vallabha Vedanta Desika Vidyapati Vishnuswami Viṭṭhalanātha Vyasatirtha Vadiraja Tirtha Yamunacharya Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu Annamacharya Bhadrachala Ramadasu Related traditions Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Munitraya Krishnaism Jagannathism Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Gaudiya ISKCON Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Mahanam v t e Metaphysics [ edit ] The school of in-essence monism or purified non-dualism of Vallabha sees equality in "essence" of the individual self with God. There is no real difference between the two (like the analogy of sparks to fire). However, unlike Shankara's Advaita, Vallabha does not deny God as the whole and the individual as the part. The individual soul is not the Supreme ( Satcitananda ) clouded by the force of avidya , but is itself Brahman , with one attribute (ananda) rendered imperceptible. The soul is both a doer and enjoyer. It is atomic in size, but pervades the whole body through its essence of intelligence (like sandalwood makes its presence felt through its scent even if sandalwood can't be seen).

Unlike Advaita, the world of Maya is not regarded as unreal, since Maya is nothing else than a power of Ishvara . Ishvara is not only the creator of the universe but is the universe itself. Vallabha cites the Chandogya Upanishad sections 6.1 - 6.4, that Brahman desired to become many, and he became the multitude of individual souls and the world. Although Brahman is not known, He is known when He manifests Himself through the world .

As is customary in Vaishnavism, bhakti is the means of salvation, though Jnana is also useful. Karmas (understood as daily and occasional ritual acts) precede knowledge of the Supreme, and are present even when this knowledge is gained. The liberated perform all karmas. The highest goal is not Mukti or liberation, but rather eternal service of Krishna and participation along with His activities in His Divine abode of Vrindavana. Vallabha distinguishes the transcendent consciousness of Brahman as Purushottama . Vallabha lays a great stress on a life of unqualified love and devotion towards God. Devotees are to serve God without any personal motives.

[ 6 ] In all the philosophical traditions, it is common practice to describe how the Supreme Entity Brahman is related to us and our surroundings. In Suddhadavaita, otherwise known as Brahmvaad , the One, secondless Ultimate Reality is the only category. Every other thing has proceeded from it at the time of creation, is non-different from it during creation and merges into it at the time of dissolution. The two other well known categories namely the animate souls and the inanimate objects are respectively its parts and modifications. The animate souls are its parts because they retain to some extent the essential qualities thereof namely consciousness and joy. The inanimate objects are its modification because the above said qualities are absent therein.

[ 7 ] Moksha (liberation) [ edit ] Followers of Vallabhacharya maintain that if one wants to obtain moksha and the bliss given by Krishna , the only path to do so is bhakti . In the Kali Yuga , it is believed that the forms of bhakti mentioned in the scriptures are nearly impossible to practice, so the followers of Vallabhacharya recommend pushti bhakti – which is the end itself and not means to an end, giving moksha, joy and oneness with Shree Krishna. It illustrates oneness with Shree Krishna can be achieved merely by having true belief and love for Shree Krsna and recitation of the Brahmasambandha mantra.

[ citation needed ] Vallabhacharya established that liberation is only possible due to God's grace.

[ 8 ] Everything is Krishna's Leela [ edit ] According to the version of Vaishnava Theology Vallabhacharya espoused; the glorious Krishna in His " Satcitananda " form is the Absolute, Svayam Bhagavan . He is permanently playing out His sport (leela) from His seat in the Goloka which is even beyond the divine Vaikuntha , the abode of Vishnu and Satya-loka , the abode of Brahma the Creator, and Kailas , the abode of Shiva . Creation is His sport.

[ citation needed ] Atma-nivedana [ edit ] It is that bhakti which gives itself up body, heart and soul to the cause of God. It is considered to be the fullest expression of what is known as Atma-nivedana (= giving-up of oneself) among the nine forms of bhakti ( Navadha Bhakti ). It is the bhakti of the devotee who worships God not for any reward or presents but for His own sake. Such a devotee goes to Goloka after leaving this body and lives in eternal bliss enjoying the sports of the Lord. The classical example of this complete self-effacement is that of the cow-herdesses towards Krishna . They spoke no word except prayer and they moved no step except towards Krishna . Their supreme-most meditation was on the lotus-feet of Krishna .Thus  it is by God's grace alone that one can obtain release from bondage and attain Krishna's heaven, Goloka.

[ citation needed ] Ashta-chhaap [ edit ] In V.S. 1602, Vallabhacharya's son Vitthalnath, also known as Gusainji , established the eight-fold system of singing the name and glory of Shrinathji ( Kirtana ) and entrusted this responsibility to eight poet-disciples of Vallabhacharya and his own, called the ashta-chhaap after the eight divine services to Shrinathji from morning until going to sleep. Foremost among them was Surdas , the blind poet of Agra .

[ citation needed ] These are Surdas, Krishna Das, Paramanand Das, Kumbhan Das, Chaturbhuj Das, Nand Das, Chhitswami, and Govind Das. The first four poets and singers were Vallabhacharya's disciples, while the other four were Gusainji's.

Shuddhadwait Martand [ edit ] Shuddhadwait is defined more thoroughly in verse 27-28 from Shuddhadwait Martand: शुद्धाद्वैतापदे ज्ञेय:      समास: कर्मधारय: I अद्वैतं शुद्धयो: प्राहुः षष्ठी तत्पुरुषमं बुधा: II मायासंबंधरहितमं    शुद्धमित्युच्यते बुधै: I कार्यकरणरूपमं हि शुद्धं ब्रह्म न मायिकम़् II [ 9 ] "It is Karmdharay samaas : Shuddham ch tat adwaitam (The Pure and its non-dualism) . Or, it is the Shashti Tatpurush samaas Shuddhyoh adwaitam (The Non-dual is pure). In this system, the combination of Maya with Brahm is done away with; therefore the cause of this world is not Brahm covered by Maya. But the pure Brahm and only pure Brahm is the effect and cause of this world." [ 10 ] The Shuddhadvaita philosophy has also been explained by various scholars of the sect, such as Devarshi Ramanath Shastri , who has enunciated the tenets of this philosophy in his books ‘Shuddhadvait Siddhantasaar’ (Hindi and Gujarati) and Shuddhadvaita Darshan.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Martin, Nancy M., "North Indian Hindi devotional literature" in Flood 2003 , pp. 182–198 ^ Sharma, Vijay Prakash (1 January 1998).

The Sadhus And Indian Civilization . Anmol Publications Pvt. Limited.

ISBN 978-81-261-0108-5 .

^ Lindtner, Chr. (16 June 1999).

"Jaina Philosophy and Religion. (English translation of Jaina Darsana by Muni Shri Nyayavijayaji). Translated by Nagin J. Shah" .

Buddhist Studies Review .

16 (2): 263– 264.

doi : 10.1558/bsrv.v16i2.14664 .

ISSN 1747-9681 .

S2CID 247906664 .

^ a b Beck 1993 , pp. 194–195 ^ a b Colas, Gerard, "History of Vaiṣṇava traditions" in Flood 2003 , pp. 229–270 ^ Saha, Shandip (2013), Kumar, P. Pratap (ed.), "Kṛṣṇa devotion in western India" , Contemporary Hinduism , Religions in Focus, Acumen Publishing, p. 140, ISBN 978-1-84465-689-9 , retrieved 4 September 2024 ^ PhD thesis, "The system of Shuddhadwait Vedant of Vallabhacharya" Archived 4 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Goswami Raghunathji ^ Smith, Frederick (August 2005). "The Hierarchy of Philosophical Systems According to Vallabhācārya".

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

33 : 421– 453.

^ Shuddhadwait Martand, verse 27-28 ^ Anubhashya on Brahmsutras, 2005, Introduction pp. iv ^ Shuddhadvait Darshan (vol.2), Pub. Mota Mandir, Bhoiwada, Mumbai, 1917 ^ Shuddhadvait Darshan (in 3 Vols.)(New Edition), Pub. Vidya Vibhag, Nathdwara,2000 References [ edit ] Beck, Guy L.

(1993).

Sonic theology: Hinduism and sacred sound . Columbia, S.C: University of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-87249-855-7 .

Flood, Gavin (Ed) (2003), Blackwell companion to Hinduism , Blackwell Publishing , ISBN 0-631-21535-2 External links [ edit ] Encyclopedia on Pushtimarg Pustimarg Sahitya by Mota Mandir Mumbai v t e Sampradayas of Vaishnavism Major traditions Brahma Sampradaya of Madhvacharya Sri Sampradaya of Ramanuja Kumara Sampradaya of Nimbarka Rudra Sampradaya of Vishnuswami Related traditions Historical Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Krishnaism Warkari Mahanubhava Sadh Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Ekasarana Gaudiya Manipuri Radha-Vallabha Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Pranami Swaminarayan Ayyavazhi Mahanam Vedanta Philosophies Dvaitadvaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shuddhadvaita&oldid=1252453662 " Categories : Hindu philosophy Vaishnavism Bhakti movement Advaita Advaita Shaivism Vedanta Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from March 2015 Use dmy dates from March 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 21 October 2024, at 12:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shuddhadvaita 7 languages Add topic

