Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Services 2 Observations 3 Research Toggle Research subsection 3.1 Air quality activities 3.2 Space Research 4 Staff 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Finnish Meteorological Institute 14 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Eesti Español Français Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Norsk bokmål Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government agency responsible for gathering and reporting weather data and forecasts in Finland Dynamicum , the building where the Finnish Meteorological Institute is located in Helsinki .

The Finnish Meteorological Institute ( FMI ; Finnish : Ilmatieteen laitos ; Swedish : Meteorologiska institutet ) is the government agency responsible for gathering and reporting weather data and forecasts in Finland . It is a part of the Ministry of Transport and Communications but it operates semi-autonomously.

The Institute is an impartial research and service organisation with expertise covering a wide range of atmospheric science activities other than gathering and reporting weather data and forecasts. The headquarters of the Institute is in Kumpula Campus , Helsinki, Finland.

C-Band Doppler weather radar at Korpo , Pargas , Finland . Design, planning, maintenance and operation by Finnish Meteorological Institute.

Services [ edit ] FMI provides weather forecasts for aviation, traffic, shipping and media as well as private citizens via internet and mobile devices. It also has air quality services. For sea areas, it provides information about ice cover, sea level changes and waves.

[ 1 ] In 2013 FMI made openly available data sets such as weather, sea and climate observation data, time series and model data. The open data is targeted to benefit application developers who want to develop new services, applications and products.

[ 2 ] In 2009, researchers from VTT published a study assessing the benefits generated by the services offered by the Finnish Meteorological  Institute. They concluded in sum in range of 260-290 million euros, while the annual budget of the institute was around 50 – 60 million Euros. This leads to estimate for annual benefit-cost ratio for the services to be at least 5:1.

[ 3 ] Observations [ edit ] Finnish Meteorological Institute makes observations of the atmosphere, sea and space at over 400 stations around Finland.

[ 4 ] Its weather radar network consists of 10 C-band Doppler weather radars .

[ 5 ] Research [ edit ] The research areas of FMI include meteorology , air quality , climate change , earth observation , marine and arctic research. Scientific research at FMI is mainly organized around three centers; "Weather, Sea and Climate Service Center", "Observing and Information Service Systems Center", "Space and Earth Observation Center", and two programs; "Meteorological and Marine Research Program", "Climate Research Program".

Every year FMI's researchers publish about 300 peer-reviewed articles.

[ 6 ] The institute is an active member of the University of the Arctic . UArctic is an international cooperative network based in the Circumpolar Arctic region, consisting of more than 200 universities, colleges, and other organizations with an interest in promoting education and research in the Arctic region.

[ 7 ] Air quality activities [ edit ] The Finnish Meteorological Institute has investigated air quality processes and air pollution prevention techniques since the early 1970s. Their staff members have comprehensive competence within the areas of meteorology , physics , chemistry , biology and engineering . Integrated work is done in cooperation with many other European research institutes and universities.

The air quality activities conducted by the Institute include: Research, testing and development of air quality measuring methods and equipment.

Development of air pollutant emission inventories.

Development of air pollution dispersion models [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Performing chemical analyses of air quality.

Study and development of air pollution prevention techniques.

The suite of local-scale (0 – 30 km) dispersion models available at the Institute includes: An urban area, multiple-source dispersion model.

Vehicular pollution line-source dispersion models.

Dispersion models for hazardous materials.

Dispersion models for odorous compounds.

Dispersion models for larger scales (30 to 3000 km) are also available.

Space Research [ edit ] The Finnish Meteorological Institute is one of the few places in Finland where space research takes place. The institute has been a part of several high-profile NASA and ESA missions, such as Phoenix , Mars Science Laboratory , Rosetta and BepiColombo , in addition to leading a lander mission of their own, MetNet .

[ 10 ] They worked with Spain and the United States to contribute to the Rover Environmental Monitoring Station (REMS) on Mars Science Laboratory ( Curiosity ).

The Finnish Meteorological Institute has designed and produced parts to the robotic space probe Rosetta and robotic lander Philae , which sent some data from comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko in 2014-2015.

[ 11 ] The electric solar wind sail , invented 2006 by FMi scientist Pekka Janhunen , got the 2010 Finnish Quality Innovation Prize among Potential innovations.

[ 12 ] It was tested in ESTCube-1 satellite.

[ 13 ] Staff [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The number of full-time staff of the Finnish Meteorological Institute is about 540. Permanent staff members account for about 2/3 of the Institute's personnel and those with contractual posts account for the remainder. The Institute operates in on a round-the-clock basis and about 30 percent of the full-time staff work in shifts.

54 percent of the staff have university degrees and 15 percent have a licentiate or PhD degree. The average age of the staff is 43 years.

See also [ edit ] Climate change in Finland Foreca List of atmospheric dispersion models National Center for Atmospheric Research National Environmental Research Institute of Denmark NILU, the Norwegian Institute for Air Research Roadway air dispersion modeling SILAM Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute TA Luft UK Atmospheric Dispersion Modelling Liaison Committee UK Dispersion Modelling Bureau University Corporation for Atmospheric Research References [ edit ] ^ Services and products FMI ^ Finnish Meteorological Institute makes its data sets public Ministry of Transport and Communications (Finland) ^ Leviäkangas, Pekka; Hautala, Raine (2009).

"Benefits and value of meteorological information services – the case of the Finnish Meteorological Institute" .

Meteorol. Appl .

16 (2009): 369– 379.

Bibcode : 2009MeApp..16..369L .

doi : 10.1002/met.135 . Retrieved 15 February 2016 .

^ Observations FMI ^ FMI Radar network FMI ^ Science News FMI ^ www.uarctic.org ^ Turner, D.B. (1994).

Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates: an introduction to dispersion modeling (2nd ed.). CRC Press.

ISBN 1-56670-023-X .

www.crcpress.com Archived November 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Beychok, Milton R. (2005).

Fundamentals Of Stack Gas Dispersion (4th ed.). author-published.

ISBN 0-9644588-0-2 .

www.air-dispersion.com ^ "FMI-SPACE" .

^ Finnish Space Technology On Board Rosetta And Philae InooConnections 2014 ^ "E-sail" .

www.electric-sailing.fi .

^ "ESTCube-1 ceased working after 2 years in orbit | Estonian Space Office" . Archived from the original on 2016-02-23 . Retrieved 2016-02-15 .

External links [ edit ] Finnish Meteorological Institute Public GIS Map Database Ministry of Transport and Communications Finland v t e National meteorological organizations Africa Algeria Ghana Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Bermuda Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan China Hong Kong (PRC) India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan North Korea South Korea Macau (PRC) Malaysia Pakistan Palestine Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Réunion (France) Tonga Tuvalu Regional: Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts European Severe Storms Laboratory Global: World Meteorological Organization v t e Government agencies and public bodies of Finland Parliament Parliamentary Office Office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman Institute of International Affairs National Audit Office Prime Minister's Office Office of the Chancellor of Justice Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry National Land Survey Natural Resources Institute Food Authority Ministry of Defence Construction Establishment of Defence Administration [ fi ] Defence Forces Ministry of Education and Culture Governing Body of Suomenlinna National Archives Research Council Heritage Agency Institute for the Languages of Finland Arts Promotion Centre [ fi ] National Audiovisual Institute Library for the Print Disabled [ fi ] National Repository Library National Agency for Education Lecturers abroad Lycée franco-finlandais d'Helsinki Suomalais-venäläinen koulu [ fi ] Maritime Safety Training Centre European School of Helsinki [ fi ] European Schools Valteri School Sámi Education Institute [ fi ] Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment Development and Administration Centre for the ELY Centres and TE Offices Finnish Energy Authority Geological Survey Patent and Registration Office [ fi ] Business Finland Safety and Chemicals Agency Competition and Consumer Authority Ministry of the Environment Housing Finance and Development Centre Finnish Environment Institute Ministry of Finance Population Register Centre State Treasury Finnish Customs Finnish Tax Administration VATT Institute for Economic Research Government Shared Services Centre for Finance and HR [ fi ] Financial Stability Authority Government ICT Centre Valtori [ fi ] Statistics Finland Ministry for Foreign Affairs Ministry for Foreign Affairs' missions Ministry of the Interior Immigration Service Border Guard Security and Intelligence Service Emergency Services Academy [ fi ] Emergency Response Centre Agency [ fi ] Crisis Management Centre [ fi ] National Police Board National Bureau of Investigation Police University College Ministry of Justice Prosecution Service Legal Register Centre [ fi ] Criminal Sanctions Agency European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control [ fi ] Office of the Data Protection Ombudsman Safety Investigation Authority Office of the Ombudsman for Children [ fi ] Office of the Ombudsman for Equality [ fi ] Office of the Non-Discrimination Ombudsman [ fi ] Enforcement Office of Bankruptcy Ombudsman [ fi ] National Administrative Office for Enforcement Ministry of Social Affairs and Health Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority Medicines Agency Fimea National Supervisory Authority for Welfare and Health Social Security Appeal Board Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare Old Vaasa Hospital [ fi ] Niuvanniemi Hospital Valtion koulukodit Health Care Services for Prisoners Ministry of Transport and Communications Transport Infrastructure Agency Transport and Communications Agency Traficom Meteorological Institute Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Norway Israel Finland Academics CiNii Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Finnish_Meteorological_Institute&oldid=1279246329 " Categories : Atmospheric dispersion modeling Governmental meteorological agencies in Europe Research institutes in Finland Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 7 March 2025, at 10:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Finnish Meteorological Institute 14 languages Add topic

