Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Characteristics 3 Movement 4 Effects 5 Regional impacts 6 DANA 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Cut-off low 2 languages 한국어 Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meteorological phenomenon Kona Low over Hawaii , an example of a cut-off low from the main core of the jet stream .

[ 1 ] A cut-off low (or cutoff low ), sometimes referred to as the weatherman's woe , is defined by the National Weather Service as "a closed upper-level low which has become completely displaced (cut off) from basic westerly current , and moves independently of that current." Cut-off lows form in mid-latitudes (usually between 20° and 45°) and can remain nearly stationary for days.

[ 2 ] Formation [ edit ] A cut-off low is a cold-core low where wind in the upper levels of the troposphere is "cut off" from the primary westerly winds of the jet stream . They are formed when a trough in the upper-air flow pinches off and separates into a closed circulation. It is defined by concentric isotherms around the core of the low . Because they are a feature of the mid- to upper-troposphere, they may not be visible on a surface weather analysis . Because they are separated from the main westerly flow, cut-off lows can move slowly and erratically. In certain arrangements, known as a block or a blocking pattern, they can remain in place for long periods of time.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Whilst cut-off lows can form at any time of the year, they are more common in autumn, winter and spring in much of the areas affected, particularly in Australia and the Mediterranean Basin , when a mass of polar air is brought towards more southern regions (or northern, in the southern hemisphere) by the jet stream moving between 5 and 9 km altitude .

[ 5 ] Characteristics [ edit ] A cut-off low situated over Italy and the tip of northern Libya.

The diameter of a cut-off low can vary from a few hundred to a thousand kilometers. The air there is homogeneous and without a front line separating it from the surrounding masses, while having a decisive influence on the weather. It then most often leads to an atmospheric blocking circulation and the formation of an upper level low . High cold drops, between 1,000 and 10,000 m, are regions of low stability, while low cold drops are regions of relatively stable air. Composed of very cold air of polar origin, it typically has a horizontal extent of 300 to 1000 km and is 5,000 to 10,000 meters above sea level .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Movement [ edit ] A cut-off low has a slow movement, typically over a confined region, where it produces heavy rainfall. They are volatile, baroclinic systems that meander to the west with strong convergence and an ascending motion, especially when they are deepening.

[ 8 ] A cut-off low can persist from a few days to more than a week. It may be absorbed into the general circulation while another forms in the same place a few days later. The evolution and movement of a cold low, like any weather blockage , is therefore uncertain.

Effects [ edit ] Effects of a cut-off low of September 1997 in Alicante .

Cut off lows typically create unsettled weather and, in the warm season, they may produce a lot of thunderstorms . A cut-off low has a slow movement, typically over a confined region, where it produces heavy rainfall, and can result in severe flooding.

[ 9 ] For example, a cut-off low was responsible for the July 2021 floods in Europe .

Regional impacts [ edit ] In southeastern Australia, cut-off lows can be associated with Australian east coast lows , which are subtropical cyclones or extratropical cyclones that originate from the east. In eastern Australia, a cut-off low can bring accumulating and widespread snowfall at low-level areas and as well as elevated regions in the subtropics .

[ 10 ] DANA [ edit ] In Spain, cut-off lows are often referred to as DANA ( Depresión Aislada en Niveles Altos , 'Isolated Upper-Level Depression'), stresses the characteristic of upper-level lows, differentiating them from other lows, such as thermal lows originating in lower atmosphere levels during the summer months.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Cold-core low References [ edit ] ^ Kona Low over Hawaii The Earth Observatory ^ Buzz word: 'Cut-off low' to bring rain to DMV most of the week WUSA-TV ^ Cut-off low by Weather Online ^ "Case Study: Blocking Highs and Closed Lows | Learning Weather at Penn State Meteorology" .

^ Cut-off Lows by the Bureau of Meteorology ^ de la Torre, Laura; Gimeno, Luis; Nieto, Raquel; Ribera, Pedro; Gallego, David; García-Herrera, Ricardo; García, José Agustín; Nuñez, Marcelino; Redaño, Angel; Lorente, Jerónimo (2005).

"Climatological Features of Cutoff Low Systems in the Northern Hemisphere" .

Journal of Climate .

18 (16): 3085– 3103.

Bibcode : 2005JCli...18.3085N .

doi : 10.1175/JCLI3386.1 .

^ Llasat, M.-C.; Martín, F.; Barrera, A. (2007).

"From the concept of "Kaltlufttropfen" (cold air pool) to the cut-off low. The case of September 1971 in Spain as an example of their role in heavy rainfalls" .

Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics .

96 ( 1– 2): 43– 60.

Bibcode : 2007MAP....96...43L .

doi : 10.1007/s00703-006-0220-9 .

^ Cut-Off Low pressure systems - Meteorological Physical Background EUMeTrain ^ Cut-Off Low pressure systems - Meteorological Physical Background EUMeTrain ^ Sydney shivers through coldest day since 1984 as snow blankets NSW By Sarah McPhee and Daniella White from The Daily Telegraph. June 10, 2021 ^ Martín León, Francisco.

"Las gotas frías / DANAS. Ideas y conceptos básicos" (PDF) .

AEMET . p. 5.

v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cut-off_low&oldid=1294126093 " Categories : Meteorological phenomena Cold Weather events Atmospheric dynamics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 19:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cut-off low 2 languages Add topic

