Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Maintaining contact 3 Management by peers or professionals 4 Types 5 Online support groups Toggle Online support groups subsection 5.1 Appropriate groups still difficult to find 5.2 Benefits and pitfalls 5.3 Mental health 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Support group 19 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Esperanto Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو ייִדיש Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gathering of people discussing a shared burden See also: Peer support In a support group , members provide each other with various types of help, usually nonprofessional and nonmaterial, for a particular shared, usually burdensome, characteristic. Members with the same issues can come together for sharing coping strategies, to feel more empowered and for a sense of community. The help may take the form of providing and evaluating relevant information, relating personal experiences, listening to and accepting others' experiences, providing sympathetic understanding and establishing social networks . A support group may also work to inform the public or engage in advocacy.

History [ edit ] Formal support groups may appear to be a modern phenomenon, but they supplement traditional fraternal organizations such as Freemasonry in some respects, and may build on certain supportive functions (formerly) carried out in (extended) families .

Other types of groups formed to support causes, including causes outside of themselves, are more often called advocacy groups , interest groups , lobby groups , pressure groups or promotional groups .

Trade unions and many environmental groups, for example, are interest groups.  The term support group in this article refers to peer-to-peer support.

Maintaining contact [ edit ] Support groups maintain interpersonal contact among their members in a variety of ways. Traditionally, groups meet in person in sizes that allow conversational interaction. Support groups also maintain contact through printed newsletters, telephone chains, internet forums, and mailing lists. Some support groups are exclusively online (see below).

Membership in some support groups is formally controlled, with admission requirements and membership fees. Other groups are "open" and allow anyone to attend an advertised meeting, for example, or to participate in an online forum.

Management by peers or professionals [ edit ] A self-help support group is fully organized and managed by its members, who are commonly volunteers and have personal experience in the subject of the group's focus. These groups may also be referred to as fellowships , peer support groups , lay organizations , mutual help groups , or mutual aid self-help groups . Most common are 12-step groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous and self-help groups for mental health .

Professionally operated support groups are facilitated by professionals who most often do not share the problem of the members, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] such as social workers, psychologists, or members of the clergy. The facilitator controls discussions and provides other managerial service. Such professionally operated groups are often found in institutional settings, including hospitals , drug-treatment centers and correctional facilities . These types of support groups may run for a specified period of time, and an attendance fee is sometimes charged.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] In the case of a disease , an identity or a pre-disposition, for example, a support group will provide information, act as a clearing-house for experiences, and may serve as a public relations voice for affected people, other members, and their families. Groups for high IQ or LGBTQIA+ individuals, for example, differ in their inclusivity, but both connect people on the basis of identity or pre-disposition.

[ citation needed ] For more temporary concerns, such as bereavement or episodic medical conditions, a support group may veer more towards helping those involved to overcome or push through their condition/experience.

Some support groups and conditions for which such groups may be formed are: Addiction AIDS Alzheimer's Alcoholics Anonymous Anxiety disorders Asperger syndrome Borderline personality disorder Breastfeeding Brain attack or Brain trauma Cancer Circadian rhythm disorders , e.g.

DSPD , Non-24 Codependency Diabetes Debtors Anonymous Domestic violence Eating disorders Erythema nodosum Families of addicts & alcoholics Fibromyalgia Gamblers Anonymous Grief Infertility Inflammatory bowel disease Irritable bowel syndrome Mental Health Miscarriage Mood disorders Narcolepsy Parkinson's disease Red Skin Syndrome/Topical Steroid Addiction and Withdrawal Sexual abuse survivors Sleep disorders Stuttering Suicide prevention Ulcerative colitis Online support groups [ edit ] Since at least 1982, the Internet has provided a venue for support groups. Discussing online self-help support groups as the precursor to e-therapy, Martha Ainsworth notes that "the enduring success of these groups has firmly established the potential of computer-mediated communication to enable discussion of sensitive personal issues." [ 3 ] In one study of the effectiveness of online support groups among patients with head and neck cancer, longer participation in online support groups were found to result in a better health-related quality of life.

[ 4 ] Gerald Ganglbauer's Parkins(on)line Appropriate groups still difficult to find [ edit ] A researcher from University College London says the lack of qualitative directories, and the fact that many support groups are not listed by search engines can make finding an appropriate group difficult.

[ 5 ] Even so, he does say that the medical community needs "to understand the use of personal experiences rather than an evidence-based approach... these groups also impact on how individuals use information.  They can help people learn how to find and use information: for example, users swap Web sites and discuss Web sites." It is not difficult to find an online support group, but it is hard to find a good one.  In the article What to Look for in Quality Online Support Groups , John M. Grohol gives tips for evaluating online groups and states: "In good online support groups, members stick around long after they've received the support they were seeking. They stay because they want to give others what they themselves found in the group. Psychologists call this high group cohesion , and it is the pinnacle of group achievement." [ 6 ] Benefits and pitfalls [ edit ] Several studies have shown the importance of the Internet in providing social support, particularly to groups with chronic health problems.

[ 7 ] Especially in cases of uncommon ailments, a sense of community and understanding in spite of great geographical distances can be important, in addition to sharing of knowledge.

Online support groups, online communities for those affected by a common problem, give mutual support and provide information, two often inseparable features.  They are, according to Henry Potts of University College London, "an overlooked resource for patients."   Many studies have looked at the content of messages , while what matters is the effect that participation in the group has on the individual.  Potts complains that research on these groups has lagged behind, particularly on the groups which are set up by the people with the problems, rather than by researchers and healthcare professionals.  User-defined groups can share the sort of practical knowledge that healthcare professionals can overlook, and they also impact on how individuals find, interpret and use information.

[ 5 ] There are many benefits to online support groups that have been found through research studies. Although online support group users are not required to be anonymous, a study conducted by Baym (2010) finds that anonymity is beneficial to those who are lonely or anxious. This does not pertain to some people seeking support groups, because not all are lonely and/or anxious, but for those who are, online support groups are a great outlet where one can feel comfortable honestly expressing themselves because the other users do not know who they are.

A study was conducted by Walther and Boyd (2000) and they found a common trend to why people find online support groups appealing. First, the social distance between members online reduced embarrassment and they appreciated the greater range of expertise offered in the larger online social network. Next, they found that anonymity increased one's confidence in providing support to others and decreased embarrassment. The users of the social support websites were more comfortable being able to reread and edit their comments and discussion forum entries before sending them, and they have access to the website any time during the day. Each of these characteristics of online support groups are not offered when going to an in-person support group.

In a study conducted by Gunther Eysenbach, John Powell, Marina Englesakis, Carlos Rizo, and Anita Stern (2004), the researchers found it difficult to draw conclusions on the effectiveness of online peer-to-peer support groups. In online support groups, people must have the desire to support and help each other, and many times participants go on the sites in order to get help themselves or are limited to a certain subgroup.

An additional benefit to online support groups is that participation is asynchronous.  This means that it is not necessary for all participants to be logged into the forum simultaneously in order to communicate.  An experience or question can be posted and others can answer questions or comment on posts whenever they are logged in and have an appropriate response.  This characteristic allows for participation and mass communication without having to worry about time constraints. Additionally, there are 24-hour chat rooms and spaces for focused conversation at all times of the day or night. This allows users to get the support they need whenever they need it, while remaining comfortable and, if they so wish, anonymous.

Mental health [ edit ] Although there has been relatively little research on the effectiveness of online support groups in mental health, [ 8 ] there is some evidence that online support groups can be beneficial.

[ 9 ] Large randomised controlled trials have both found positive effects [ 10 ] and failed to find positive effects.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Group psychotherapy Self-help groups for mental health List of Twelve-Step groups Category:Online support groups References [ edit ] ^ a b APA Dictionary of Psychology , 1st ed., Gary R. VandenBos, ed., Washington: American Psychological Association, 2007.

^ Rosenstein, D. & Yopp, J. (2018).

The Group: Seven Widowed Fathers Reimagine Life . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-190-64956-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ainsworth, Martha.

"E-Therapy: History and Survey" . Retrieved 15 April 2008 .

^ Algtewi, Eamar; Owens, Janine; Baker, Sarah R. (17 April 2017).

"Online support groups for head and neck cancer and health-related quality of life" .

Quality of Life Research .

26 (9): 2351– 2362.

doi : 10.1007/s11136-017-1575-8 .

ISSN 0962-9343 .

PMC 5548849 .

PMID 28417218 .

^ a b Potts HW.

"Online support groups: An overlooked resource for patients" (PDF) .

He@LTH Information on the Internet .

44 (1): 6– 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2006.

^ Grohol, John M. (May 2004).

"What to Look for in Quality Online Support Groups" . Archived from the original on 14 January 2010 . Retrieved 15 April 2008 .

^ Powell, John; Aileen Clarke (2002).

"The WWW of the World Wide Web: Who, What, and Why?" .

Journal of Medical Internet Research .

4 (1): e4.

doi : 10.2196/jmir.4.1.e4 .

PMC 1761925 .

PMID 11956036 .

^ a b Dean, J; Potts, HWW; Barker, C (2016).

"Direction to an Internet Support Group Compared With Online Expressive Writing for People With Depression And Anxiety: A Randomized Trial" .

JMIR Mental Health .

3 (2): e12.

doi : 10.2196/mental.5133 .

PMC 4887661 .

PMID 27189142 .

^ Griffiths, KM; Calear, AL ; Banfield, M (2009).

"Systematic review on Internet Support Groups (ISGs) and depression (1): Do ISGs reduce depressive symptoms?" .

J Med Internet Res .

11 (3): e40.

doi : 10.2196/jmir.1270 .

PMC 2802256 .

PMID 19793719 .

^ Griffiths, KM; Mackinnon, AJ; Crisp, DA; Christensen, H; Bennett, K; Farrer, L (2012).

"The effectiveness of an online support group for members of the community with depression: a randomised controlled trial" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (12): e53244.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...753244G .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0053244 .

PMC 3532446 .

PMID 23285271 .

External links [ edit ] v t e Psychotherapy Schools Psychodynamic Adlerian therapy Analytical therapy Mentalization-based treatment Psychoanalysis Transference focused psychotherapy Cognitive and behavioral Clinical behavior analysis Acceptance and commitment therapy Functional analytic psychotherapy Cognitive behavioral therapy Cognitive therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy Rational emotive behavior therapy Humanistic Emotionally focused therapy Existential therapy Focusing Gestalt therapy Logotherapy Person-centered therapy Other Art therapy Dance therapy Feminist therapy Music therapy Narrative therapy Play therapy Reality therapy Systemic therapy Transactional analysis List Integrative Eclectic psychotherapy Multimodal therapy Transtheoretical model Approaches Brief psychotherapy Counseling Online therapy Telephone therapy Residential treatment Self-help Support group Research Clinical formulation Clinical pluralism Common factors theory Discontinuation History Practitioner–scholar model Techniques Behaviour therapy Aversion therapy Chaining Contingency management Shaping Stimulus control Token economy Counterconditioning Desensitization / Exposure therapy Systematic desensitization Other individual therapy Autogenic training Biofeedback Clean language Cognitive restructuring Emotion regulation Affect labeling Free association Homework Hypnotherapy Modeling Group psychotherapy Co-therapy Couples therapy Family therapy Psychodrama Sensitivity training People Philippe Pinel Josef Breuer Sigmund Freud Pierre Janet Alfred Adler Sándor Ferenczi Carl Jung Ludwig Binswanger Melanie Klein Otto Rank Karen Horney Harry Stack Sullivan Fritz Perls Anna Freud Donald Winnicott Wilhelm Reich Milton H. Erickson Jacques Lacan Erik Erikson Carl Rogers Viktor Frankl George Kelly Rollo May Virginia Axline Carl Whitaker Albert Ellis Silvano Arieti James Bugental Joseph Wolpe Virginia Satir Aaron Beck Salvador Minuchin Paul Watzlawick Haim Ginott Ogden Lindsley Paul Watzlawick Arthur Janov Eugene Gendlin R. D. Laing Jean Baker Miller Otto F. Kernberg Nathan Azrin Irvin D. Yalom Arnold Lazarus Lorna Smith Benjamin Marsha M. Linehan Vittorio Guidano Les Greenberg William R. Miller Steven C. Hayes Michael White Jeffrey Young Peter Fonagy Associations Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies Association for Behavior Analysis International European Association for Psychotherapy Society for Psychotherapy Research World Council for Psychotherapy Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Support_group&oldid=1290245612 " Categories : Aftermath of war Support groups Self-care Types of organization Personal development Grief Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Support group 19 languages Add topic

