Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Domain of discourse 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Português Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Universe of discourse ) Type of abstract object A symbol for the set of domain of discourse In the formal sciences , the domain of discourse or universe of discourse (borrowing from the mathematical concept of universe ) is the set of entities over which certain variables of interest in some formal treatment may range.

It is also defined as the collection of objects being discussed in a specific discourse .
In model-theoretical semantics , a universe of discourse is the set of entities that a model is based on.

The domain of discourse is usually identified in the preliminaries, so that there is no need in the further treatment to specify each time the range of the relevant variables.

[ 1 ] Many logicians distinguish, sometimes only tacitly, between the domain of a science and the universe of discourse of a formalization of the science .

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] The concept universe of discourse was used for the first time by George Boole (1854) on page 42 of his Laws of Thought : In every discourse, whether of the mind conversing with its own thoughts, or of the individual in his folley with others, there is an assumed or expressed limit within which the subjects of its operation are confined. The most unfettered discourse is that in which the words we use are understood in the widest possible application, and for them the limits of discourse are co-extensive with those of the universe itself. But more usually we confine ourselves to a less spacious field. Sometimes, in discoursing of men we imply (without expressing the limitation) that it is of men only under certain circumstances and conditions that we speak, as of civilized men, or of men in the vigour of life, or of men under some other condition or relation. Now, whatever may be the extent of the field within which all the objects of our discourse are found, that field may properly be termed the universe of discourse. Furthermore, this universe of discourse is in the strictest sense the ultimate subject of the discourse.

— George Boole , The Laws of Thought.

1854/2003. p. 42.

[ 3 ] The concept, probably discovered independently by Boole in 1847, played a crucial role in his philosophy of logic especially in his principle of wholistic reference .

Alfred North Whitehead cited Augustus De Morgan as identifying "that limited class of things which is the special subject of discourse on any particular occasion. Such a class was called by De Morgan, the Universe of Discourse." [ 4 ] Lewis Carroll expressed the need for a universe of discourse as follows: It sometimes happens that, in one or both of the Terms of a Proposition, the Name consists of Adjectives only, the Substantive being understood. In order to express such a Proposition fully , we must supply the Name of some Class which may be regarded as a Genus of which each Term is a Species...The Genus referred to is called the Universe of Discourse ...

[ 5 ] Examples [ edit ] For example, in an interpretation of first-order logic , the domain of discourse is the set of individuals over which the quantifiers range. A proposition such as ∀ x ( x 2 ≠ 2) is ambiguous if no domain of discourse has been identified. In one interpretation, the domain of discourse could be the set of real numbers ; in another interpretation, it could be the set of natural numbers . If the domain of discourse is the set of real numbers, the proposition is false, with x = √ 2 as counterexample; if the domain is the set of natural numbers, the proposition is true, since 2 is not the square of any natural number.

The binary relation called set membership , expressed as x ∈ ∈ A {\displaystyle x\in A} , and meaning that x belongs to set A , is clear enough. Every binary relation has a converse relation , and the converse of ∈ ∈ {\displaystyle \in } is written ∋ ∋ {\displaystyle \ni } . Also, a binary relation must have a domain . The domain of the converse of set membership is the universe of discourse. Any subset of this universe may, or may not, contain x .

A is a subset of this universe, not necessarily restricted to A .

See also [ edit ] Look up domain of discourse in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Domain of a function Domain theory Interpretation (logic) Quantifier (logic) Term algebra Universe (mathematics) References [ edit ] ^ Corcoran, John.

Universe of discourse . Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, 1995, p. 941.

^ José Miguel Sagüillo, Domains of sciences, universe of discourse, and omega arguments, History and philosophy of logic, vol. 20 (1999), pp. 267–280.

^ Facsimile of 1854 edition, with an introduction by J. Corcoran. Buffalo: Prometheus Books (2003). Reviewed by James van Evra in Philosophy in Review 24 (2004): 167–169.

^ Alfred North Whitehead (1898) A Treatise on Universal Algebra with Applications, page 100 via Internet Archive ^ Lewis Carroll (1896) Symbolic Logic, Part I: Elementary page 10 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Domain_of_discourse&oldid=1301497087#Universe_of_discourse " Categories : Semantics Predicate logic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 04:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Domain of discourse 12 languages Add topic

