Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the neo-Gramscian perspective 2 Basics of the neo-Gramscian perspective 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Neo-Gramscianism 8 languages العربية Deutsch 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International relations theory Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e International relations theory Constructivism Feminist constructivism Liberalism Idealism Democratic peace theory Capitalist peace Republican liberalism Liberal institutionalism Marxism Dependency theory Theories of imperialism Uneven and combined development World-systems theory Realism Classical realism Neoclassical realism Neorealism Offensive realism Defensive realism Territorial peace theory Democratic peace theory Realpolitik Other theories Neo-Gramscianism Critical security studies Critical theory English School Intergovernmentalism ( liberal intergovernmentalism ) International political economy Feminism Green theory Hegemonic stability theory Copenhagen School Functionalism ( neofunctionalism ) Postmodernism Postcolonialism Intercommunalism Chinese school of international relations Classifications Postpositivism Rationalism Reflectivism " Great Debates " Inter-paradigm debate Other approaches International ethics Historical sociology Regime theory State cartel theory Geopolitics Scholars Michael Barnett Zbigniew Brzezinski Hedley Bull E. H. Carr Daniel Deudney Michael W. Doyle Cynthia Enloe James Fearon Martha Finnemore Robert Gilpin Samuel P. Huntington John Ikenberry Robert Jervis Peter J. Katzenstein Robert Keohane Henry Kissinger Stephen D. Krasner John Mearsheimer Hans Morgenthau Joseph Nye Kathryn Sikkink Susan Strange J. Ann Tickner Immanuel Wallerstein Stephen Walt Kenneth Waltz Alexander Wendt Yan Xuetong Qin Yaqing Categories International relations Politics portal v t e This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Neo-Gramscianism is a critical theory approach to the study of international relations (IR) and the global political economy (GPE) that explores the interface of ideas, institutions and material capabilities as they shape the specific contours of the state formation. The theory is heavily influenced by the writings of Antonio Gramsci .

[ 1 ] Neo-Gramscianism analyzes how the particular constellation of social forces, the state and the dominant ideational configuration define and sustain world orders. In this sense, the neo-Gramscian approach breaks the decades-old stalemate between the realist schools of thought and the liberal theories by historicizing the very theoretical foundations of the two streams as part of a particular world order and finding the interlocking relationship between agency and structure .

Karl Polanyi , Karl Marx , Max Weber , Max Horkheimer , Theodor Adorno and Michel Foucault are cited as major sources within the critical theory of IR.

[ 1 ] Origins of the neo-Gramscian perspective [ edit ] The beginning of the neo-Gramscian perspective can be traced to York University professor emeritus Robert W. Cox 's article "Social Forces, States and World Orders: Beyond International Relations Theory" in Millennium 10 (1981) 2 and "Gramsci, Hegemony and International Relations: An Essay in Method", published in Millennium 12 (1983) 2. In his 1981 article, Cox demands a critical study of IR as opposed to the usual "problem-solving" theories, which do not interrogate the origin, nature and development of historical structures, but accept for example that states and the (supposedly) "anarchic" relationships between them as Kantian Dinge an sich .

However, Cox disavows the label neo-Gramscian despite the fact that in a follow-up article he showed how Gramsci's thought can be used to analyze power structures within the GPE. Particularly Gramsci's concept of cultural hegemony , vastly different from the realists' conception of hegemony, appears fruitful. Gramsci's state theory, his conception of "historic blocs"—dominant configurations of material capabilities, ideologies and institutions as determining frames for individual and collective action —and of élites acting as "organic intellectuals" forging historic blocs, is also deemed useful.

The neo-Gramscian approach has also been developed along somewhat different lines by Cox's colleague, Stephen Gill , distinguished research professor of political science at York University. Gill contributed to showing how the elite Trilateral Commission acted as an "organic intellectual", forging the (currently hegemonic) ideology of neoliberalism and the so-called Washington Consensus and later in relation to the globalization of power and resistance in his book Power and Resistance in the New World Order (Palgrave, 2003). Gill also partnered with fellow Canadian academic A. Claire Cutler to release a neo-Gramscian inspired volume entitled New Constitutionalism and World Order (Cambridge, 2014). The book brings together a selection of critical theorists and neo-Gramscians to analyze the disciplinary power of legal and constitutional innovations in the global political economy. Co-editor A. Claire Cutler has been a pioneer scholar detailing a neo-Gramscian theory of international law .

[ 2 ] Outside of North America, the so-called Amsterdam School around Kees van der Pijl and Henk Overbeek (at VU University Amsterdam ) and individual researchers in Germany, notably in Düsseldorf , Kassel and Marburg as well as at the Centre for Global Political Economy at the University of Sussex in the United Kingdom and other parts of the world, have adopted the neo-Gramscian critical method.

Christoph Scherrer at the University of Kassel is one of the leading neo-Gramscian theorists in Germany who introduced the concept of "double hegemony". He represents the critical global political economy approach in Germany.

[ 3 ] Basics of the neo-Gramscian perspective [ edit ] In the mainstream approaches to international or global political economy, the theoretical primacy of the state is not in question. In contrast, neo-Gramscianism, using an approach which Henk Overbeek, Professor of International Relations at the VU University Amsterdam, calls transnational historical materialism , "identifies state formation and interstate politics as moments of the transnational dynamics of capital accumulation and class formation".

[ 4 ] Neo-Gramscianism perceives state sovereignty as subjugated to a global economic system marked by the emergence of a transnational financial system and a corresponding transnational system of production. The major players in these systems, multinational corporations and international financial institutions such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund , have evolved into a "transnational historic bloc" that exercises global hegemony (in contrast to the realist view of hegemony as the "predominant power of a state or a group of states").

[ 5 ] The historic bloc acquires its authority through the tacit consent of the governed population gained through coercive techniques of intellectual and cultural persuasion, largely absent violence. It links itself to other social groups that have been involved in political struggles [ 6 ] to expand its influence and seeks to solidify its power through the standardization and liberalization of national economies, creating a single regulatory regime (e.g.

World Trade Organization ).

There are powerful forces opposing the progress of this historic bloc who may form counterhegemonies to challenge it as part of an open-ended class struggle. These might include neo-mercantilists who depend on the protection of tariffs and state subsidies, or alliances of lesser developed countries , or identitarian and environmentalist movements in the industrialized West.

[ 7 ] If a counterhegemony grows large enough, it is able to subsume and replace the historic bloc it was born in. Neo-Gramscians use the Machiavellian terms " war of position " and "war of movement" to explain how this is possible. In a war of position, a counterhegemonic movement attempts through persuasion or propaganda to increase the number of people who share its view on the hegemonic order whereas in a war of movement the counterhegemonic tendencies which have grown large enough to overthrow, violently or democratically, the current hegemony and establish themselves as a new historic bloc .

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Jameson, Fredric; Larsen, Neil (1988).

The Ideologies of Theory: Essays 1971-1986 .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-00658-3 .

^ "A. Claire Cutler" .

University of Victoria .

^ Hellmann, Gunther; Wolf, Klaus Dieter; Zürn, Michael (2003).

Die neuen internationalen Beziehungen: Forschungsstand und Perspektiven in Deutschland [ The new international relations: state of research and prospects in Germany ] (in German). Nomos.

ISBN 978-3-8329-0320-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Overbeek, Henk (2000). "Transnational Historical Materialism". In Palan, Ronan (ed.).

Global Political Economy: Contemporary Theories .

Routledge . pp.

168– 169.

ISBN 9780415694117 .

^ Cohn, Theodore H. (2005).

Global Political Economy: Theory and Practice . Pearson. pp.

130– 131.

ISBN 9780367512507 .

^ Emre, Iseri (2007). "Neo-Gramscian Analysis of US Hegemony Today".

In-Spire: Journal of Politics, International Relations and the Environment .

2 (1).

^ Jones, R. J. Barry (2001).

Routledge Encyclopedia of International Political Economy .

Routledge . p. 1106.

ISBN 9780203440162 .

^ Cox, Robert W. (June 1983). "Gramsci, Hegemony and International Relations: An Essay in Method".

Millennium: Journal of International Studies .

12 (2): 162– 175.

doi : 10.1177/03058298830120020701 .

S2CID 143091690 .

External links [ edit ] Andreas Bieler , Adam David Morton : Theoretical and Methodological Challenges of neo-Gramscian Perspectives in International Political Economy [1] Teaching Neo-Gramscian Perspectives [2] Kees van der Pijl , The Making of an Atlantic Ruling Class , London Verso, 1984. Published online 2004 [3] Stephen Gill , A. Claire Cutler , "New Constitutionalism and World Order", Cambridge, 2014.

[4] v t e International relations theory Constructivism Feminist constructivism Liberalism Idealism Democratic peace theory Capitalist peace Republican liberalism Liberal institutionalism Marxism Dependency theory Theories of imperialism Uneven and combined development World-systems theory Realism Classical realism Neoclassical realism Neorealism Offensive realism Defensive realism Territorial peace theory Democratic peace theory Realpolitik Other theories Neo-Gramscianism Critical security studies Critical theory English School Intergovernmentalism ( liberal intergovernmentalism ) International political economy Feminism Green theory Hegemonic stability theory Copenhagen School Functionalism ( neofunctionalism ) Postmodernism Postcolonialism Intercommunalism Chinese school of international relations Classifications Postpositivism Rationalism Reflectivism " Great Debates " Inter-paradigm debate Other approaches International ethics Historical sociology Regime theory State cartel theory Geopolitics Scholars Michael Barnett Zbigniew Brzezinski Hedley Bull E. H. Carr Daniel Deudney Michael W. Doyle Cynthia Enloe James Fearon Martha Finnemore Robert Gilpin Samuel P. Huntington John Ikenberry Robert Jervis Peter J. Katzenstein Robert Keohane Henry Kissinger Stephen D. Krasner John Mearsheimer Hans Morgenthau Joseph Nye Kathryn Sikkink Susan Strange J. Ann Tickner Immanuel Wallerstein Stephen Walt Kenneth Waltz Alexander Wendt Yan Xuetong Qin Yaqing Categories International relations Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neo-Gramscianism&oldid=1299997342 " Categories : Antonio Gramsci Critical theory Eponymous political ideologies Imperialism studies International relations theory Marxist theory Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2023 This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 17:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neo-Gramscianism 8 languages Add topic

