Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common attributes 2 Economic systems Toggle Economic systems subsection 2.1 Labor conditions 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Pre-industrial society 17 languages Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Italiano עברית Nederlands Română Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Societies before industrialization "Tartar Agriculturalist": A Chinese farmer using an ox to pull a scratch plow History of technology By technological eras Premodern / Pre-industrial Prehistoric Stone Age ( lithic ) First Agricultural Revolution Copper Age Urban revolution Bronze Age Iron Age Ancient Modern Proto-industrialization Second Agricultural Revolution First Industrial Revolution Standardization Second Industrial Revolution Machine Age Jet Age Third Agricultural Revolution Atomic Age Space Age Third Industrial Revolution Digital transformation Information Age Fourth Industrial Revolution Imagination Age Future Post-industrial Singularity Emerging technologies By historical regions Ancient Africa Ancient Egypt Indian subcontinent Ancient China Maya civilization Hellenistic world Roman Empire Byzantine Empire Medieval Islamic world Arab Agricultural Revolution Medieval Europe Renaissance Europe By type of technology History of agriculture History of biotechnology History of communication History of computer hardware History of electrical engineering History of manufacturing History of maritime History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of simple machine History of nuclear technology History of transport Technology timelines Timeline of historic inventions Technological revolution Complete list by category Article indices Outline of technology Outline of prehistoric technology v t e Pre-industrial society refers to social attributes and forms of political and cultural organization that were prevalent before the advent of the Industrial Revolution , which occurred from 1750 to 1850.

Pre-industrial refers to a time before there were machines and tools to help perform tasks en masse . Pre-industrial civilization dates back to centuries ago, but the main era known as the pre-industrial society occurred right before the industrial society . Pre-Industrial societies vary from region to region depending on the culture of a given area or history of social and political life. Europe was known for its feudal system and the Italian Renaissance .

The term "pre-industrial" is also used as a benchmark for environmental conditions before the development of industrial society: for example, the Paris Agreement , adopted in Paris on 12 December, 2015 and in force from 4 November, 2016, "aims to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees celsius , compared to pre-industrial levels." [ 1 ] The date for the end of the "pre-industrial era" is not defined.

[ 2 ] Common attributes [ edit ] Limited production Extreme agricultural economy Limited division of labor . In pre-industrial societies, production was relatively simple and the number of specialized crafts was limited.

Limited variation of social classes Parochialism — Communications were limited between communities in pre-industrial societies. Few had the opportunity to see or hear beyond their own village. Industrial societies grew with the help of faster means of communication, having more information at hand about the world, allowing knowledge transfer and cultural diffusion between them.

Populations grew at substantial rates [ 3 ] Social classes: peasants and lords [ 4 ] Subsistence level of living [ 4 ] Population dependent on peasants for food [ 4 ] People were located in villages rather than in cities Economic systems [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2016 ) Hunter gather society [ 4 ] Commodity market Mercantilism Subsistence agriculture Subsistence Labor conditions [ edit ] Harsh working conditions had been prevalent long before the Industrial Revolution took place. Pre-industrial society was very static, and child labour , dirty living conditions, and long working hours were not as equally prevalent before the Industrial Revolution.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Agrarian society Industrialisation Modernization theory Traditional society Dependency Theory Imperialism Hunter gatherers Low technology Transhumance Nomads Pastoral nomads Post-industrial society Proto-industrialization References [ edit ] ^ UNFCCC, The Paris Agreement , accessed 30 December 2020 ^ Hawkins, E. (2017), Defining 'pre-industrial' , published 25 January 2017, accessed 30 December 2020 ^ Cipolla, Carlo M. Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy, 1000–1700. New York: Norton, 1976 ^ a b c d Persson, Karl Gunnar. Pre-industrial Economic Growth: Social Organization, and Technological Progress in Europe. Oxford: Blackwell, 1988.

^ R.M. Hartwell, The Industrial Revolution and Economic Growth , Methuen and Co., 1971, pp. 339–41 ISBN 0-416-19500-8 Bibliography [ edit ] Grinin, L.

2007. Periodization of History: A theoretic-mathematical analysis. In: History & Mathematics . Ed. by Leonid Grinin, Victor de Munck, and Andrey Korotayev . Moscow: KomKniga/URSS. P.10-38.

ISBN 978-5-484-01001-1 .

v t e Types of societies Pre-industrial Hunter-gatherer Montane Circumpolar Subarctic Nomadic Pastoral Horticultural Agricultural/Agrarian Feudal Complex Proto-Industrial Industrial Post-industrial Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pre-industrial_society&oldid=1280700821 " Categories : Sociological terminology Industrial Revolution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles to be expanded from February 2016 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 23:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pre-industrial society 17 languages Add topic

