Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope Toggle Scope subsection 1.1 Basic science 1.2 The planets 1.3 Other studies 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Planetary and Space Science 3 languages Français Nederlands Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Planetary and Space Science Discipline Solar System , planetary science , space science Language English Edited by Maria Cristina De Sanctis Publication details History 1959–present Publisher Elsevier Frequency 15/year Impact factor 2.03 (2020) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Planet. Space Sci.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN PLSSAE ISSN 0032-0633 LCCN 60003632 OCLC no.

1762457 Links Journal homepage Online archive Planetary and Space Science ( P&SS ), published 15 times per year, is a peer-reviewed scientific journal established in 1959. It publishes original research articles along with short communications (letters). The main topic is Solar System processes which encompasses multiple areas of the natural sciences .

Numerical simulations of solar system processes are also conducted at ground-based facilities or on-board space platforms. The editor-in-chief is Maria Cristina De Sanctis (National Institute of Astrophysics, Roma, Italy). It is published by Elsevier .

[ 1 ] Scope [ edit ] Research that involves planetary and space sciences involves many disciplines, which is reflected by the scope of the journal.

[ 2 ] Basic science [ edit ] Celestial mechanics is part of these studies, as this science includes understanding the dynamic evolution of the Solar System, relativistic effects, among other areas of analysis and consideration.

Cosmochemistry is also part of the published research in this journal. Cosmochemistry in this instance, includes all aspects of the initial physical and chemical formation along with the subsequent evolution of the solar system pertaining to these physical and chemical processes.

[ 2 ] The planets [ edit ] The research expands to include the terrestrial planets , and their satellites . This involves the physics of the interior, the geology of the planet or satellite surface, the surface morphology, and studying their tectonics, mineralogy and dating. Observing the outer planets and their satellites includes studying formation and evolution. This method of observation and study involves remote sensing at all wavelengths and in situ measurements.

Planet formation and planet evolution is of interest when gathering and interpreting data for planetary atmospheres .

Atmospheric circulation , meteorology, and boundary layers are also part of the original published research. Understanding is gained through remote sensing and laboratory simulation .

The study of planets also includes magnetospheres and ionospheres . The origin of their respective magnetic fields, magnetospheric plasma and radiation belts is also of interest. Included in this area is the interaction of magnetospheres and ionospheres with the Sun , solar wind , and their natural satellites .

Other studies [ edit ] Research that involves the small bodies of the Solar System is also published. Small bodies describes dust, objects of rings, asteroids, comets, zodiacal light. This research also describes their interaction with solar radiation and the solar wind.

Beyond the Solar System, extrasolar system studies are also considered a field of interest for this journal. This includes detection of exoplanets, as well as determining whether or not given exoplanets or exosystems can be detected. Also the formation and evolution of these planets and systems are of interest.

History of planetary and space research is also part of the journal's scope.

Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] The journal is abstracted and indexed in: [ 3 ] Applied Mechanics Reviews Cambridge Scientific Abstracts Chemical Abstracts Current Contents /Physics, Chemical, & Earth Sciences Environmental Periodicals Bibliography Inspec Meteorological & Geoastrophysical Abstracts PASCAL Scopus According to the Journal Citation Reports , the journal has a 2020 impact factor of 2.03.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Planetary and Space Science Editorial Board .

^ a b Esteban, C. (July 2004).

Cosmochemistry: The Melting Pot of the Elements .

Cambridge University Press . pp. xi.

ISBN 978-0-521-82768-3 .

^ "Abstracting and indexing" .

Planetary and Space Science . Elsevier . Retrieved 24 October 2010 .

^ "Planetary and Space Science".

2020 Journal Citation Reports .

Web of Science (Science ed.).

Thomson Reuters . 2021.

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planetary_and_Space_Science&oldid=1152363170 " Categories : English-language journals Elsevier academic journals Academic journals established in 1959 Space science journals Journals published between 13 and 25 times per year Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata 15 times per year journals (infobox) Articles with outdated impact factors from 2020 This page was last edited on 29 April 2023, at 19:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Planetary and Space Science 3 languages Add topic

