Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Henricus Reneri 2 languages Français Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch philosopher Writing by Henricus Reneri Henricus Reneri or Renerius (1593, Huy – 20 March 1639, Utrecht ) was a Dutch [ 1 ] philosopher.

Life [ edit ] Reneri was born at Huy in the Prince-Bishopric of Liège in 1593. He studied liberal arts at the University of Leuven and attended the Grand Séminaire of Liège . After his conversion to Calvinism in 1616 he went to the Dutch Republic . He studied theology at the Collège Wallon at Leiden, but he broke off his studies in 1621. The following ten years Reneri worked as a private tutor to the children of several Amsterdam merchant-regents, including Adriaan Pauw . In the meantime he studied medicine at Leiden University . In 1631 he found a position as professor of philosophy at the illustrious school of Deventer , the Illustre Gymnasium. From 1634 he held the same chair at the newly founded illustrious school of Utrecht, which was raised to the status of university in 1636. He died only three years later, at the age of 46.

Reneri mainly taught scholastic logic and natural philosophy. Apart from his professorship, he worked on a method of his own in the Ramist tradition. This method met especially with much enthusiasm within the Hartlib circle, the European network around the English pansophist Samuel Hartlib . Furthermore, Reneri was engaged in experiments and inventions in the fields of optics , thermometers , water clocks , alchemy and natural magic .

Reneri was one of the best friends of René Descartes and an admirer of his philosophy. They met during the winter of 1628-1629 and Descartes followed Reneri to Deventer and Utrecht. Reneri is reported to have read the Discours de la Méthode and the accompanying Essais (including La Géométrie ) publicly in his classes.

[ 2 ] Nevertheless, Reneri is not to be regarded as a Cartesian philosopher , since his works show little Cartesian influences.

[ 3 ] What survives are an inaugural address, several disputations which were presided by him, and a correspondence of more than sixty letters with leading scholars, philosophers, theologians, diplomats and poets from the Republic and abroad, such as André Rivet , Constantijn Huygens , Pierre Gassendi and Pieter Corneliszoon Hooft .

Works [ edit ] "De lectionibus ac exercitiis philosophicis" , Reneri's inaugural address at the illustrious school of Utrecht Notes [ edit ] ^ Reneri was born at Huy in the Prince-Bishopric of Liège, but half of his life he lived in the Dutch Republic. Furthermore, he is included in The Dictionary of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century Dutch Philosophers . Bristol: Thoemmes Press, pp. 824–826.

^ Letter from Claude Saumaise to Ismaël Boulliau , 7 March 1638. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery . ed. (1996).

Oeuvres de Descartes . Paris: Vrin, vol. 10, p. 557.

^ Ferdinand Sassen. (1941).

Henricus Renerius, de eerste "Cartesiaanse" hoogleraar te Utrecht . Amsterdam: Noord-Hollandse Uitgeversmaatschappij; Robin Buning (2010). "An Unknown Letter From Henricus Reneri to Constantijn Huygens on the Thermometer and the Camera Obscura" In Lias 37:1, p. 99.

References [ edit ] Online primary sources Aemilius, Antonius (1639).

Oratio in obitum clarissimi et præstantissimi viri, Henrici Renerii, liberalium artium magistri, et philosophiae in academia Ultrajectina professoris, accedit ejusdem carmen funebre . Utrecht: Aegidius Roman.

Letter from Pieter Corneliszoon Hooft to Reneri, 11 May 1637 Letter from Reneri to Hooft, 16 June 1637 Letter from Reneri to Constantijn Huygens, 22 October 1635 ( O.S.

) Letter from Reneri to Huygens, 14 April 1635 Letter from Huygens to Reneri, 29 October 1635 Letter from Huygens to Reneri, 19 December 1637 Letter from Reneri to Huygens, 1 January 1638 Secondary literature Sassen, Ferdinand (1941).

Henricus Renerius, de eerste "Cartesiaanse" hoogleraar te Utrecht . Amsterdam: Noord-Hollandse Uitgeversmaatschappij.

Verbeek, Theo (1993). "Henricus Reneri (1593-1639)". In H.W. Blom, H.A. Krop and M.R. Wielema. ed.

Deventer denkers. De geschiedenis van het wijsgerig onderwijs te Deventer . Hilversum: Verloren, pp. 123–134.

Verbeek, Theo (2003). "Reneri, Henricus" In Wiep van Bunge, Henri Krop and Bart Leeuwenburgh. ed.

The Dictionary of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century Dutch Philosophers . Bristol: Thoemmes Press, pp. 824–826.

Buning, Robin (2013).

Henricus Reneri (1593-1639): Descartes' Quartermaster in Aristotelian Territory . Utrecht: Utrecht University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies.

hdl : 1874/284362 .

External links [ edit ] Henricus Reneri at the Mathematics Genealogy Project "Henricus Renerius" entry in Poortman's Repertorium der Nederlandse Wijsbegeerte The Correspondence of Henricus Reneri in EMLO The Correspondence of Henricus Reneri in EMLO Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Netherlands Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henricus_Reneri&oldid=1250603893 " Categories : 1593 births 1639 deaths People from Huy Old University of Leuven alumni Academic staff of Utrecht University 17th-century Dutch philosophers Dutch logicians Natural philosophers Leiden University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 October 2024, at 11:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henricus Reneri 2 languages Add topic

