Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Public opinion 3 Religious reasons for opposition Toggle Religious reasons for opposition subsection 3.1 Christian opposition 3.2 Islamic opposition 3.3 Asian religious opposition 3.4 Scientology opposition 4 Opposition in different countries Toggle Opposition in different countries subsection 4.1 Belarus 4.2 Georgia 4.3 India 4.4 Indonesia 4.5 Malaysia 4.6 Poland 4.7 Russia 4.8 Sweden 4.9 United Kingdom 4.10 United States 4.10.1 History 4.10.1.1 1950s and 1960s 4.10.1.2 1970s and 1980s 4.10.1.3 1990s and 2000s 4.10.1.4 2010s and 2020s 4.10.2 U.S. public opinion 4.10.3 United States Armed Forces 4.10.4 Boy Scouts of America 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Opposition to LGBTQ rights 6 languages العربية Български Italiano עברית Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Opposition to legal rights for LGBTQ people Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on LGBTQ rights Lesbian ∙ Gay ∙ Bisexual ∙ Transgender ∙ Queer Overview Rights Movements Student Germany (pre-1933) United States Intersex rights Social attitudes Transgender rights Legal status Movement Aspects Decriminalization Gender self-identification Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Legal status Timeline Migration Military service Organizations List Parenting Adoption Pinkwashing Relationship Recognition Right to sexuality Union Opposition Censorship Conversion therapy Corrective rape Discrimination Criminalization of homosexuality Execution Opposition Propaganda Rhetoric Violence Organizations LGBTQ Bisexual Intersex Community centre Medical Military and Veteran Rights Transgender United States Religious Christian Jewish Muslim Politics Anarchism Bisexual politics Communism Conservatism Ecology Homonationalism Liberation Libertarianism Nationalism Radicalism Sexual revolution Socialism Transfeminism Political parties affiliates Political ideologies regarding LGBTQ Timeline Years List Category Related Discrimination Freedom Index Human rights Minority rights Legality of conversion therapy LGBTQ people in prison Right to privacy LGBTQ portal v t e Opposition to legal rights for lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , and queer ( LGBTQ ) people exists worldwide. Opponents of LGBTQ rights may object to the decriminalization of homosexuality , laws permitting civil unions or partnerships , same-sex parenting and adoption , the inclusion of LGBTQ people in the military , access to assisted reproductive technology , and gender-affirming surgery and hormone therapy for transgender individuals.

Organizations that oppose LGBTQ rights often resist the enactment of laws legalizing same-sex marriage , the passage of anti-discrimination legislation aimed at curbing discrimination against LGBTQ people (including in employment and housing), the adoption of anti-bullying laws to protect LGBTQ minors, the decriminalization of same-gender relationships, and other related laws.

[ 1 ] These groups are often religious or socially conservative in nature.

[ 6 ] Such opposition can be motivated by homophobia , [ 1 ] [ 4 ] transphobia , [ 1 ] [ 4 ] bigotry , [ 7 ] animosity, [ 9 ] religion , [ 10 ] moral beliefs , [ 11 ] political ideologies , [ 12 ] or other factors.

According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , " natural law theory offers the most common intellectual defense for differential treatment of gays and lesbians".

[ 13 ] Dag Øistein Endsjø , a Norwegian scholar and professor of religious studies , and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief , have stated that religious belief underpins most forms of opposition to LGBTQ rights.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] German Student Union members plunder the Institut für Sexualwissenschaft in preparation to burn its books , May 1933 The first organized gay rights movement arose in the late nineteenth century in Germany.

[ 15 ] In the 1920s and into the early 1930s, there were LGBTQ communities in cities like Berlin; German-Jewish sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld was one of the most notable spokespeople for LGBTQ rights at this time. When the Nazi party came to power in 1933, one of the party's first acts was to burn down Hirschfeld's Institut für Sexualwissenschaft , where many prominent Nazis had been treated for perceived sexual problems.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Initially tolerant to the homosexuality of Ernst Röhm and his followers, many gay men were purged from the Nazi Party following the Night of the Long Knives and the Section 175 Laws began to be enforced again, with gay men interned in concentration camps by 1938.

[ a ] Under the Nazi rule in Germany, the dismantling of rights for LGBTQ individuals was approached in two ways. By strengthening and re-enforcing existing laws that had fallen into disuse, male homosexuality was effectively re-criminalised; homosexuality was treated as a medical disorder, but at a social level rather than individual level intended to reduce the incidence of homosexuality. The treatment was a program of eugenics , starting with sterilisation , then a system of working people to death in forced labour camps, and eventually refined by medical scientists to include euthanasia . The driving force was the elimination of perceived degeneracy at various levels – genetic, social, identity and practice, and the elimination of such genetic material in society. Lifton wrote about this in his book The Nazi Doctors : [ 18 ] Graph of convictions under Germany's Paragraph 175 . Spike occurs during Nazi era , and dropoff after partial repeal in 1969.

[...] sexology and defense of homosexuality [...] were aspects of "sexual degeneration, a breakdown of the family and loss of all that is decent," and ultimately the destruction of the German Folk. [...] medicine was to join in the great national healing mission, and the advance image of what Nazi doctors were actually to become: the healer turned killer. [...] Sterilization policies were always associated with the therapeutic and regenerative principles of the biomedical vision: with the "purification of the national body" and the "eradication of morbid hereditary dispositions." Sterilization was considered part of "negative eugenics" [...] [ 19 ] It is argued that the number of gay people who perished in the Holocaust was quite low in comparison to other Holocaust victims , and confined to Germany itself, based on estimates that of 50,000 gay people who came before the courts, between 5,000 and 15,000 [ 20 ] [ 21 ] ended up in concentration camps. However, many of those who came before the courts were directed (or volunteered) to undergo sterilisation/castration; they would be included with others who, in line with the historic shift in German society (that started with Westphal , and developed through Krafft-Ebing to Magnus Hirschfeld , of homosexuality being seen as having a neurological, endocrinological or genetic basis), were treated for homosexuality as a medical rather than criminal matter.

After the Second World War , the United States became more intolerant of homosexuality, [ 22 ] but many gay men and lesbians decided to reveal their gay identities after meeting others in the military.

[ 23 ] Many gay bars and villages were created, and a whole gay subculture formed.

[ 23 ] Campaigns for gay rights began to develop, initially in the UK.

[ 24 ] Towards the end of the 1960s homosexuality began to be decriminalised and de-medicalised in areas such as the UK, New Zealand, Australia, North America and Europe, in the context of the sexual revolution and anti-psychiatry movements. Organized opposition to gay and lesbian rights began in the 1970s.

[ 25 ] Public opinion [ edit ] Main article: Societal attitudes toward homosexuality Societal attitudes towards homosexuality vary greatly in different cultures and different historical periods, as do attitudes toward sexual desire, activity and relationships in general. All cultures have their own norms regarding appropriate and inappropriate sexuality ; some sanction same-sex love and sexuality, while others disapprove of such activities.

[ 26 ] According to The 2007 Pew Global Attitudes Project, "Throughout Western Europe and much of the Americas, there is widespread tolerance towards homosexuality. However, the United States, Japan, South Korea, and Israel stand apart from other wealthy nations on this issue; in each of these countries, fewer than half of those surveyed say homosexuality should be accepted by society. Meanwhile, in most of Africa, Asia and the Middle East, there is less tolerance toward homosexuality." [ 27 ] However, a 2012 CNN poll showed that a majority number of Americans are in favor of gay rights, such as same-sex marriage.

[ 28 ] In late 2015, a poll of Japanese people also found that a majority supported same-sex marriage.

[ 29 ] Religious reasons for opposition [ edit ] This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Religion and homosexuality See also: Human sexuality § Religious sexual morality Many religions, including ones within the Eastern faiths and Abrahamic faiths , do not support homosexual sex.

Evangelical Christianity , [ 30 ] Catholicism , [ 31 ] Mormonism , [ 32 ] Orthodox Judaism , [ 33 ] and Islam [ 34 ] view homosexual sex as a sin and hold that its practice and acceptance in society weakens moral standards.

Christian opposition [ edit ] A 2015 cover of Time highlighting the conflict between some Christian denominations' views and LGBTQ rights Protesters against same-sex marriage at the U.S. Supreme Court in 2015 Main articles: Christianity and homosexuality , Christianity and transgender people , List of Christian denominational positions on homosexuality , and The Bible and homosexuality Passages in the Old Testament that prohibit man to "lie with mankind as with womankind" [ b ] and the story of Sodom and Gomorrah have historically been interpreted as condemning sodomy . Several Pauline passages have also been cited against male and female homosexuality.

[ c ] Christians who take a conservative position on homosexuality endorse this reading of these passages in the belief that God is against same-sex sexual activity, while Christians who take a liberal position believe that these same passages refer to more specific situations, such as pedophilia, [ 35 ] rape or abuse, and not homosexuality.

[ 36 ] The largest Christian body, the Catholic Church , condemns homosexual acts as "gravely sinful" and "intrinsically disordered".

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The second-largest Christian body, the Eastern Orthodox Church , also condemns homosexual behaviour, as do many denominations of Protestantism .

Within the Catholic Church , the theory of natural law has been employed by philosophers and theologians to justify its condemnation of homosexual behaviour.

[ 39 ] The theologian Thomas Aquinas maintained that homosexual practice was contrary to natural law, arguing that the primary natural end of the sexual act was procreation, and since said procreation is carried out from a process of sexual fertilization between a man and a woman, homosexual sex is contrary to the very end of said act.

[ 40 ] Islamic opposition [ edit ] Further information: LGBTQ people and Islam Sodomy is regarded as criminal and forbidden in most Islamic countries , according to Sharia law , and officially carries the death penalty in Saudi Arabia , United Arab Emirates , Iran , Brunei , Mauritania , Nigeria , and Yemen .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] It carries the death penalty in Afghanistan under the Taliban .

[ 43 ] In Egypt , openly gay men have been prosecuted under general public morality laws.

[ d ] On the other hand, homosexuality has been legal in Turkey since 1858.

[ 44 ] In Saudi Arabia, the maximum punishment for homosexuality is public execution, but the government will use other punishments – e.g., fines, jail time, and flagellation – as alternatives, unless it feels that LGBTQ individuals are challenging state authority by engaging in LGBTQ social movements .

[ 45 ] Iran is perhaps the nation to execute the largest number of its citizens for homosexuality. Since the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran, the Iranian government has executed more than 4,000 people charged with homosexual acts.

[ 46 ] Even though homosexuality is widespread amongst the Pashtun ethnic group in southern Afghanistan, [ 47 ] after the fall of the Taliban, homosexuality went from a capital crime to one that is punished with fines, prison sentences, and vigilante violence.

[ citation needed ] Most international human rights organizations, such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International , condemn laws that make homosexual relations between consenting adults a crime. Muslim nations insist that such laws are necessary to preserve Islamic morality and virtue. Of the nations with a majority of Muslim inhabitants where homosexuality is criminalized, only Lebanon and Tunisia have organizations which are trying to get homosexuality legalized.

[ 48 ] Asian religious opposition [ edit ] Further information: Homosexuality and Hinduism , Buddhism and sexual orientation , and Homosexuality in China Among the religions that originated in India , including Hinduism , Buddhism , Jainism and Sikhism , teachings regarding homosexuality are less clear than among the Abrahamic traditions. Unlike the Abrahamic religions, homosexuality is not a 'sin' in Hindu philosophy, [ 49 ] while in Buddhism, the Dalai Lama has stated that male-female relationships are intended by nature, though without condemning same-sex relationships.

[ 50 ] Gender-specific Temples like Aravan worship are dedicated to celebrate the non-heteronormative diverse Indigenous gender & sexuality in Hinduism.

[ 51 ] In 2005, the Head Cleric of the Akal Takht condemned same-sex marriages.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Hinduism is diverse, with no supreme governing body which allows people of diverse SOGIESC communities to marry under Hindu Marriage Law 1951.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Scientology opposition [ edit ] Main article: Scientology and sexual orientation Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard classified homosexuality as a mental illness and paraphilia (then known as "sexual perversion"), citing contemporary psychiatric and psychological textbooks to support his view.

[ 57 ] Gay people are designated a 1.1. on Hubbard's emotional tone scale , and Hubbard urged society to tackle the issue of "sexual perversion" (including homosexuality), calling it "of vital importance, if one wishes to stop immorality, and the abuse of children." In his book Science of Survival , Hubbard called for drastic action to be taken, saying that: "Such people should be taken from the society as rapidly as possible and uniformly institutionalized; for here is the level of the contagion of immorality, and the destruction of ethics; here is the fodder which secret police organizations use for their filthy operations." [ 58 ] A 2004 article in the St. Petersburg Times reported that the Scientology defines marriage as the union between a man and a woman.

[ 59 ] After 35 years of being a Scientologist, film producer and director Paul Haggis publicly quit the Church of Scientology over the organization's position on gay rights and a showdown with the Church's spokesperson over the 2008 California Proposition 8 on same-sex marriage.

[ 60 ] Opposition in different countries [ edit ] This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Belarus [ edit ] See also: LGBTQ rights in Belarus A 2014 report prepared by the United Kingdom , under the Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition government of 2010–2015, raised concerns about LGBTQ treatment in Belarus : The LGBT community suffered increased harassment from the [Belarusian] regime in 2013. The Ministry of Justice denied registration to LGBT groups, and members of the LGBT community were regularly targeted by the security forces and brought in for questioning. The authorities threatened to stigmatise them by informing their colleagues, families, or friends of their sexual orientation. Gay clubs in Minsk and Vitebsk were raided, and those present were filmed and had their details collected. The clubs were then closed down.
Gay Pride week in Minsk was disrupted by the authorities who forced owners of venues, where events were due to be held, to withdraw at the last minute. Those events that did take place were raided by the police, and a request for a march through the city was turned down by the authorities.

— "LGBT rights", Corporate Report: Belarus – Country of Concern , (UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office , October 2014) [ 61 ] Georgia [ edit ] See also: 2021 attack on Tbilisi Pride , 2023 attack on Tbilisi Pride , and 2013 Tbilisi anti-homophobia rally protests On 8 July 2023, over 2,000 anti-LGBTQ+ protesters violently disrupted the LGBTQ+ Pride festival in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi. Homophobia remains widespread in Georgia, and several journalists were attacked during similar protests in Tbilisi two years ago.

[ 62 ] India [ edit ] See also: Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code On 6 October 1860, sodomy was legally forbidden in India according to Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code.

[ 63 ] This was ruled unconstitutional in 2009 by the Delhi High Court, but reaffirmed on 11 December 2013 by a Supreme Court ruling.

[ 64 ] It was again legalised by the Supreme Court on 6 September 2018.

[ 65 ] Indonesia [ edit ] Traditionally, Indonesians are quite tolerant towards LGBTQ people who keep quiet and stay discreet about their private lives .

[ 66 ] However, this level of tolerance is not extended towards the LGBTQ rights movements, which has faced fierce condemnation in the public sphere from Indonesian authorities. A wave of anti-LGBTQ rhetoric began in January 2016 when Higher Education Minister Mohamad Nasir said LGBTQ people should be barred from university campuses.

[ 67 ] The Minister called for a ban on gay groups on university campuses after a group of University of Indonesia (UI) students established a counselling and support group called the Support Group and Resource Center on Sexuality Studies (SGRC).

[ 68 ] The group was meant as a counselling service, resource centre and support group on sexuality and gender issues, especially for LGBTQ youth and students, who often suffer from abuses, harassment, violence and discrimination regarding their gender and sexuality. SGRC sees LGBTQ people as human beings who need a friend and protection. The group, which sought to advocate for those who suffer from gender-based violence, explained that they do not "turn" or "encourage" people to be gay , nor had they tried to "cure" gay people.

[ 69 ] Amid the heat of the issue, the University of Indonesia refused to be held responsible for SGRC's actions and announced the group was not an officially registered student organisation.

[ 68 ] Another official pressured smartphone instant-messaging services to drop gay and lesbian-themed emoji, prompting one company to comply.

[ 70 ] Muhammadiyah , said it would not issue any edict condemning members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community, Muhammadiyah's secretary-general, Abdul Mukti said. Muhammadiyah considered LGBTQ expression immoral, but that publicly condemning people affiliated with those identities and orientations would not help them return to normalcy.

[ 71 ] Other religious groups, such as Christianity and specifically Roman Catholicism , have expressed their rejection of LGBTQ rights in Indonesia. Indonesian Catholic authorities have reiterated that Catholicism does not recognise same-sex marriage but assured that, despite their perceived transgressions, LGBTQ people should be protected and not harmed.

[ 72 ] The Indonesia Psychiatric Association (PDSKJI) classifies homosexuality, bisexuality and transgenderism as mental disorders . Referring to Law No.18/2014 on Mental Health and the association's Mental Health and Mental Disorder Diagnostic Guidelines, the PDSKJI categorises homosexual and bisexual Indonesians as "people with psychiatric problems" and transgender people as having "mental disorders".

[ 73 ] Some military figures have used conspiracy theory rhetoric. Defense Minister Ryamizard Ryacudu called the LGBTQ movement a " proxy war " to brainwash Indonesians, and claimed that it received "foreign funding", [ 67 ] pointing to funds from United Nations organisations like UNAIDS or Western governments and foundations.

There have been a few incidents of LGBTQ people being harassed. LGBTQ groups are now working on setting up safe houses and draw up evacuation plans in case of need. In Yogyakarta , in February 2016, 23 LGBTQ activists were roughed up by police, who told local media they stopped them from holding a rally to avoid a clash with a hardline Muslim group holding an anti-LGBTQ protest nearby.

[ 67 ] The chair of the People's Consultative Assembly , Zulkifli Hasan mentioned in a statement that, "As a movement, the existence of LGBTQ must be opposed. We must limit its room to move. However, as individual people, they must be protected like any other citizen." [ 74 ] Anthropologist Sharyn Graham Davies commented that the main focus of this opposition was that sexual and gender diversity may be tolerated but as long as LGBTQ people remain invisible in the Indonesian society and did not form a visible movement.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] On the other hand, amid fierce hostilities, some officials – including former Governor of Jakarta , Basuki Tjahaja Purnama and former Political, Legal, and Security Affairs Minister Luhut Binsar Panjaitan — have defended the LGBTQ community. "Whoever they are, wherever they work, he or she continues to be an Indonesian citizen. They have the right to be protected as well," Panjaitan said.

[ 67 ] President Joko Widodo has also expressed support for LGBTQ rights and has called on an end to discrimination.

[ 77 ] Malaysia [ edit ] Same-sex relationships in Malaysia are criminalised . In 2018, Malaysian LGBTQ people faced government-enforced clampdowns.

[ 78 ] Poland [ edit ] See also: LGBT-free zone and Operation Hyacinth Opposition to LGBTQ rights in Poland comes mainly from right-wing politics, such as the ruling in 2015-2023 Law and Justice party, and from the Catholic Church in Poland , in which a majority of Poles are members. According to ILGA-Europe 's 2020 report, Poland ranks the lowest of European Union countries for LGBTQ rights. According to some opinion polls, opposition to LGBTQ rights has been diminishing, with support for civil partnerships rising from 52% in 2017 to 60% in 2019. The number of Poles who say that homosexuality should not be accepted in society dropped from 41% in 2001 to 24% in 2019.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Russia [ edit ] See also: LGBTQ rights in Russia LGBTQ activists in Moscow, 2 March 2013 Opposition to the LGBTQ rights movement is very prevalent in Russia , including within the Kremlin . President Vladimir Putin enacted laws in 2012 which criminalised education about LGBTQ issues, calling it " gay propaganda ". It banned telling minors that homosexuality was normal or natural.

[ 81 ] This was opposed by some nations with many members of the public in the U.S. and Western Europe calling for a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi . However, President Putin assured that all athletes would be respected, regardless of their sexuality [ 82 ] and in the event, no boycott occurred.

[ 83 ] The law passed has been described as taking Russia's LGBTQ community "from being a stigmatized fringe group to full-blown enemies of the state ", and has been described as a major contributor to a wave of anti-gay violence by several neo-Nazi organisations (such as Occupy Paedophilia ), which target gay teens online and meet up with them, posting on YouTube their acts of assault against the LGBTQ teens, which have even resulted in the death of several LGBTQ teens in Russia, which are rarely investigated by the authorities, defining them as "civil movements fighting the sins of society".

[ 81 ] Sweden [ edit ] Sweden has seen increased opposition to LGBTQ rights through anti-gender campaigns. Scholars have documented how Sweden, despite its reputation as a gender-equal country, is increasingly affected by what has been termed "insidious de-democratization ," a process in which small but cumulative political and discursive shifts erode liberal democratic norms by marginalizing already vulnerable groups such as trans people.

[ 84 ] Anti-LGBTQ and anti-gender rhetoric in Sweden is promoted by a range of actors, including the far-right Sweden Democrats and Christian Democrats , who have opposed legal reforms strengthening transgender rights.

[ 85 ] These parties frame their opposition in terms of protecting women’s rights and Swedish values. At the same time, anti-gender views have also gained ground among some radical feminist groups that identify as “ gender-critical .” One prominent example is the Swedish Women's Lobby (SWL), which in recent years has been criticized by scholars and civil society groups for adopting trans-exclusionary positions.

[ 86 ] [ 85 ] [ 84 ] In 2025, SWL launched the Women's Platform for Action International (WoPAI), an international network promoting " sex-based rights " and opposing what it calls a "pro-gender movement", a " queer agenda " and the concept of gender identity .

[ 87 ] The increasing normalization of anti-gender discourse has also coincided with growing political violence and intimidation, particularly directed at trans advocates. This includes online harassment, threats, and public vilification. Researchers argue that such violence, both symbolic and physical, plays a central role in silencing dissent and undermining democratic participation.

[ 84 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: LGBTQ rights in the United Kingdom , LGBTQ rights in Scotland , and Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom In 1988, the Conservative Party , who were in government at the time , enacted Section 28 which stated that local authorities must not "intentionally promote homosexuality or publish material with the intention of promoting homosexuality"  and that maintained schools should not "promote the teaching [...] of the acceptability of homosexuality", describing families with gay parents as being in a "pretended family relationship".

[ 88 ] Research on the effect of suppressing information about sexuality awareness in schools showed a correspondence with increases in the level of homophobic bullying by peers, as well as increased incidence in depression and suicide amongst LGBTQ people trying to come to terms with their sexuality.

[ 89 ] In 1987, Thatcher also declared that "hard left education authorities and extremist teachers" were indoctrinating the nation by teaching the younger generation "political slogans", "anti-racist mathematics" and telling their pupils that they have an "inalienable right to be gay", rather than "taught to respect traditional moral values".

[ 90 ] She then went on to say that "all of those children are being cheated of a sound start in life—yes cheated!" [ 90 ] In 2003, despite opposition from socially liberal Conservatives such as later prime minister David Cameron , [ 91 ] Section 28 was repealed by the Labour government under Tony Blair .

[ 92 ] In June 2009, Cameron, whilst campaigning for the 2010 general election, formally apologised for his party introducing the law, stating that it was a mistake and had been offensive to gay people.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] In 2013, same-sex marriage was legalised under Cameron's premiership (despite his government voting against it) [ 95 ] which Cameron described as "an important step forward" and said that he thought that "it is right that gay people should be able to get married too".

[ 96 ] As of 2010, the largest voice against LGBTQ equality in the UK came from the Church of England over the issue of same-sex marriage. Labour passed into law in 2005 the ability for same-sex couples to enter civil partnerships, but they could not take place in a church or be called a "marriage". The Church of England opposed the-then coalition Government's plans (this government came to an end in May 2015) to extend this to "full marriage rights." [ 97 ] The British National Party has shifted its platform from recriminalisation to an extension of section 28 -style legislation, i.e. making it illegal to portray homosexuality positively in the media.

[ 98 ] In 1999, the Admiral Duncan pub , a gay bar in London 's Soho , was targeted up as part of a terrorist campaign by a former National Socialist Movement and British National Party (BNP) member, David Copeland ; three people were killed, and seventy maimed or injured by a nail bomb detonated in the pub.

[ 99 ] United States [ edit ] History [ edit ] Main article: LGBTQ history in the United States 1950s and 1960s [ edit ] See also: Stonewall riots § Background Joseph McCarthy and Roy Cohn , leaders of the Lavender scare In the 1950s in the United States , open homosexuality was taboo. Legislatures in every state had passed laws against homosexual behavior well before this, most notably anti-sodomy laws . During the Cold War politicians frequently described homosexuals as "subversives" who undermined national security and patriotism, and described them as Communist sympathisers or a Communist Fifth column . During the Lavender Scare , Joseph McCarthy used accusations of homosexuality as a smear tactic .

[ 100 ] Senator Kenneth Wherry publicized fears that Joseph Stalin had obtained a list of closeted homosexuals in positions of power from Adolf Hitler , which he believed Stalin intended to use to blackmail these men into working against the U.S. for the Soviet regime.

[ 101 ] In the 1950 report produced by a Senate subcommittee titled "Employment of Homosexuals and Other Sex Perverts in Government" said that "the pervert is easy prey to the blackmailer... It is an accepted fact among intelligence agencies that espionage organizations the world over consider sex perverts who are in possession of or have access to confidential material to be prime targets where pressure can be exerted." Along with that security-based concern, the report found homosexuals unsuitable for government employment because "those who engage in overt acts of perversion lack the emotional stability of normal persons. In addition, there is an abundance of evidence to sustain the conclusion that indulgence in acts of sex perversion weakens the moral fiber of an individual to a degree that he is not suitable for a position of responsibility." [ 102 ] McCarthy and Roy Cohn more often used the secrets of closeted gay American politicians as tools for blackmail than did foreign powers.

[ 103 ] The modern roots of the Christian right 's views on sexual matters were evident in the years 1950s–1960s, a period in which many conservative Christians in the United States viewed sexual promiscuity as not only excessive, but in fact as a threat to their ideal vision of the country.

[ 104 ] : 30 1970s and 1980s [ edit ] Brochure used by Save Our Children in 1977 Beginning in the 1970s, conservative Christian protests against promiscuity began to surface, largely as a reaction to the " permissive Sixties " and an emerging prominence of sexual rights arising from Roe v. Wade and the LGBTQ rights movement . The Christian right proceeded to make sexuality issues a priority political cause.

[ 104 ] : 28 Anita Bryant organized Save Our Children , a widespread campaign to oppose legislation prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Miami-Dade County, Florida .

[ 1 ] The group argued that gay people were " recruiting " or " molesting children " in order to make them gay.

[ 1 ] Bryant infamously claimed that "As a mother, I know that homosexuals cannot biologically reproduce children; therefore, they must recruit our children," and also claimed that "If gays are granted rights, next we'll have to give rights to prostitutes and to people who sleep with St. Bernards and to nail biters." [ 105 ] The Bryant campaign achieved success in repealing some city anti-discrimination laws, and proposed other citizen initiatives such as a failed California ballot question designed to ban gay people or those who supported LGBTQ rights from holding public teaching jobs. Bryant's campaign attracted widespread opposition and boycotts which put her out of business and destroyed her reputation.

From the late 1970s onwards, some conservative Christian organizations such as the Christian Broadcasting Network , Focus on the Family , Concerned Women for America , the American Family Association , and the Christian Coalition of America , along with right-wing Christian hate groups such as the Westboro Baptist Church , have been outspoken against LGBTQ rights.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] Late in 1979, a new religious revival among conservative Evangelical Protestants and Roman Catholics ushered in the Republican coalition politically aligned with the Christian right that would reign in the United States between the years 1970s and 1980s, becoming another obstacle for the progress of the LGBTQ rights movement .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] During the HIV/AIDS epidemic of the 1980s , LGBTQ communities were further stigmatized as they became the focus of mass hysteria , suffered isolation and marginalization , and were targeted with extreme acts of violence .

[ 108 ] The Christian right champions itself as the "self-appointed conscience of American society". During the 1980s, the movement was largely dismissed by political pundits and mainstream religious leaders as "a collection of buffoonish has-beens". Later, it re-emerged, better organized and more focused, taking firm positions against abortion, pornography, sexual deviancy, and extreme feminism.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] : 4 1990s and 2000s [ edit ] Homophobic Westboro Baptist Church protesters in Washington, D.C.

, 2019 Influential Christian right organizations were at the forefront of the anti-gay rights movement in the United States in the 1990s and 2000s, including Focus on the Family, Family Research Council, and the Family Research Institute .

[ 111 ] [ 104 ] : 15–16 An important stratagem in Christian right anti-gay politics is in its rejection of "the edicts of a Big Brother" state, allowing it to profit from "a general feeling of discontent and demoralization with government". As a result, the Christian right has endorsed smaller government, restricting its ability to arbitrate in disputes regarding values and traditions. In this context, gay rights laws have come to symbolize the government's allegedly unconstitutional "[interference] with individual freedom".

[ 104 ] : 170–171 The central tenets of Focus on the Family and similar organizations, such as the Family Research Council, emphasise issues such as abortion and the necessity of gender roles. A number of organizations, including the New Christian Right, "have in various ways rejected liberal America in favor of the regulation of pornography, anti-abortion legislation, the criminalization of homosexuality, and the virtues of faithfulness and loyalty in sexual partnerships", according to sociologist Bryan Turner .

[ 112 ] 2010s and 2020s [ edit ] Main article: 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Men protesting outside Disney World in 2020 with a sign reading, "Save Our Kids from LGBT Indoctrination".

During the presidency of Donald Trump , some Christian conservatives refrained from engaging in debates about sexual morality.

[ 113 ] However, beginning in the early-2020s, an anti-LGBTQ movement occurred in the United States, heavily focused on transgender Americans. This conservative political backlash against LGBTQ rights included bathroom use restrictions , bans on gender transition , "don't say gay" laws , laws against drag performances , book bans , boycotts , and conspiracy theories around grooming .

[ 114 ] U.S. public opinion [ edit ] See also: Public opinion of same-sex marriage in the United States Public opinion has shifted towards increased acceptance of homosexuality and equal rights for gays and lesbians since the late 1970s. According to the Gallup poll, the percentage of Americans who think that same-sex relations between consenting adults should be legal increased from 43% in 1977 to 59% in 2007.

[ 115 ] In 1977, 56% of Americans thought that gay people should have equal rights in terms of job opportunities. As of 2007 [update] , that number has risen to 89%.

[ 115 ] In 1982, 34% thought that homosexuality should be considered "an acceptable alternative lifestyle". As of 2007 [update] , that number is 54%.

[ 115 ] In 1997, 27% of Americans thought that same-sex marriages should be legally valid. That number is 46% as of 2007 [update] . In 1977, 13% of Americans thought that sexual orientation is "something a person is born with"; as of 2007 [update] , that percentage increased to 42%.

[ 115 ] A poll conducted in 2013 showed a record high of 58% of the Americans supporting legal recognition for same-sex marriage.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] In April 2015, a Washington Post-ABC News poll showed that 61% of Americans supported same-sex marriage and a similar share were against state-by-state legalization.

[ 118 ] Numerous studies have investigated the prevalence of acceptance and disapproval of homosexuality and have consistently found correlations with various demographic, psychological, and social variables. For example, studies (mainly conducted in the United States) have found that heterosexuals with positive attitudes towards homosexuality are more likely to be non-religious, politically liberal or moderate, young, female and have close personal contact with openly gay men and lesbians.

[ e ] [ 119 ] and are less likely to support traditional gender roles.

[ 120 ] United States Armed Forces [ edit ] Main article: Don't ask, don't tell Homosexual activity was a reason for expulsion from the United States Armed Forces from their very beginning, although that was not codified until 1920.

[ 121 ] The " Don't ask, don't tell " (DADT) policy that began in 1994 barred the military from questioning people about their sexual orientation, but maintained the barring of service members who had come out . The barring of homosexuals was removed altogether in December 2010 by President Barack Obama .

[ 122 ] Even before DADT was established , advocates for allowing gay people to openly serve pointed out that neither unit cohesion nor morale were affected when the UK admitted gay people into the military. A similar comparison has been made to the lack of negative consequences when African-Americans and women were admitted into the military.

[ 123 ] Boy Scouts of America [ edit ] The Boy Scouts of America now accepts gay and bisexual people in its organizations. Previously, there was an exclusion enforced commonly for Scoutmasters, but also for scouts in leadership positions. Their rationale was that homosexuality is immoral and that Scouts are expected to have certain moral standards and values, as the Scout Oath and Scout Law requires boys to be "morally straight".

[ 124 ] The Boy Scout organization did not view their policy as unjustly discriminatory , but instead defends their policy saying that, "Tolerance for diversity of values does not require abdication of one's own values".

[ 125 ] In 2000 the United States Supreme Court ruled in Boy Scouts of America v. Dale that the Boy Scouts of America is a private organization , and as such can decide its own membership rules.

[ 126 ] There is still a movement to try to persuade the organization to change its policy or allow local chapters to decide for themselves.

[ 127 ] In 2005, the U.S. Congress passed the Support Our Scouts Act of 2005 to exempt the BSA from anti-discrimination laws, to require the Department of Defense to support scouting Jamborees (thus rendering ineffective a Federal Court injunction prohibiting this as an unconstitutional establishment of religion in violation of the First Amendment ) and to require state or local governments that receive Community Development Block Grant money from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to allow BSA to have meetings in their facilities or on their property.

[ 128 ] The BSA historically has received much of its funding and support from religious groups noted for their opposition to the gay rights movement .

[ 129 ] Some BSA local councils found that United Way 's, municipalities', school districts' and businesses' support and funding was reduced because of their adherence to the BSA's policy on sexual orientation.

[ 130 ] In order to continue receiving funding, local councils like New Jersey signed nondiscrimination agreements contrary to BSA National Council policy.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Other outdoor-focused, youth-based organizations such as the 4-H club and Girl Scouts of the USA do not discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.

In most countries where Boy Scouts organizations exist homosexuality is not regarded as incompatible with scout values, and gay members are not excluded from activities; [ 133 ] this includes the United Kingdom , where scouting was founded by Baden-Powell .

In July 2015, the Boy Scouts' executive board voted to end the ban on adult leaders who are openly gay.

[ 134 ] See also [ edit ] LGBTQ portal Politics portal Society portal Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2023 – Ugandan law Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Antifeminism Anti-gender movement Biphobia Conversion therapy Culture war " Down-low ", sexual subculture of Black men who identify as heterosexual but secretly have sex with other men " Drop the T ", slogan coined to encourage LGBTQ organizations to stop support of transgender people Gay agenda Gay concentration camps in Chechnya Gay–straight alliance George Rekers Heteronormativity Heterosexism Homophile movement Homophobic propaganda Homosexual recruitment , a conspiracy theory alleging conversion efforts targeting heterosexuals Ivar Lovaas Lesbophobia LGBTQ people and Islam LGBTQ retirement issues in the United States List of organizations designated by the Southern Poverty Law Center as anti-LGBTQ hate groups List of U.S. ballot initiatives to repeal LGBTQ anti-discrimination laws Persecution of gay and bisexual men by the Islamic State Straight pride Straightwashing Transphobia Discrimination against transgender men Transmisandry Transmisogynoir Transphobic misogyny Karl Heinrich Ulrichs Violence against LGBTQ people Notes [ edit ] ^ See Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany and the Holocaust .

^ Leviticus 18:22 Archived 8 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine and Leviticus 20:13 Archived 1 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine (KJV).

^ Romans 1:25–28 Archived 21 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine – these are often considered the only explicit references in the Bible discussing female homosexuality.

^ See: Cairo 52 .

^ Studies finding that heterosexual men usually exhibit more hostile attitudes toward gay men and lesbians than heterosexual women: Herek, G. M. (1994).

Assessing heterosexuals' attitudes toward lesbians and gay men.

In "B. Greene and G.M. Herek (Eds.) Psychological perspectives on lesbian and gay issues: Vol. 1 Lesbian and gay psychology: Theory, research, and clinical applications." Thousands Oaks, Ca: Sage.

Kite, M.E. (1984).

Sex differences in attitudes toward homosexuals: A meta-analytic review.

Journal of Homosexuality, 10 (1–2), 69–81.

Morin, S., & Garfinkle, E. (1978).

Male homophobia.

Journal of Social Issues, 34 (1), 29–47.

Thompson, E., Grisanti, C., & Pleck, J. (1985).

Attitudes toward the male role and their correlates.

Sex Roles, 13 (7/8), 413–427.

For other correlates, see: Larson et al. (1980) Heterosexuals' Attitudes Toward Homosexuality , The Journal of Sex Research, 16, 245–257 Herek, G. (1988), Heterosexuals' Attitudes Toward Lesbians and Gay Men , Journal of Sex Research , 25, 451–477 Kite, M.E., & Deaux, K., 1986.

Attitudes toward homosexuality: Assessment and behavioral consequences. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 7, 137–162 Haddock, G., Zanna, M. P., & Esses, V. M. (1993).

Assessing the structure of prejudicial attitudes: The case of attitudes toward homosexuals.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1105–1118.

See also: Lewis, Gregory B., Black-White Differences in Attitudes toward Homosexuality and Gay Rights, Public Opinion Quarterly, Volume 67, Number 1, Pp. 59–78 They are also more likely to have positive attitudes towards other minority groups References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Fetner, Tina (August 2001). "Working Anita Bryant: The Impact of Christian Anti-Gay Activism on Lesbian and Gay Movement Claims".

Social Problems .

48 (3).

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for the Study of Social Problems : 411– 428.

doi : 10.1525/sp.2001.48.3.411 .

hdl : 11375/21175 .

ISSN 1533-8533 .

S2CID 144876642 .

^ a b c d e f Gannon, Thomas M. (July–September 1981).

"The New Christian Right in America as a Social and Political Force" .

Archives de sciences sociales des religions .

26 ( 52– 1).

Paris : Éditions de l'EHESS : 69– 83.

doi : 10.3406/assr.1981.2226 .

ISSN 0335-5985 .

JSTOR 30125411 .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 July 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h McKeegan, Michele (Fall 1993). "The politics of abortion: A historical perspective".

Women's Health Issues .

3 (3).

Elsevier on behalf of the Jacobs Institute of Women's Health : 127– 131.

doi : 10.1016/S1049-3867(05)80245-2 .

ISSN 1878-4321 .

PMID 8274866 .

S2CID 36048222 .

^ a b c d e f g h Ibrahim, Nur Amali (October 2016). "Homophobic Muslims: Emerging Trends in Multireligious Singapore".

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

58 (4).

Cambridge and New York : Cambridge University Press : 955– 981.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417516000499 .

ISSN 1475-2999 .

JSTOR 26293235 .

S2CID 152039212 .

^ a b c d Rehman, Javaid; Polymenopoulou, Eleni (2013).

"Is Green a Part of the Rainbow?

Sharia , Homosexuality, and LGBT Rights in the Muslim World" (PDF) .

Fordham International Law Journal .

37 (1).

Fordham University School of Law : 1– 53.

ISSN 0747-9395 .

OCLC 52769025 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2018 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ^ [ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] ^ Romer v. Evans , 517 U.S. 620 (1996), archived from the original on 25 May 2011.

^ [ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 8 ] ^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ^ [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ^ Pickett, Brent (2020).

"Homosexuality" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 24 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Endsjø, Dag Øistein (May 2020).

"The other way around? How freedom of religion may protect LGBT rights" (PDF) .

The International Journal of Human Rights .

24 (10).

Taylor & Francis : 1681– 1700.

doi : 10.1080/13642987.2020.1763961 .

ISSN 1744-053X .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 July 2022 . Retrieved 19 July 2022 .

That religious beliefs lie at the heart of most of the opposition to LGBT rights is a generally known fact. As the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief noted in 2017, 'in certain States where religion has been given 'official' or privileged status, other fundamental rights of individuals – especially women, religious minorities, and members of the LGBTI community – are disproportionately restricted or vitiated under threat of sanctions as a result of obligatory observation of State-imposed religious orthodoxy.' ^ "Archive for Sexology" .

hu-berlin.de . Archived from the original on 9 July 2008.

^ Lenz, Ludwig L. (1954).

The Memoirs of a Sexologist . New York: Cadillac Publishing. p. 429.

...not ten percent of those men who, in 1933, took the fate of Germany into their hands, were sexually normal ^ Haeberle, Erwin (August 1981).

"Swastika, Pink Triangle, and Yellow Star – The Destruction of Sexology and the Persecution of Homosexuals in Nazi Germany" .

The Journal of Sex Research .

17 (3): 270– 287.

doi : 10.1080/00224498109551120 .

JSTOR 3812563 .

PMID 28135957 . Archived from the original on 16 April 2010 . Retrieved 14 April 2010 – via Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.

^ Lifton, Robert (1986).

The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killing and the Psychology of Genocide . Basic Books.

^ "Lifton' Nazi Doctors p.42" .

holocaust-history.org . Archived from the original on 18 July 2009 . Retrieved 29 June 2009 .

^ "Nazi Persecution of Homosexuals 1933–1945" . Ushmm.org.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "Homosexuals – Holocaust Teacher Resource Center" . Holocaust-trc.org.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2012 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ Michael Klarman: From the Closet to the Altar: Courts, Backlash, and the Struggle for Same-Sex Marriage .  Oxford University Press, 2013.

^ a b "Milestones in the Gay Rights Movement" .

infoplease.com . Houghton Mifflin Company.

Archived from the original on 10 February 2015 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ "1957: Homosexuality 'should not be a crime' " .

news.bbc.co.uk . BBC. 4 September 1957.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2007 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ Jerome Himmelstein, p. 97; Spiritual Warfare: The Politics of the Religious Right, p.49–50, Sara Diamond, South End Press , Boston, MA ^ Murray, Stephen O., Homosexualities , University of Chicago 2000 ^ "World Publics Welcome Global Trade – But Not Immigration" (PDF) .

pewglobal.org . The Pew Global Attitudes Project. 4 October 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2015 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ "CNN Poll: Americans' attitudes toward gay community changing" . politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com. 6 June 2012. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "New poll shows majority of Japanese support marriage equality" . 29 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 November 2016 .

^ Strauss, Lehman, Litt.D., F.R.G.S.

"Homosexuality: The Christian Perspective" Archived 15 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Roman Catholics and Homosexuality" Archived 17 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance (2006) ^ "Teaching about Procreation and Chastity: Homosexuality" Archived 24 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , The Church of Jesus-Christ of Latter-day Saints. Home & Family.

^ Shafran, Rabbi Avi.

"Jewish Law: Marital Problems" Archived 6 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Jewish Law Commentary: Examining Halacha, Jewish Issues, and Secular Law.

^ "Islam and Homosexuality" Archived 17 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance (2005).

^ Lehti, Andrew (November 2022).

"The Bible Never Condemned Homosexuality; it Condemned Pedophilia. The Papal Revision and Mandate of Translations of the Bible in the 16th Century by Pope Clement VIII and Pope Paul V." ResearchGate .

doi : 10.13140/RG.2.2.29803.62240 . Retrieved 16 June 2024 .

^ "What the Bible says and means about homosexuality" .

religioustolerance.org .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2009 . Retrieved 14 July 2015 .

^ Ratzinger, Joseph Cardinal (Prefect). (1 October 1986).

'Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic Church on the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons' .

Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith .

^ Gramick, Jeannine; Nugent, Robert (1988).

The Vatican and homosexuality: reactions to the "Letter to the bishops of the Catholic Church on the pastoral care of homosexual persons" . Crossroad. p.

112 .

ISBN 9780824508647 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church (2nd ed.).

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . 2019.

Paragraph 2357 Archived 24 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Blankenhorn, Fr. Bernhard; Droste, Sr. Catherine Joseph; Jindráček, Fr. Efrem; Legge, Fr. Dominic; White, Fr. Thomas Joseph (2015).

«Aquinas & Homosexuality. Five Dominicans Respond to Adriano Oliva» Archived 14 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

Angelicum 92 (3): 297-302.

ISSN 1123-5772 .

^ "World Day Against Death Penalty" .

ilga.org . ILGA Files. 10 October 2007. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "Homosexuality and Islam" .

religionfacts.com . Archived from the original on 15 April 2015 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ Reid, Tim (12 January 2002).

"Kandahar Comes Out of the Closet" .

sodomylaws.org .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2004 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ "Where is it illegal to be gay?" .

BBC News . 10 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 11 February 2014 .

^ Dahir, Mubarak (December 2002).

"Is Beheading Really the Punishment for Homosexuality in Saudi Arabia?" .

sodomylaws.org .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2003 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

^ "Homosexuality and Religion" .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ Farmer, Ben (13 January 2011).

"Paedophilia 'culturally accepted in south Afghanistan' " .

telegraph.co.uk . Kabul: The Daily Telegraph.

Archived from the original on 13 July 2015 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

American social scientists employed to help troops understand the local culture reported that homosexual sex was widespread among the Pashtun ethnic group in southern Afghanistan. Strict separation of men and women, coupled with poverty and the significant expense of getting married, contributed to young men turning to each other for sexual companionship.

^ "Helem English – !EXIST" .

helem.net .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2018 . Retrieved 1 February 2009 .

^ Wise Teacher, Wise Student: Tibetan Approaches to a Healthy Relationship , Alexander Berzin ^ Canada Tibet Committee (1 July 1993).

"A Lesson on Life, Happiness; Anyone Can Achieve It, Says Dalai Lama to Seattle Crowd" .

World Tibet Network News . Archived from the original on 4 August 2004.

^ "Sikhism: beliefs about love and sex" .

BBC.co.uk . BBC GCSE Bitesize.

Archived from the original on 23 March 2015 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "Homosexuality and Sikhism" .

gaylaxymag.com . GayLaxy. 26 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2015 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ World Sikh group against gay marriage bill Archived 7 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine , CBC News , Tuesday, 29 March 2005.

^ " "Transwoman A 'Bride' Under Hindu Marriage Act": Madras HC; Also Bans Sex Re-Assignment Surgeries On Intersex Children [Read Judgment]" . 23 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 .

^ "Discussions on Dharma" . Hinduism Today. October 2004. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "Hinduism: beliefs about love and sex" .

BBC.co.uk . BBC GCSE Bitesize.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2014 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "The sexual pervert (and by this term Dianetics, to be brief, includes any and all forms of deviation in Dynamic II [i.e. sexuality] such as homosexuality, lesbianism, sexual sadism, etc., and all down the catalog of Ellis and Krafft-Ebing ) is actually quite ill physically...he is very far from culpable for his condition, but he is also far from normal and extremely dangerous to society..." Hubbard (1978).

Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health . Church of Scientology of California. pp.

122– 123.

ISBN 0-88404-000-3 .

^ Hubbard (1975).

Science of Survival . Church of Scientology of California. pp.

88–90 .

ISBN 0-88404-001-1 .

"Such people should be taken from the society as rapidly as possible and uniformly institutionalized; for here is the level of the contagion of immorality, and the destruction of ethics; here is the fodder which secret police organizations use for their filthy operations. One of the most effective measures of security that a nation threatened by war could take would be rounding up and placing in a cantonment , away from society, any 1.1 individual who might be connected with government, the military, or essential industry; since here are people who, regardless of any record of their family's loyalty, are potential traitors, the very mode of operation of their insanity being betrayal. In this level is the slime of society, the sex criminals, the political subversives, the people whose apparently rational activities are yet but the devious writhings of secret hate." ^ "About Scientology" .

St. Petersburg Times . 18 July 2004. Archived from the original on 8 July 2015 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

Scientology Positions: Gay marriage - Scientologists recognize marriage as a part of the second of eight dynamics of existence. The second dynamic includes all creative activity, including sex, procreation and child rearing. The Scientology marriage ceremony is traditional and addresses a union between a man and a woman.

^ Wright, Lawrence (14 February 2011).

"The Apostate : Paul Haggis vs. the Church of Scientology" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 6 May 2015 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ "Corporate Report: Belarus – Country of Concern" .

Gov.uk .

Foreign and Commonwealth Office . October 2014 . Retrieved 28 May 2015 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Anti-LGBTQ+ protesters break up Pride event in Georgian capital Tbilisi" .

the Guardian . 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 10 July 2023 .

^ "Homosexuality in Hinduism" .

Faithology .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 7 July 2015 .

^ "India's Supreme Court turns the clock back with gay sex ban" .

Reuters . 11 December 2013.

Archived from the original on 16 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ "India: Supreme Court Strikes Down Sodomy Law" .

Human Rights Watch . 6 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 13 May 2021 .

^ Gollmer, Anggatira (2 March 2011).

"It's OK to be gay in Indonesia so long as you keep it quiet" . Deutsche Welle.

Archived from the original on 19 May 2015 . Retrieved 17 March 2016 .

^ a b c d Alisa Tang (8 March 2016).

"Under attack, Indonesian LGBT groups set up safehouses, live in fear" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ a b "Mahasiswa Beri Konseling LGBT, Begini Respons UI" .

Tempo.co (in Indonesian). 21 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

^ Wisnu Prasetyo (23 January 2016).

"Support Group untuk LGBT di UI: Kami Tak Mendorong dan Menyembuhkan Orang dari Gay" .

detikNews (in Indonesian).

Archived from the original on 4 March 2019 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

^ Jeffrey Hutton (15 February 2016).

"Anti-Gay Actions in Indonesia Threaten a Fragile Population" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 2 March 2017 .

^ "National scene: Muhammadiyah takes soft approach on LGBT - the Jakarta Post" .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 7 April 2025 .

^ "Sikap Gereja Katolik terhadap isu LGBT" .

UCAN Indonesia (in Indonesian). 19 February 2016. Archived from the original on 14 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ Liza Yosephine (24 February 2016).

"Indonesian psychiatrists label LGBT as mental disorders" .

The Jakarta Post . Jakarta.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 17 March 2016 .

^ Nurbianto, Bambang (21 March 2016).

"More political leaders speak out against LGBT" .

The Jakarta Post .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 .

^ Davies, Sharyn Graham (15 July 2016).

"Indonesia's anti-LGBT panic" .

East Asia Forum .

8 (2): 8– 11.

Archived from the original on 15 July 2016 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 .

^ Davies, Sharyn Graham (2019). "Waria".

Global Encyclopedia of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer (LGBTQ) History . Gale eBooks. pp.

1717– 1720.

ISBN 978-0-684-32554-5 .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 .

^ "Indonesia's President Finally Speaks Out Against Worsening Anti-LGBT Discrimination" .

TIME.com . 20 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ "Mahathir's Malaysia accused of 'state-sponsored homophobia' " .

South China Morning Post . 22 August 2018.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ Tilles, Daniel (17 June 2020).

"Poland's anti-LGBT campaign explained: 10 questions and answers" .

Notes From Poland .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2020 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 .

^ "Unrest feared as Poland Catholic church doubles down on anti-gay rhetoric" .

NBC News .

Reuters . 2 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2020 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 .

^ a b "Young and Gay in Putin's Russia – Full Length" .

VICE.com . VICE News. 18 January 2014.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 .

^ Brydum, Sunnivie (28 October 2013).

"Putin Promises Gay Olympians Will Be "Comfortable" in Sochi" . The Advocate.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Caldwell, Christopher.

"Why the west has not boycotted the Sochi Olympics" .

FT.com . The Financial Times.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ a b c Karlberg, Eva; Korolczuk, Elżbieta; Sältenberg, Hansalbin (2025). "Insidious de-democratization: Conceptualizing anti-gender politics in Sweden".

Journal of Gender Studies .

34 (1): 732– 748.

doi : 10.1080/09589236.2024.2446345 .

^ a b Grahn, Michal; Holm, Malin (2025). "Trans inclusive no more? Allies and adversaries of gender self-identification in Sweden".

European Journal of Politics and Gender .

8 (1): 234– 241.

doi : 10.1332/25151088Y2024D000000052 .

^ Alm, Erika; Engebretsen, Elisabeth Lund (2020). "Gender Self-identification".

Lambda Nordica .

25 (1): 48– 56.

doi : 10.34041/ln.v25.613 .

^ "Why WoPAI is needed" . Women's Platform for Action International (WoPAI). 5 February 2025. Archived from the original on 20 February 2025.

^ Local Government Act 1988 (c. 9) Archived 22 November 2005 at the Wayback Machine , section 28. Accessed 18 January 2015 on opsi.gov.uk.

^ Epstein, Debbie; O'Flynn, Sarah; Telford, David (2003).

Silenced Sexualities in Schools and Universities . Trentham Books.

^ a b "Speech to Conservative Party Conference, 1987 Oct 9" .

margaretthatcher.org . Margaret Thatcher Foundation.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2020 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ "Cameron: Toff At The Top" .

channel4.com .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ Roberts, Scott (16 April 2013).

"Ian McKellen: 'Margaret Thatcher misjudged the future with Section 28' " .

pinknews.co.uk .

Pink News .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

Section 28 was later removed from the statute book by Tony Blair's Labour government in 2003.

^ "Cameron sorry for Section 28" .

The Independent . 22 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2011 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 .

^ Pierce, Andrew (July 2009).

"David Cameron says sorry over Section 28 gay law" .

Telegraph.co.uk . The Telegraph.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ "Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill" . House of Commons. 25 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2013 . Retrieved 28 January 2013 .

^ "Gay marriage an important step forward, says PM" .

bbc.co.uk . BBC. 5 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ Ross, Tim (24 December 2010).

"Coalition ministers consider gay marriage plans" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 26 December 2010.

^ Andrew Anthony (September 2002).

"Andrew Anthony meets Nick Griffin – From the Observer – The Observer" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 29 April 2007 .

^ "1999: Dozens injured in Soho nail bomb" .

BBC News . 30 April 1999.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2010 .

^ Cuordileone, K. A. "'Politics in an Age of Anxiety': Cold War Political Culture and the Crisis in American Masculinity, 1949–1960" The Journal of American History 87 (2) (2000): 515–545 ^ Von Hoffman, Nicholas, Citizen Cohn Doubleday, 1988, pp 130 ^ "Who's Gay? What's Straight? – Employment Of Homosexuals And Other Sex Perverts In Government (1950) – Assault On Gay America – FRONTLINE – PBS" .

pbs.org .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2017 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 .

^ Von Hoffman, Nicholas, Citizen Cohn Doubleday, 1988 ^ a b c d Herman, Didi (1997).

The Antigay Agenda: Orthodox Vision and the Christian Right . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-32764-8 . Retrieved 20 September 2012 .

^ Bryant, Anita; Green, Bob (1978).

At Any Cost . Grand Rapids, Michigan, US: Fleming H. Revell.

ISBN 9780800709402 .

^ a b Miller, Steven P. (2014).

"Left, Right, Born Again" .

The Age of Evangelicalism: America's Born-Again Years .

New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

32– 59.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199777952.003.0003 .

ISBN 9780199777952 .

LCCN 2013037929 .

OCLC 881502753 .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 July 2022 .

^ a b Durham, Martin (2000).

"The rise of the right" .

The Christian Right, the Far Right, and the Boundaries of American Conservatism .

Manchester and New York : Manchester University Press . pp.

1– 23.

ISBN 9780719054860 .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 July 2022 .

^ Westengard, Laura (2019).

"Monstrosity: Melancholia, Cannibalism, and HIV/AIDS" .

Gothic Queer Culture: Marginalized Communities and the Ghosts of Insidious Trauma .

Lincoln, Nebraska : University of Nebraska Press . pp.

99– 103.

ISBN 978-1-4962-0204-8 .

LCCN 2018057900 .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 July 2022 .

^ Kaplan, George R. (May 1994). "Shotgun Wedding: Notes on Public Education's Encounter with the New Christian Right".

Phi Delta Kappan .

75 (9).

^ Green, Hohn (2006). Green, John C.; Rozell, Mark J.; Wilcox, Clyde (eds.).

THE VALUES CAMPAIGN? The Christian Right and the 2004 Elections . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-1589011083 .

^ Draper, Electa (22 October 2008).

"Focus on the Family focuses on homosexuals" .

Denver Post . Retrieved 7 June 2023 .

^ Petersen, David L. (2005). "Genesis and Family Values".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

124 (1): 5– 23.

doi : 10.2307/30040988 .

JSTOR 30040988 .

^ Douthat, Ross, et al.

"The 'Let's Just Ban Everything' Edition" Archived 30 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine Political Gabfest . Slate, 15 February 2018.

Slate . Start listening at 37:00.

^ "America's far right is increasingly protesting against LGBT people" .

The Economist .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2023 . Retrieved 24 May 2023 .

^ a b c d Gallup, Inc. (29 May 2007).

"Tolerance for Gay Rights at High-Water Mark" .

Gallup.com .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2008 . Retrieved 19 November 2008 .

^ Kludt, Tom (18 March 2013).

"Poll:New High Of 58 Percent Support Same-Sex Marriage" . livewire.talkingpointsmemo.com.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2013 . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .

^ "Gay marriage support hits new high in Post-ABC poll" .

washingtonpost.com . 18 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2013 . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .

^ "Poll: Gay-marriage support at record high" .

washingtonpost.com . 23 April 2015.

Archived from the original on 26 May 2015 . Retrieved 24 May 2015 .

^ Herek, G.M. (1991).

Stigma, prejudice, and violence against lesbians and gay men.

In: J. Gonsiorek & J. Weinrich (Eds.), "Homosexuality: Research implications for public policy" (pp. 60–80). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

^ Kyes, K.B. & Tumbelaka, L. (1994).

Comparison of Indonesian and American college students' attitudes toward homosexuality.

Psychological Reports, 74, 227–237.

^ "Uniform Discrimination: The "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" Policy of the U.S. Military" (PDF) . Human Rights Watch. 2003.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2021 .

^ "Study: Military gays don't undermine unit" .

NBC News . Associated Press. 7 July 2008.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2015 .

^ "Out In Force" .

ucdavis.edu .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2008 . Retrieved 19 November 2008 .

^ "Boy Scouts" . Scouting.org. Archived from the original on 24 May 2009 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ The Boy Scouts of America.

"Position statements: United Way" .

scouting.org . Archived from the original on 16 October 2002.

^ "Supreme Court says Boy Scouts can bar gay troop leaders" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2020 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ "Scouting for All: Committed to Scouting, Open to Diversity. Working to end discrimination against gays, atheists, agnostics, other non-theists, and all other groups in the Boy Scouts of America" .

scoutingforall.org .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2009 . Retrieved 21 March 2009 .

^ "Support our scouts act of 2005" . BSALegal.org. 30 December 2005. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "Two-year anniversary of Supreme Court case" .

religionlink.org . 24 June 2002. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "Boy Scouts Of America Practices Discrimination" . Freedom From Religion Foundation. Archived from the original on 7 February 2005 . Retrieved 9 October 2007 .

^ "United Way to Continue Aid to Central Jersey Scouts" .

NY Times . 31 August 2001. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007 . Retrieved 3 November 2006 .

^ "The Impact of the Boy Scouts of America's Anti-Gay Discrimination" .

lambdalegal.org . Archived from the original on 26 June 2006.

^ "Scouting for All: Committed to Scouting, Open to Diversity. Working to end discrimination against gays, atheists, agnostics, other non-theists, and all other groups in the Boy Scouts of America" .

scoutingforall.org .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 March 2009 .

^ Leopold, Todd (27 July 2015).

"Boy Scouts change policy on gay leaders" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2015 . Retrieved 23 August 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] "History of the Anti-Gay Movement Since 1977" . Montgomery, Ala.: Southern Poverty Law Center. 28 April 2005.

Perkins, Tom (9 July 2023).

"US religious right at center of anti-LGBTQ+ message pushed around the world" .

The Guardian .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Opposition to LGBTQ rights at Wikiquote v t e LGBTQ rights overview Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Intersex rights General Capital punishment Censorship of LGBTQ issues Criminalization Decriminalization Legal status of transgender people Legality of conversion therapy LGBTQ rights at the United Nations Activists Movements Organizations Societal attitudes Student movement Timeline of LGBTQ history Transgender rights movement By regions ( list ) Africa Americas North America South America Asia Europe European Union Oceania Middle East Commonwealth La Francophonie Post-Soviet states By years ( list ) 1700s 1800s 1900–1949 1950s 1960s 1970s 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980s 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990s 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000s 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010s 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020s 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Ideological Communism and LGBTQ rights LGBTQ conservatism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Libertarian perspectives on LGBTQ rights New Left Queer anarchism Queer radicalism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2ztbf
Cached time: 20250817003353
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.902 seconds
Real time usage: 2.149 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11035/1000000
Revision size: 101617/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 400031/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11307/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 39/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 516885/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.222/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24632350/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1818.845      1 -total
 46.24%  841.118      2 Template:Reflist
 19.38%  352.582      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.06%  346.748      1 Template:Discrimination_sidebar
 16.91%  307.499     58 Template:Cite_web
 13.76%  250.230      9 Template:Excerpt
  9.49%  172.582     14 Template:Cite_journal
  7.43%  135.224     23 Template:Cite_news
  6.50%  118.168      1 Template:Annotated_link
  5.45%   99.081     13 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1527351:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817003353 and revision id 1305820419. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opposition_to_LGBTQ_rights&oldid=1305820419 " Categories : Anti-LGBTQ sentiment Biphobia Discrimination against LGBTQ people Homophobia Lesbophobia LGBTQ rights Religion and LGBTQ people Opposition to same-sex marriage Persecution of LGBTQ people Transphobia Anti-LGBTQ activism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Use dmy dates from February 2025 Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2015 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 08:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Opposition to LGBTQ rights 6 languages Add topic

