Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Influences 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Aubrey Thomas de Vere 5 languages Español Français Nederlands Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish poet and cleric Aubrey Thomas de Vere Aubrey Thomas de Vere Born ( 1814-01-10 ) 10 January 1814 Curraghchase House, Curraghchase , Kilcornan , County Limerick, Ireland Died 20 January 1902 (1902-01-20) (aged 88) Curraghchase, Kilcornan, County Limerick, Ireland Occupation Author Notable works In verse: The Sisters (1861) The Infant Bridal (1864) Irish Odes (1869) Legends of St Patrick (1872) Alexander the Great (1874) St Thomas of Canterbury (1876) Legends of the Saxon Saints (1879) In prose: Essays Chiefly on Poetry (1887) Essays Chiefly Literary and Ethical (1889) Parents Sir Aubrey de Vere, 2nd Baronet Mary Spring de Vere ( née Rice) Relatives Sir Aubrey de Vere, 3rd Baronet Sir Stephen Edward De Vere, 4th Baronet (brothers) Lord Monteagle (uncle) Lucy Knox (cousin) Academic background Alma mater Trinity College, Dublin Influences Lord Byron William Wordsworth Sir William Rowan Hamilton John Henry Newman Aubrey Thomas de Vere (10 January 1814 – 20 January 1902) was an Irish poet and critic.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Aubrey Thomas Hunt de Vere was born at Curraghchase House (now in ruins) at Curraghchase , Kilcornan , County Limerick , [ 2 ] the third son of Sir Aubrey de Vere, 2nd Baronet (1788–1846) and his wife Mary Spring Rice, daughter of Stephen Edward Rice (d.1831) and Catherine Spring, [ 3 ] of Mount Trenchard, County Limerick . He was a nephew of Lord Monteagle , a younger brother of Sir Stephen de Vere, 4th Baronet and a cousin of Lucy Knox . His sister Ellen married Robert O'Brien, the brother of William Smith O'Brien .

[ 4 ] In 1832, his father dropped the original surname 'Hunt' by royal licence, assuming the surname 'de Vere'.

The characteristics of Aubrey de Vere's poetry are high seriousness and a fine religious enthusiasm. His research in questions of faith led him to the Roman Catholic Church where in 1851 he was received into the Church by Cardinal Manning in Avignon .

[ 5 ] In many of his poems, notably in the volume of sonnets called St Peters Chains (1888), he made rich additions to devotional verse. For a few years he held a professorship, under Newman, in the Catholic University in Dublin.

[ 6 ] In "A Book of Irish Verse," W. B. Yeats described de Vere's poetry as having "less architecture than the poetry of Ferguson and Allingham, and more meditation. Indeed, his few but ever memorable successes are enchanted islands in gray seas of stately impersonal reverie and description, which drift by and leave no definite recollection. One needs, perhaps, to perfectly enjoy him, a Dominican habit, a cloister, and a breviary." Works [ edit ] His best-known works are: in verse, The Sisters (1861); The Infant Bridal (1864); Irish Odes (1869); Legends of St Patrick (1872); and Legends of the Saxon Saints (1879); and in prose, "The Foray of Queen Meave and Other Legends of Ireland's Heroic Age" (1882), Essays Chiefly on Poetry (1887); and Essays Chiefly Literary and Ethical (1889). He also wrote a picturesque volume of travel-sketches, and two dramas in verse, Alexander the Great (1874); and St Thomas of Canterbury (1876). According to the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition , both of these dramas, "though they contain fine passages, suffer from diffuseness and a lack of dramatic spirit." [ 7 ] One of his best remembered poem is Inisfail while two of his historical poems used to be on the Junior Cycle English syllabus, [ 8 ] The March to Kinsale [ 9 ] and The Ballad of Athlone .

[ 10 ] Influences [ edit ] In his Recollections he says that Byron was his first admiration, but was instantly displaced when Sir Aubrey put Wordsworth's "Laodamia" into his hands. He became a disciple of Wordsworth , whose calm meditative serenity he often echoed with great felicity; and his affection for Greek poetry, truly felt and understood, gave dignity and weight to his own versions of mythological idylls. A critic in the Quarterly Review of 1896 said of his poetry, that next to Browning's it showed the fullest vitality, the largest sphere of ideas, covered the broadest intellectual field since Wordsworth.

[ 11 ] "May Carols and Legends of Saxon Saints" (1857) "Legends and Records of the Church and Empire" (1887) "Mediæval Records and Sonnets" (1898) But perhaps he will be chiefly remembered for the impulse which he gave to the study of Celtic legend and Celtic literature . In this direction he has had many followers, who have sometimes assumed the appearance of pioneers; but after Matthew Arnold 's fine lecture on Celtic Literature, nothing perhaps did more to help the Celtic revival than Aubrey de Vere's tender insight into the Irish character, and his stirring reproductions of the early Irish epic poetry.

[ 7 ] A volume of Selections from his poems was edited in 1894 (New York and London) by G. E. Woodberry .

[ 7 ] The de Vere Hunt Male line DNA Several members of Aubrey's family from two brothers of his ancestor Captain Vere, namely those referred to as Henry "of LIgadoon" (1)  and John " of Glangoole" Aubrey's ancestor (4) have determined that he belonged to the rare J-FTA83121 Hunt group and subsequently to the J-FTA84824 for John. In relation to other families, it points to Norman origin of the family via VIenne, originating from an ancient Jewish line via the Levant.

References [ edit ] ^ Gosse, Edmund (1913).

"Aubrey de Vere." In: Portraits and Sketches.

London: William Heinemann, pp. 117–125.

^ Ward, Wilfrid (1904).

Aubrey de Vere: A Memoir.

London: Longmans, Green and Co., p. 1.

^ Ward (1904), p. 4.

^ "The De Vere Family by Patrick J. Cronin" (PDF) .

www.limerickcity.ie .

^ "Aubrey Thomas De Vere" (PDF) .

^ "Aubrey Thomas de Vere (1814–1902)", The English Poets , (Thomas Humphry Ward, ed.), Vol. V ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " De Vere, Aubrey Thomas ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 121.

^ "Intermediate Poetry: a New Anthology Specially Compiled for the Intermediate Certificate Course in Accordance with the Programme of the Department of Education" .

^ "The March to Kinsale" .

^ "The Ballad of Athlone" .

^ Smith, Helen Grace. "Aubrey Thomas Hunt de Vere." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 18 March 2016 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Aubrey Thomas Hunt de Vere ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aubrey Thomas de Vere .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Aubrey Thomas de Vere Works by Aubrey De Vere at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Aubrey Thomas de Vere at the Internet Archive More information on the life of Aubrey Thomas de Vere 1901 census return Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Netherlands Latvia Greece Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Ireland DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aubrey_Thomas_de_Vere&oldid=1299534714 " Categories : 1814 births 1902 deaths Converts to Roman Catholicism De Vere family Irish Catholic poets Irish male poets Writers from County Limerick Sonneteers Younger sons of baronets 19th-century Irish poets Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Use dmy dates from April 2017 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 00:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aubrey Thomas de Vere 5 languages Add topic

