Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Archaeology 3 Administration 4 Historical population 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 Notes 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Dion, Pieria 21 languages العربية Български Cebuano Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°10′N 22°29′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.167°N 22.483°E ﻿ / 40.167; 22.483 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Village in Dion-Olympos, Greece "Dium" redirects here. For other uses, see Dium (disambiguation) .

Municipal unit in Greece Dion Δίον Municipal unit Hypocaust of ancient public baths Dion Location within the regional unit Coordinates: 40°10′N 22°29′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.167°N 22.483°E ﻿ / 40.167; 22.483 Country Greece Administrative region Central Macedonia Regional unit Pieria Municipality Dio-Olympos Area • Municipal unit 172.743 km 2 (66.696 sq mi) • Community 31.375 km 2 (12.114 sq mi) Elevation 40 m (130 ft) Population (2021) [ 1 ] • Municipal unit 9,067 • Municipal unit density 52/km 2 (140/sq mi) • Community 1,268 • Community density 40/km 2 (100/sq mi) Time zone UTC+2 ( EET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+3 ( EEST ) Postal code 601 00 Area code(s) 23510 Vehicle registration KN Dion ( Greek : Δίον ; [ note 1 ] Ancient Greek : Δῖον ; [ note 2 ] Latin : Dium ) is a village and municipal unit in the municipality of Dion-Olympos in the Pieria regional unit , Greece .

[ note 3 ] It is located at the foot of Mount Olympus at a distance of 17 km from the capital city of Katerini . The seat of the municipal unit was in Kondariotissa .

It is best known for its great ancient Macedonian sanctuary of Zeus and the ancient city, much of which is visible in the Archaeological Park of Dion [ 2 ] and the Archaeological Museum of Dion .

View of Mount Olympus History [ edit ] Plan of Dion. The sanctuaries and the city (Archive of the excavation of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki/Drawing of Orkopoulos – Palli 1995) [Pandermalis (1997), p. 14-15].

Ancient Thermes View of a statue, Sanctuary of Isis.

The ancient city owes its name to the most important Macedonian sanctuary dedicated to Zeus ( Dios , "of Zeus"), leader of the gods who dwelt on Mount Olympus ; as recorded by Hesiod 's Catalogue of Women , Thyia , daughter of Deucalion , bore Zeus two sons, Magnes and Makednos , eponyms of Magnetes and Macedonians , who dwelt in Pieria at the foot of Mount Olympus.

[ 3 ] Hence from very ancient times, a large altar had been set up for the worship of Olympian Zeus and his daughters, the Muses, in a unique environment characterised by rich vegetation, towering trees, countless springs and a navigable river. For this reason Dion was the "sacred place" of the Ancient Macedonians . It was the place where the kings made splendid sacrifices to celebrate the new year of the Macedonian calendar at the end of September. In the Spring, purification rites of the army and victory feasts were held.

The first mention of Dion in history comes from Thucydides , who reports that it was the first city reached by the Spartan general Brasidas after crossing from Thessaly into Macedon on his way through the realm of his ally Perdiccas II during his expedition against the Athenian colonies of Thrace in 424 BC.

[ 4 ] According to Diodorus Siculus , it was Archelaus I who, at the end of the 5th century BC when the Macedonian state acquired great power and emerged onto the stage of history, gave the city and its sanctuary their subsequent importance by instituting a nine-day festival of games that included athletic and dramatic competitions in honor of Zeus and the Muses , whose organisation was overseen by the Macedonian kings themselves.

Philip II and Alexander the Great celebrated victories here, and Alexander assembled his armies and performed magnificent sacrifices here on the eve of his campaign to Asia in 334 BC.

[ 5 ] Many ancient authors speak of the sculptural bronze masterpiece by Lysippos made for Alexander depicting 25 mounted companions who fell at the Battle of the Granicus and later taken to Rome by Metellus .

A city was built adjacent to the sacred sites that acquired monumental form during the reigns of Alexander the Great's successors and Cassander took a great interest in the city erecting strong walls and public buildings, so that in Hellenistic times Dion was renowned far and wide for its fortification and splendid monuments. Dion and its sanctuary was destroyed during the Social War in 219 BC by Aetolian invaders but was immediately rebuilt by Philip V . Many of the dedications from the sanctuary that had been destroyed were buried in pits, including royal inscriptions and treaties, and these have been discovered recently.

Fortification wall It fell to the Romans in 169 BC [ 6 ] and the city was given a new lease of life in 32/31 BC when Octavian founded the Colony of COLONIA JULIA AUGUSTA DIENSIS here.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Coins of colonial Dion survive.

[ 9 ] It experienced its second heyday during the reigns of 2nd- and 3rd-century AD Roman emperors who were fond of Alexander the Great. Dion's final important period was in the 4th and 5th centuries AD when it became the seat of a bishopric. It was abandoned following major earthquakes and floods.

The modern village at the site was called Malathria until 1961, when it was renamed to Dion .

[ 10 ] Archaeology [ edit ] A mosaic floor The site of ancient Dion was first identified by the English traveler William Martin Leake on December 2, 1806, in the ruins adjoining the village of Malathria .  He published his discovery in the third volume of his Travels in Northern Greece in 1835.

Léon Heuzey visited the site during his famous Macedonian archaeological mission of 1855 and again in 1861 when he also detected the ancient Leivithra .  Later, the epigraphist G. Oikonomos published the first series of inscriptions.  Nevertheless, systematic archaeological exploration did not begin until 1928.  From then until 1931, G. Sotiriadis carried out a series of surveys, uncovering a 4th-century BC Macedonian tomb and an early Christian basilica. Excavations were not resumed until 1960 under the direction of G. Bakalakis in the area of the theatre and the wall.  Since 1973, Professor Dimitrios Pandermalis of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki has conducted archaeological research in the city.

Dion is the site of a large temple dedicated to Zeus, as well as a series of temples to Demeter and to Isis (the Egyptian goddess was a favorite of Alexander ).

Excavation of the magnificent House of Dionysos revealed a mosaic of exceptionally fine quality.

Dion House of Dionysos Mosaic A rare and unusual find in the museum is a bronze "hydraulis" or hydraulic musical pipe organ found in a former workshop.

Dion hydraulis In 2006, a statue of Hera was found built into the walls of the city.  The statue, 2200 years old, had been used by the early Christians of Dion as filling for the city's defensive wall.

[ 11 ] Administration [ edit ] In October 1992, the Municipality of Dion ( Δήμος Δίου , Dimos Diou ) was formed. At the 1997 Kapodistrias reform , it was expanded with the former communities Agios Spyridonas , Karitsa , Kondariotissa , Nea Efesos and Vrontou .

[ 12 ] The administrative center was in the village of Kondariotissa . As part of Greece's 2011 local government reform Dion merged with the former municipalities East Olympos and Litochoro to form the new municipality Dion-Olympos . Dion became a municipal unit of the newly formed municipality , and the former municipal districts became communities.

[ 13 ] The community of Dion consists of the village of the same name and Platanakia .

[ 14 ] The municipal unit has an area of 172.74 km 2 (67 sq mi), the community 31.38 km 2 (12 sq mi).

[ 15 ] Historical population [ edit ] Year Community population Municipal unit population 1981 1,236 - 1991 1,149 9,876 2001 1,314 10,885 2011 [ 14 ] 1,424 10,066 2021 [ 1 ] 1,268 9,067 Gallery [ edit ] View of the archeological site Ruins at the archaeological site Ancient column Sanctuary of Isis Aphrodite Hypolympidia statue.

View of the villa of Dionysus containing the large Dionysus mosaic Sanctuary of Demeter The sacred spring with the sanctuary of Zeus Hypsistos in the background Sanctuary of Isis Four-columned temple dedicated to Isis Lochia, Sanctuary of Isis View of the Hellenistic theater Baths of ancient Dion Public toilets along the central road Mosaic floor in the Great Baths complex Detail of a mosaic floor, Great Baths complex The hypocaust of the Great Baths complex Shields dedicated by Alexander the Great on his victory over the Persians at the Granicus river Large mosaic at the Archaeological Museum of Dion Inscription from the Archaeological Museum of Dion reading "ΒΑΣΣΙΛΕΩΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΟΥ" [King Philip] See also [ edit ] Archaeological Museum of Dion List of settlements in the Pieria regional unit References [ edit ] ^ a b "Αποτελέσματα Απογραφής Πληθυσμού - Κατοικιών 2021, Μόνιμος Πληθυσμός κατά οικισμό" [Results of the 2021 Population - Housing Census, Permanent population by settlement] (in Greek). Hellenic Statistical Authority. 29 March 2024.

^ "Ancient Dion" . Archived from the original on 25 October 2008 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ Hesiod.

Γυναικῶν Κατάλογος (Catalogue of Women) .

^ Thucydides .

History of the Peloponnesian War . Vol. 4.78.

^ Diodorus Siculus: Bibliotheca historica ^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita Libri [ History of Rome ]. Vol. 44.7.

^ Pliny .

Naturalis Historia . Vol. 4.10.

^ Ptolemy .

The Geography . Vol. 3.13.15.

^ Smith, William , ed. (1854–1857). "Dium".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . London: John Murray.

^ "Name Changes of Settlements in Greece: Malathria -- Dion" .

Pandektis . Retrieved 7 May 2020 .

^ Kantouris, Costas.

Greek archaeologists find Hera statue .

Associated Press .  March 1, 2007.

^ "EETAA local government changes" .

^ "ΦΕΚ B 1292/2010, Kallikratis reform municipalities" (in Greek).

Government Gazette .

^ a b "Απογραφή Πληθυσμού - Κατοικιών 2011. ΜΟΝΙΜΟΣ Πληθυσμός" (in Greek). Hellenic Statistical Authority.

^ "Population & housing census 2001 (incl. area and average elevation)" (PDF) (in Greek). National Statistical Service of Greece. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2015.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Romanization: Díon , Modern Greek : [ˈði.on] ^ Romanization: Dȋon , Ancient: [dîːon] ^ Prior to Greece's 2011 local government reform , Dion was a municipality. As part of that reform the current municipality of Dion-Olympos was created by combining Dion with the municipalities of East Olympos and Litochoro , all of which are now regional units of Dion-Olympos.

F. Papazoglou , Les villes de Macédoine romaine , Supplément 18 du BCH , Paris, 1988.

D. Pandermalis , Dion, the archaeological site and the museum , Athens, 1997.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dion (Greece) .

Municipality of Dion website Official website of the archaeological park of Dion Archaeological site of Dion Images from the archaeological site v t e Macedonia (Greece) People Ancient Macedonians List Macedonians (Greeks) List Jews of Thessaloniki Slavic speakers Macedonian Bulgarians , Ethnic Macedonians Aromanians Megleno-Romanians History Ancient Macedonia History Government Kings Wars of Alexander the Great Wars of the Diadochi Macedonian Wars Roman Macedonia Barbarian invasions Theme of Macedonia Theme of Thessalonica Theme of Strymon Sack of Thessalonica (904) Byzantine–Bulgarian wars Sack of Thessalonica (1185) Kingdom of Thessalonica Empire of Thessalonica Byzantine civil war of 1321–1328 Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347 Zealots of Thessalonica Byzantine–Ottoman wars Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430) Ottoman Greece Rumelia Eyalet Greek War of Independence Manastir Vilayet Sanjak of Monastir Sanjak of Serfiğe Salonica Vilayet Sanjak of Drama Sanjak of Salonica Sanjak of Siroz Macedonian Struggle Balkan Wars Macedonian front Provisional Government of National Defence Axis occupation Greek Civil War Macedonia naming dispute Prespa agreement Administration Ministry of Macedonia and Thrace Western Macedonia Central Macedonia Eastern Macedonia and Thrace Economy Agios Dimitrios Power Plant Amyntaio Power Plant Drama coal mine Gerakini mine Olympias mine Piavitsa mine Port of Kavala Port of Thessaloniki Prinos oil field Ptolemaida-Florina coal mine Skouries mine Stratoni mine Thessaloniki International Fair Major cities Thessaloniki Kavala Kastoria Serres Veria Katerini Edessa Florina Drama Naousa Kozani Siatista Kilkis Other Nature Axios River Doiran Lake Falakro Galikos River Haliacmon Lake Kerkini Lake Koroneia Lake Orestiada Lake Prespa Small Prespa Lake Lake Vegoritida Lake Volvi Mount Paiko Nestos (river) Mount Olympus Pangaion Hills Pindus ( Pindus National Park ) Petralona cave Strymon River Vasilitsa Vermio Mountains Seli Verno Voras Mountains Islands : Thasos Ammouliani Monuments Agios Athanasios Alexandrion (Litochoro) Amphipolis Lion of Amphipolis Kasta Tomb Dion Archaeological Park Hellenistic theatre Mount Athos Mieza ( Tomb of Judgement , Tomb of the Palmettes ) Byzantine monuments of Thessaloniki Pella Philippi Platamon Castle Vergina ( Aigai ) Museums : Archaeological Museum of Amphipolis , Aiani Archaeological Museum , Archaeological Museum of Dion , Archaeological Museum of Pella , Archaeological Museum of Thessaloniki , Museum of Byzantine culture Culture Vergina Sun Flag Music Cuisine Greek Macedonia Portal v t e Subdivisions of the municipality of Dion-Olympos Municipal unit of Dion Agios Spyridonas Dion Karitsa Kontariotissa Nea Efesos Vrontou Municipal unit of East Olympos Leptokarya Panteleimonas Platamon Poroi Skotina Municipal unit of Litochoro Litochoro Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dion,_Pieria&oldid=1278802593 " Categories : Dion, Pieria Dion-Olympos Populated places in Pieria (regional unit) Populated places established in the 5th century BC Populated places disestablished in the 5th century 1806 archaeological discoveries Geography of ancient Pieria Culture of Macedonia (ancient kingdom) Argead colonies in Macedonia Archelaus of Macedon Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Pieria Coloniae (Roman) Mount Olympus Holy cities Cities in ancient Macedonia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRG without Wikisource reference Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2024 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dion, Pieria 21 languages Add topic

