Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Materials 2 Process for casting metal 3 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 3.1 Features of centrifugal casting 3.2 Glass 4 Benefits 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Centrifugal casting (industrial) 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Casting technique that is typically used to cast thin-walled cylinders This article is about the large-scale industrial process. For the silversmithing process, see Centrifugal casting (silversmithing) .

Video of concrete pipe production Centrifugal casting or rotocasting is a casting technique that is typically used to cast thin-walled cylinders. It is typically used to cast materials such as metals, glass, and concrete. A high quality is attainable by control of metallurgy and crystal structure. Unlike most other casting techniques, centrifugal casting is chiefly used to manufacture rotationally symmetric stock materials in standard sizes for further machining , rather than shaped parts tailored to a particular end-use.

Materials [ edit ] Typical materials that can be centrifugal cast are metals, cements, concretes, glass, and pottery materials. Typical metals cast are iron , steel , stainless steels , and alloys of nickel , aluminum , and copper , magnesium .

Two materials can be combined by introducing a second material during the process. A common example is cast iron pipe coated on the interior with cement.

Process for casting metal [ edit ] Centrifugal casting In centrifugal casting, a permanent mold is rotated continuously at high speeds (300 to 3000 rpm) as the molten metal is poured. The molten metal spreads along the inside mold wall, where it solidifies after cooling. The casting is usually a fine-grained casting with an especially fine-grained outer diameter, due to the rapid cooling at the surface of the mold. Lighter impurities and inclusions move towards the inside diameter and can be machined away following the casting.

Casting machines may be either horizontal or vertical-axis.

[ 1 ] Horizontal axis machines are preferred for long, thin cylinders, vertical machines for rings and bearings.

[ 2 ] Castings usually solidify from the outside in. This directional solidification improves some metallurgical properties. Often the inner and outermost layers are removed and only the intermediary columnar zone is used.

[ 3 ] Centrifugal casting was the invention of Alfred Krupp , who used it to manufacture railway tyres ( cast steel tyres for railway wheels) starting in 1852.

[ 4 ] Applications [ edit ] Concrete pipe and form Typical parts made by this process are pipes , flywheels , cylinder liners , and other parts that are axi-symmetric . It is notably used to cast cylinder liners and sleeve valves for piston engines, parts which could not be reliably manufactured otherwise.

UFIP is notable for applying this process to the manufacture of Cymbals .

Features of centrifugal casting [ edit ] Castings can be made in almost any length, thickness and diameter.

Different wall thicknesses can be produced from the same mold.

Eliminates the need for cores.

Good mechanical properties due to the grain structure formed by centrifugal action.

Typically cylindrical shapes are produced: In sizes of up to 6 m (20 ft) diameter and 15 m (49 ft) length.

With a wall thickness range from 2.5 to 125 mm (0.098 to 4.921 in).

In tolerance limits of the outer diameter of 2.5 mm (0.098 in) an die inner diameter of 3.8 mm (0.15 in).

In a surface finish from 2.5 to 12.5 mm (0.098 to 0.492 in) rms.

Glass [ edit ] The technique is known in the glass industry as " spinning ". The centrifugal force pushes the molten glass against the mold wall, where it solidifies. The cooling process often takes between 16 and 72 hours depending on the impurities or volume of material. Typical products made using this process are television tubes and missile nose cones.

[ citation needed ] Spin casting is also used to manufacture large telescope mirrors, where the natural curve followed by the molten glass greatly reduces the amount of grinding required. Rather than pouring glass into a mold an entire turntable containing the peripheral mold and the back pattern (a honeycomb pattern to reduce the mass of the finished product) is contained within a furnace and charged with the glass material used. The assembly is then heated and spun at slow speed until the glass is liquid, then gradually cooled over a period of months.

Centrifugal casting is also commonly used to shape glass into spherical objects such as marbles .

[ citation needed ] Benefits [ edit ] Cylinders and shapes with rotational symmetry are most commonly cast by this technique. Long castings are often produced with the long axis parallel to the ground rather than standing up in order to distribute the effect of gravity evenly.

Thin-walled cylinders are difficult to cast by other means. Centrifugal casting is particularly suited as they behave in the manner of shallow flat castings relative to the direction of the centrifugal force.

Centrifugal casting is also used to manufacture disk and cylinder shaped objects such as railway carriage wheels or machine fittings where grain, flow, and balance are important to the durability and utility of the finished product.

Noncircular shapes may also be cast providing the shape is relatively constant in radius.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Centrifugal casting .

Engineering portal Rotating furnace – Device for making axially symmetric paraboloids Spin casting – Method of utilizing centrifugal force to produce castings from a rubber mold Spin casting (mirrors) – Technique for constructing large parabolic mirrors References [ edit ] ^ "Tulsa Centrifugal-Technical" .

^ "Vertical Centrifugal Casting Advantages & Process" .

Accurate Specialties Inc . 2018-07-19 . Retrieved 2018-08-28 .

^ "Centrifugal Casting" (PDF) . 30 July 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 January 2010 .

^ Manchester, William (1969).

The Arms of Krupp . Michael Joseph. p. 102.

Further reading [ edit ] Kalpakjian, Serope; Schmid, Steven R.

Manufacturing Engineering and Technology (5th ed.). p. 525.

External links [ edit ] animation of centrifugal casting process Efunda site page with centrifugal casting fundamentals Centrifugal Casting Video Cylinder Liner Manufacturing (Centrifugal Casting Process Video) Centrifugal Casting Ductile Iron Pipe v t e Metalworking v t e Casting Processes Centrifugal Continuous Die Evaporative-pattern Full mold Lost foam Investment (Lost wax) Permanent mold Plaster mold Sand Semi-solid metal Shaw process Shell molding Spin Components Chill Cope and drag Core Flask Molding sand Pattern Riser Sprue Terminology Casting defects Draft Dross Foundry Ingot Semi-finished casting products Slag Casting Fabrication Forming Jewellery Machining Metallurgy Smithing Tools and terminology Welding Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Centrifugal_casting_(industrial)&oldid=1215554611 " Category : Casting (manufacturing) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 25 March 2024, at 20:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Centrifugal casting (industrial) 11 languages Add topic

