Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sales 2 Condition 3 Booktowns 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Used book 13 languages العربية Català Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių 日本語 ไทย Türkçe اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book which has been owned before by an owner other than the publisher or retailer Used books in a bookshop in Japan A used book or secondhand book is a book which has been owned before by an owner other than the publisher or retailer , usually by an individual or library .

[ 1 ] Sales [ edit ] The South Bank Book Market, London, England Used books typically become available on the market when they are sold or given to a second-hand shop , church used book sale or used bookstore ; they are usually sold for about half or three-quarters the price of what they would cost new, though rare books and others still in demand or hard to obtain might sell for more than this.

[ 2 ] Book sales in general decreased with the advent of online shopping . However, there are dedicated online retailers for used books that allow individuals to sell directly to them.

[ 3 ] Some retailers also allow used books to be sold through a third-party marketplace.

[ 2 ] Some new book shops also carry used books, and some used book shops also sell new books. Though the original authors or publishers will not benefit financially from the sale of a used book, it helps to keep old books in circulation. Sometimes very old, rare, first edition , antique , or simply out of print books can be found as used books in used book shops.

College textbooks are often bought secondhand.

[ 4 ] Students will buy secondhand or resell books they bought at full-price to save costs. These copies will be sold through secondhand markets or the school itself.

[ 5 ] Condition [ edit ] Main article: List of used book conditions A reading copy of a book may be well-used, may include highlighting, marginalia , dedications, [ 6 ] and is suitable for reading, but is not collectible. This is a term used in the used book business, to indicate the lack of collectible value, while claiming that the book is in sufficiently good condition for a purchaser whose interest is primarily in actually reading the book. A reading copy is typically less expensive than a collectible copy.

Booktowns [ edit ] Used bookstore in Hay-on-Wye A number of small towns have become centres for used book sellers, most notably Hay-on-Wye in South Wales .

[ 7 ] They act as a magnet for buyers, and are located in country areas of great scenic beauty.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Bibliophilia Bibliomania Book swapping Bookselling Book store shoplifting First-sale doctrine References [ edit ] ^ Parkinson, Hannah Jane (9 August 2019).

"A secondhand book is a glimpse into the lives of other readers" .

The Guardian .

Guardian News & Media Limited .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 October 2019 .

^ a b Rosenwald, Michael S. (December 26, 2015).

"In the age of Amazon, used bookstores are making an unlikely comeback" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2023 . Retrieved November 26, 2024 .

^ Hooker, Lucy (December 27, 2018).

"The booming trade in second-hand books" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2023 . Retrieved December 8, 2024 .

^ Min, Sarah (July 16, 2019).

"Pearson ditches print textbooks for college students in digital-first strategy" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2024 . Retrieved December 8, 2024 .

^ Lumpkin, Lauren (January 17, 2020).

"Textbooks are pricey. So students are getting creative" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 8, 2024 .

^ Gooderham, W. B. (2012-12-05).

"The secret contents of secondhand books" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2024-11-26 .

^ Nadeau, Sophie (26 February 2018).

"Hay-on-Wye Guide: The Adorably Cute Book Town of Wales" .

Solo Sophie .

Amazon Services LLC Associates Program .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 October 2019 .

^ Johnson, Alex (26 April 2018).

"10 of the world's best book towns" .

The Guardian .

Guardian News & Media Limited .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 14 October 2019 .

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Book collecting Bibliophilia Bibliomania tsundoku Bookbreaking The Book Collector journal The Bookworm (painting) First edition Limited edition Marginalia Preservation slipcase solander box Used book conditions Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Used_book&oldid=1304229028 " Categories : Bookstores Bookselling Books by type Book collecting Reuse Used bookstores Books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 19:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Used book 13 languages Add topic

