Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Specific national contexts Toggle Specific national contexts subsection 2.1 China 2.2 India 3 New commanding heights Toggle New commanding heights subsection 3.1 Healthcare and education 3.2 Internet 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Commanding heights of the economy 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Strategically important sectors of the economy Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In Marxian economics , the commanding heights of the economy are certain strategically important economic sectors. Some examples of industries considered to be part of the commanding heights include public utilities , natural resources , and sectors relating to both foreign trade and domestic trade .

History [ edit ] This phrase emerged from a branch of modern political philosophy concerned with organising society . According to Yevgeni Preobrazhensky , a Bolshevik economist, control over the commanding heights of the economy would ensure primitive socialist accumulation .

[ 1 ] The phrase can be traced back to Vladimir Lenin 's defense of the New Economic Policy (NEP), which saw market-oriented reforms while the state retained control of the commanding heights. Lenin used the military metaphor to justify NEP, proposing that free markets could be permitted so as long as the government retained control of certain commanding heights like heavy industry and transport .

[ 2 ] Specific national contexts [ edit ] China [ edit ] China retains state control over the commanding heights of the economy in key industries like infrastructure, telecommunications, and finance despite significant marketization of the economy since reform and opening up .

[ 3 ] : 20 Specific mechanisms implementing its control of the commanding heights in these areas include public property rights, pervasive administrative involvement, and Communist Party supervision of senior managers.

[ 3 ] : 20 Through Jiang Zemin 's emphasis on grasping the large, letting go of the small , the China's central government focused on developing a core group of large state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in strategically important fields deemed as part of the commanding heights of the economy, [ 4 ] : 53 while relinquishing control over smaller and unprofitable SOEs.

[ 5 ] For an example from socialism with Chinese characteristics , while the Chinese economic reform has generally shifted funding sources for higher education from the government to individual students, the Chinese Communist Party also organized projects like Project 985 and Project 211 to retain government funding and therefore influence over certain elite institutions.

[ 6 ] India [ edit ] The second of the Five-Year Plans of India , overseen by Jawaharlal Nehru , was an attempt to industrialize India through state control of the commanding heights.

[ 7 ] New commanding heights [ edit ] The phrase "commanding heights" often occurs in modern political commentary outside of Marxist connotations.

[ 8 ] Healthcare and education [ edit ] In service economies , where the relative importance of industry has decreased, Arnold Kling posited in 2011 that healthcare and education are the new commanding heights. The two sectors are central to employment and consumption, and in the United States are driven primarily by government intervention.

[ 9 ] In the ten years preceding 2011, employment in education and healthcare in the United States increased by 16%, despite employment in other sectors decreasing.

[ 10 ] Internet [ edit ] Other commentators have identified digital platforms and the internet as the new commanding heights of the economy.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Communism portal Socialism portal Look up commanding heights in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Commanding Heights References [ edit ] ^ Bonner 2013 , p. 86.

^ Wang, Rong (2014). "The commanding heights: The state and higher education in China".

The Oxford Companion to the Economics of China . p. 78.

'The commanding heights' was first used by Lenin as a defence of his New Economic Policy, which included permitting profitmaking enterprises in some areas of the ...

^ a b Heilmann, Sebastian (2018).

Red Swan: How Unorthodox Policy-Making Facilitated China's Rise .

The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press .

ISBN 978-962-996-827-4 .

^ Leutert, Wendy (2024).

China's State-Owned Enterprises: Leadership, Reform, and Internationalization . Business and Public Policy Series. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-009-48654-5 .

^ Li, David Daokui (2024).

China's World View: Demystifying China to Prevent Global Conflict . New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company . p. 116.

ISBN 978-0393292398 .

^ Wang, Rong (2014). "The commanding heights: The state and higher education in China".

The Oxford Companion to the Economics of China . p. 78.

^ Tharoor, Shashi (2011).

Nehru: The Invention of India . Arcade Publishing. p. 188.

^ Joseph Stanislaw, Daniel Yergin (1998).

The Commanding Heights . Free Press.

^ Kling, Arnold (5 July 2011).

"The New Commanding Heights" .

Cato Institute . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

The commanding heights of our economy today are not heavy manufacturing, energy, and transportation. They are, rather, education and health care.

^ "Liberating The Economy's New Commanding Heights" .

Manhattan Institute . 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

^ Denyer, Simon (10 July 2016).

"The Internet was supposed to foster democracy. China has different ideas" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

^ Rajadhyaksha, Niranjan (29 August 2017).

"Digital platforms—the new commanding heights?" .

Livemint . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

... the Indian government has been building a new generation of digital public goods—or platforms that in a way occupy the commanding heights of the digital economy.

Bibliography [ edit ] Bonner, Stephen Eric (2013).

Socialism Unbound: Principles, Practices, and Prospects .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0231527354 .

Wesson, Robert G. (1978).

Lenin's Legacy: The Story of the CPSU . Stanford, Calif: Hoover Press .

ISBN 978-0817969226 .

Nove, Alec; Nove, Alexander (1969).

An Economic History of the U.S.S.R.

IICA. p. 83-86.

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commanding_heights_of_the_economy&oldid=1277919290 " Categories : Communist terminology Socialism Political theories Political economy Marxism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2022 This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 13:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commanding heights of the economy 1 language Add topic

