Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Translations of Gundissalinus 3 Works 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Dominicus Gundissalinus 15 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 12th-century Spanish translator and philosopher Dominicus Gundissalinus , also known as Domingo Gundisalvi or Gundisalvo ( c.

1115 – after 1190), was a philosopher and translator of Arabic to Medieval Latin active in Toledo, Spain . Among his translations, Gundissalinus worked on Avicenna 's Liber de philosophia prima and De anima , Ibn Gabirol 's Fons vitae , and al-Ghazali 's Summa theoricae philosophiae , in collaboration with the Jewish philosopher Abraham Ibn Daud and Johannes Hispanus .

[ 1 ] As a philosopher, Gundissalinus crucially contributed to the Latin assimilation of Arabic philosophy , being the first Latin thinker in receiving and developing doctrines, such as Avicenna 's modal ontology or Ibn Gabirol 's universal hylomorphism, that would soon be integrated into the thirteenth-century philosophical debate.

Life [ edit ] Born in Castile around 1115–1125, Gundissalinus received his education in Chartres , supposedly following the teaching of William of Conches and Thierry of Chartres .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Since 1148, Gundissalinus is in Castile : the capitular archives of Segovia refer to him as archdeacon of Cuéllar , a small town not far from Segovia, where he presumably spent around 14 years, regarding which almost no information is available.

[ 4 ] Following Ibn Daud 's request to the archbishop of Toledo , John II, to start a series of translations into Latin of Avicenna 's Kitab al-Shifāʾ , Gundissalinus moved to Toledo in 1161–1162, where he worked with Ibn Daud on the translation of Avicenna 's De anima , realised before 1166.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Gundissalinus remained in Toledo for twenty years, collaborating with Abraham Ibn Daud and Johannes Hispanus to the realisation of around twenty translations of Arabic  works into Latin. In the Castilian capital, Gundissalinus also wrote his philosophical treatises.

[ 7 ] The Toledan chapter names Gundissalinus for the last time in 1178 but he presumably remained in Toledo at least until 1181, when a document written in Arabic mentions his name.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The last record witnessing Gundissalinus alive is the report of a meeting between the chapters of Segovia and Burgos , held in Segovia in 1190.

[ 10 ] It is probable that the last years of Gundissalinus's life were spent in that Castilian town, and he died sometime after 1190.

[ 1 ] Translations of Gundissalinus [ edit ] Together with Avendauth, that is, Abraham ibn Daud, and Iohannes Hispanus, Gundissalinus translated around twenty philosophical works from Arabic to Latin, which decisively marked the passage from Platonism to Aristotelianism typical of Latin speculation of the 13th century. Translations traditionally attributed to Gundissalinus are: Alexander of Aphrodisias, De intellectu et intellecto
al-Farabi, De intellectu et intellecto
al-Kindi, De intellectu
Avicenna, De anima seu sextus naturalium
Avicenna, De convenientia et differentia subiectorum
al-Farabi, Exposición del V libro de los Elementa de Euclide
pseudo al-Kindi, Liber introductorius in artem logicae
pseudo al-Farabi, De ortu scientiarum
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, Liber de definitionibus
Avicenna, Logica
Avicenna, De universalibus
Al-Ghazali, Logica
Avicena, Liber de philosophia prima
Avicena, Liber primus naturalium, tractatus primus
Avicenna, Liber primus naturalium, tractatus secundus
al-Ghazali, Metaphysica
Avicebron, Fons vitae
Pseudo-Avicena, Liber caeli et mundi
al-Farabi, Liber exercitationis ad viam felicitatis
al-Farabi, Fontes quaestionum
Avicenna, Prologus discipuli et capitula
Avicenna, De viribus cordis Works [ edit ] Dominicus Gundissalinus also wrote five philosophical works, in which he embraces the ideas of Avicenianna and al-Gabirol, combining them with the Latin philosophical tradition, and particularly Boethius together with some authors of his time, such as the philosophers of the School of Chartres or Herman of Carinthia. Gundissalinus' treatises show his deep knowledge of Arabic-Hebrew philosophy, and there are the three philosophical disciplines that characterize his thought: metaphysics, epistemology and psychology. The five treatises of Dominicus Gundissalinus are: De divisione philosophiae – is an epistemological treatise in which Gundissalinus proposes his division of philosophy into various scientific disciplines, structured hierarchically. In this work, Gundissalinus combines the divisions of al-Farabi and Avicenna with the classifications of knowledge of Isidore of Seville and Boethius. It had a prolific diffusion and reception in Latin land.

De scientiis – this is a Gundisalvian revision of al-Farabi's work of the same name, very similar to De divisione, although the latter manifests a higher level of philosophical analysis and critical reception of Latin sources.

De anima – De anima is a treatise on psychology in which Gundissalinus mainly welcomes Avicenna's De anima, often modifying the speculative results that could be problematic for Latin reflection, and ibn Gabirol's Fons Vitae.

De unitate et uno – brief metaphysical and ontological treatise where Gundissalinus examines the onto-metaphysical and theological doctrine of the One, following the Arabic-Hebrew and Latin Neoplatonic tradition, and in particular the perspective of ibn Gabirol.

De processione mundi – work of maturity, here Gundissalinus analyzes the generation of creation from the prima cause, following the various logical-ontological distinctions that are specified in the progressive unions of matter and form, until the generation of sentient creatures. In this treatise, the doctrine of universal hylemorphism inherited from ibn Gabirol and of which Gundissalinus is one of the main supporters, plays a fundamental role.

In addition to these five treatises, on which scholars agree, the De immortalitate animae has also been traditionally attributed to Gundissalinus, a text that the majority of the academic community nevertheless attributes to William of Auvergne. Gundissalinus' works were well received. both in the Latin philosophical field, and in the Hebrew.

See also [ edit ] Toledo School of Translators Latin translations of the 12th century Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Polloni, Nicola (2016-10-12).

"Elementi per una biografia di Dominicus Gundisalvi" .

Archives d'Histoire Doctrinale et Littéraire du Moyen Âge (in Italian). Tome 82 (1): 7– 22.

doi : 10.3917/ahdlm.082.0007 .

ISSN 0373-5478 .

^ Fidora, Alexander , 2011, 'Le débat sur la création: Guillaume de Conches, maître de Dominique Gundisalvi?', in B. Obrist - I. Caiazzo (eds.), Guillaume de Conches: Philosophie et science au XIIe siècle , Firenze, 271-288.

^ Polloni, Nicola (2015-01-01). "Thierry of Chartres and Gundissalinus on Spiritual Substances: The Problem of Hylomorphic Composition".

Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale .

57 : 35– 57.

doi : 10.1484/J.BPM.5.110804 .

ISSN 0068-4023 .

^ Villar García, L.M., 1990, Documentación medieval de la Catedral de Segovia (1115-1300) , Salamanca, 91.

^ Hernandez, J., 1985, Los Cartularios de Toledo. Catalogo Documental , Madrid, 130.

^ Bertolacci, Amos, 2011, 'A Community of Translators: The Latin Medieval Versions of Avicenna’s Book of the Cure', in C. J. Mews- J. N. Crossley (eds.), Communities of Learning: Networks and the Shaping of Intellectual Identity in Europe 1100-1500 , Turnhout, 37-54 ^ Polloni, Nicola (2017).

Domingo Gundisalvo. Una introducción . Madrid: Editorial Sindéresis.

ISBN 978-84-16262-34-2 .

^ D'Alverny, Marie-Thérèse , 1989, 'Les traductions à deux interprètes, d’arabe en langue vernaculaire et de langue vernaculaire en latin', in G. Contamine, (ed.), Traduction et traducteurs au Moyen Âge. Actes du colloque international du CNRS organisée à Paris, Institut de recherche et d’histoire des textes, les 26-28 mai 1986 , Paris, 193-206.

^ Alonso Alonso, Manuel, 1943, 'Notas sobre los traductores toledanos Domingo Gundisalvo y Juan Hispano', al-Andalus 8:  155-188 ^ Villar García , L. M., 1985, Documentación medieval de la Catedral de Segovia (1115-1300) , Madrid, 135.

References [ edit ] Nicola Polloni, Domingo Gundisalvo. Una introducción , Editorial Sindéresis, Madrid, 2017.

External links [ edit ] Nicola Polloni, Domingo Gundisalvo. Filósofo de Frontera .

Alexander Fidora (2000). "Dominicus Gundissalinus, span. Domingo Gundisalvo". In Bautz, Traugott (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 17. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 281–286.

ISBN 3-88309-080-8 .

(in Spanish) Alexander Fidora , La Recepción de San Isidoro de Sevilla por Domingo Gundisalvo v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Academics zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dominicus_Gundissalinus&oldid=1293344387 " Categories : Philosophers of science Arabic–Latin translators 12th-century Spanish philosophers 12th-century translators 12th-century writers in Latin 12th-century writers from León and Castile Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 05:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dominicus Gundissalinus 15 languages Add topic

