Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Understanding diversity 2 The State of the World's Forest Genetic Resources 3 Forest genetic resources and climate change 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Forest genetic resources 3 languages Español فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genetic material of trees and shrubs Forest genetic resources or forest tree genetic resources are genetic resources (i.e., genetic material of actual or future value) of forest shrub and tree species.

[ 1 ] Forest genetic resources are essential for forest-depending communities who rely for a substantial part of their livelihoods on timber and non-timber forest products (for example fruits, gums and resins) for food security, domestic use and income generation. These resources are also the basis for large-scale wood production in planted forests to satisfy the worldwide need for timber and paper. Genetic resources of several important timber, fruit and other non-timber tree species are conserved ex situ in genebanks or maintained in field collections. Nevertheless, in situ conservation in forests and on farms is in the case of most tree species the most important measure to protect their genetic resources.

[ citation needed ] Understanding diversity [ edit ] A better understanding of the diversity of these species is crucial for their sustainable use and conservation.

[ 2 ] Monitoring patterns of distribution and genetic diversity of these species allows the prioritization of populations for in situ conservation , identification of populations and species most at risk and existing gaps in genebank collections.

[ 3 ] This is vital information which helps tackle global challenges such as food security and climate change .

[ citation needed ] The State of the World's Forest Genetic Resources [ edit ] In 2014, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations published the first State of the World's Forest Genetic Resources .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The publication addressed the conservation, management and sustainable use of forest tree and other woody plant genetic resources of actual and potential value for human well-being in the broad range of management systems.  It was prepared based on information provided by 86 countries, outcomes from regional and subregional consultations, and commissioned thematic studies . Amongst the ten key findings , half of the forest species reported as regularly utilized by countries are threatened by the conversion of forests to pastures and farmland, overexploitation , and the impacts of climate change.

[ 7 ] On the basis of the information and knowledge compiled by FAO for The State of World’s Forest Genetic Resources, the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture developed the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation, Sustainable Use and Development of Forest Genetic Resources.

[ 8 ] This Global Plan of Action identifies 27 strategic priorities grouped into 4 areas: improving the availability of, and access to, information on forest genetic resources; conservation of forest genetic resources ( in situ and ex situ ) sustainable use, development and management of forest genetic resources policies, institutions and capacity-building.

[ citation needed ] Forest genetic resources and climate change [ edit ] Even though this is a field with many uncertainties, it is evident that during the next 50–100 years climate changes will have an effect on the distribution of forest tree species and the composition of forests. Diversity of forest genetic resources enables the potential for a species (or a population ) to adapt to climatic changes and related future challenges such as temperature changes, drought , pests , diseases and forest fires .

[ 9 ] Though forest trees are known for showing great plasticity in their response to climate changes, [ 10 ] not all species are naturally capable to adapt at the pace necessary. For that reason human interventions, such as transfer of forest reproductive material , may be needed. This is particular important for rare and scattered distributed species and species found on the edge of its distribution range .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Trees portal Environmental DNA Plant genetic resources References [ edit ] ^ The Fridtjof Nansen Institute (FNI), Oslo, Norway.

"The concept of "genetic resources" in the Convention on Biological Diversity and how it relates to a functional international regime on Access and Benefit-Sharing" (PDF) .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Dawson, I.K.; Lengkeek, A.; Weber, J.C.; Jamnadass, R. (2009). "Managing genetic variation in tropical trees: linking knowledge with action in agroforestry ecosystems for improved conservation and enhanced livelihoods".

Biodiversity and Conservation .

18 (4): 969– 986.

doi : 10.1007/s10531-008-9516-z .

S2CID 299734 .

^ Scheldeman, X.; van Zonneveld, M. (2010).

Training Manual on Spatial Analysis of Plant Diversity and Distribution . Bioversity International.

^ "UN urges action to protect forests' genetic diversity" . BBC News Science and Environment. BBC. 5 June 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ The State of the World's Forest Genetic Resources (PDF) . Rome: FAO. 2014.

^ "Action needed to safeguard genetic diversity of the world's forests" . FAO. 3 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 June 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Redassranch Agriculture, gardening and forestry resources" . Archived from the original on March 22, 2016 . Retrieved March 17, 2016 .

^ Global Plan of Action for the conservation, sustainable use and development of forest genetic resources (PDF) . Rome: FAO. 2014.

^ a b Kelleher; et al. (2015), Approaches to the conservation of forest genetic resources in Europe in the context of climate change , European Forest Genetic Resources Programme ^ Savolainen; et al. (2011). "Adaptive Potential of Northernmost Tree Populations to Climate Change, with Emphasis on Scots Pine (Pinus sylvestris L.)".

Journal of Heredity .

102 (5): 526– 36.

doi : 10.1093/jhered/esr056 .

PMID 21715569 .

External links [ edit ] Forest Genetic Resources Program of FAO Bioversity International - Forest and Tree Genetic Diversity Research Program Bioversity International - Why forest and tree genetic diversity matters EUFORGEN European Forest Genetic Resources Programme Training guide on forest genetic resources for global foresters - Bioversity International Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_genetic_resources&oldid=1288861033 " Categories : Trees Forest management Conservation biology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 03:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest genetic resources 3 languages Add topic

