Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work 2 Publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Kaja Silverman 7 languages العربية Asturianu Bikol Central Deutsch Español Nederlands ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American art historian Kaja Silverman Born ( 1947-09-16 ) September 16, 1947 (age 77) Title Katherine and Keith L. Sachs Professor of Art History, University of Pennsylvania Academic background Education University of California, Santa Barbara ( B.A.

, M.A.

) Brown University ( PhD ) Website www .kajasilverman .com Kaja Silverman (born September 16, 1947) [ 1 ] is an American art historian and critical theorist. She is currently the Katherine and Keith L. Sachs Professor of Art History at the University of Pennsylvania .

She received B.A. and M.A. degrees in English from the University of California, Santa Barbara and a Ph.D. in English from Brown University .

[ 2 ] Thereafter, she taught at Yale University , Trinity College , Simon Fraser University , Brown University , the University of Rochester and for many years was the Class of 1940 Professor in the Rhetoric Department at the University of California, Berkeley . She was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship [ 3 ] in 2008, and is currently the holder of an Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Distinguished Achievement Award.

[ 4 ] Work [ edit ] Her writing and teaching at the moment are focused primarily on photography, contemporary art, and painting.

[ 5 ] She is currently writing the second volume, A Three-Personed Picture: or the History of Photography Part 2, of a three part revisionary history and theory of photography. The first volume, Miracle of Analogy, was published in 2015.

Silverman has written extensively on a wide range of figures including artists: Jean-Luc Godard , Gerhard Richter , Marcel Proust , Ranier Maria Rilke , Terrence Malick , James Coleman , Jeff Wall , Chantal Akerman , John Dugdale (photographer) , and thinkers: Jacques Lacan , Friedrich Nietzsche , Sigmund Freud , Walter Benjamin , Martin Heidegger , Maurice Merleau-Ponty , Lou Andreas-Salomé .

Silverman co-wrote Speaking About Godard with the German artist and filmmaker Harun Farocki .

Publications [ edit ] The Subject of Semiotics (Oxford University Press, 1983) The Acoustic Mirror: The Female Voice in Psychoanalysis and Cinema (Indiana University Press, 1988) Male Subjectivity at the Margins (Routledge Press, 1992) The Threshold of the Visible World (Routledge Press, 1996) Speaking About Godard (New York University Press, 1998; with Harun Farocki ) World Spectators .

Stanford University Press . 2000. Archived from the original on 2010-07-18 . Retrieved 2020-02-12 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) James Coleman (Munich: Hatje Cantz , 2002; ed. Susanne Gaensheimer) Flesh of My Flesh .

Stanford University Press . 2009.

The Miracle of Analogy: or The History of Photography, Part 1 .

Stanford University Press . 2015.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Birthdate is sourced through Library of Congress Name Authority File (LCNAF).

^ "Kaja Silverman | Penn History of Art" .

www.sas.upenn.edu .

University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved 2019-03-27 .

^ "Kaja Silverman" . John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. Archived from the original on 2011-06-04.

^ "UPenn Press Release" . 25 April 2011.

^ "Kaja Silverman Penn faculty webpage" .

^ Pinson, Stephen C. (2015-11-01).

"Kaja Silverman's Miracle of Analogy" .

Artforum . Retrieved 2025-02-03 .

^ "Medium retains its mystique" .

The Art Newspaper - International art news and events . 2015-05-14 . Retrieved 2025-02-03 .

External links [ edit ] Kaja Silverman lecture on Gerhard Richter on YouTube "The Twilight of Posterity." Kaja Silverman Lecture at UC Berkeley.

Art, Technology and Culture Colloquium audio from 'Lectures with Lindsay' Archived 2015-01-11 at the Wayback Machine Website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kaja_Silverman&oldid=1276529241 " Categories : 1947 births Living people 20th-century American historians 20th-century American Jews 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American women writers 21st-century American historians 21st-century American Jews 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American women writers American feminist writers American women art historians American art historians American women non-fiction writers Brown University alumni Film theorists Jewish American feminists Jewish American historians Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish philosophers Jewish women writers University of Pennsylvania faculty Writers from Pennsylvania Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 11:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kaja Silverman 7 languages Add topic

