Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Political philosophy Toggle Political philosophy subsection 2.1 Localism and populism 3 Localism and developing countries 4 International relations 5 Localist activism 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Localism (politics) 18 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy Part of a series on Communitarianism Ideas Civil society Common good Community Consensus decision-making Diversity Political particularism Positive rights Social capital Solidarity Social responsibility Value pluralism Workplace democracy Intellectuals Aristotle Barber Barzilai Bellah Seyla Benhabib Blond Etzioni Galston Hauerwas Jean Bethke Elshtain Hegel Kuczewski MacIntyre Marglin Adán Preve Putnam Rousseau Reich Sandel Taylor Tönnies Walzer Related topics Catholic social teaching Christian democracy Libertarian socialism Progressivism Radical centrism Republicanism Social democracy Utopian socialism Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Community Academic studies Social sciences Community studies Community practice Community psychology Social work Computational sociology Cultural anthropology Internet studies Philosophy of social science Rural sociology Social geography Social philosophy Sociocultural evolution Urban planning Key concepts Affinity (sociology) Collectivism and individualism Community engagement Community education Community cohesion Community of interest Community practice Community of practice Community of place Community service Communitarianism Community politics Group cohesiveness Group (sociology) Group dynamics Imagined community Organization Prosocial behavior Sense of community Small-group communication Sobornost Social alienation Social capital Social death Social exclusion Socialization Social rejection Social support Solidarity (sociology) Community development Community-based management Community building Community economic development Community development planning Community organizing See also Outline Category:Community building Category:Community development Category:Localism (politics) v t e Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e Localism is a range of political philosophies which prioritize the local. Generally, localism supports local production and consumption of goods , local control of government, and promotion of local history , local culture and local identity. Localism can be contrasted with regionalism and centralized government , with its opposite being found in unitarism .

Localism can also refer to a systematic approach to organizing a central government so that local autonomy is retained rather than following the usual pattern of government and political power becoming centralized over time.

On a conceptual level, there are important affinities between localism and deliberative democracy . This concerns mainly the democratic goal of engaging citizens in decisions that affect them. Consequently, localism will encourage stronger democratic and political participatory forums and widening public sphere connectivity.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Localists assert that throughout the world's history, most social and economic institutions are scaled at the local level, as opposed to regional, interregional, or global [ 2 ] . Through ongoing forms of colonialism , imperialism and industrialisation local scales become less central [ 3 ] . Most proponents of localism position themselves as defending aspects of this way of life; the phrase "relocalization" is often used in this sense [ 4 ] .

In the 20th century, localism drew heavily on the writings of Leopold Kohr , E. F. Schumacher , Wendell Berry , and Kirkpatrick Sale , among others. More generally, localism draws on a wide range of movements and concerns and it proposes that by re-localizing democratic and economic relationships, social, economic and environmental problems will be more definable and solutions more easily created. They include anarchism , bioregionalism , environmentalism , the Greens , and more specific concerns about food, monetary policy and education. Political parties of all persuasions have also occasionally favored the devolution of power to local authorities. In this vein Alan Milburn , a UK Labour Party MP, has spoken of "making services more locally accountable, devolving more power to local communities and, in the process, forging a modern relationship between the state, citizens and services" [ 5 ] Beginning in the 1960s, a particularly visible strain of localism in the United States was a movement started by Alice Waters to buy locally produced products. This movement originated with organic farming and likely gained impetus because of growing dissatisfaction with organic certification and the failing economic model of industrial agriculture for small farmers. While the advocates of local consumption draw on protectionist arguments, they also appealed primarily to an environmental argument: that pollution caused by transporting goods was a major externality in a global economy, and one that " localvores " could greatly diminish. Also, environmental issues can be addressed when decision-making power is held by those affected by the issues instead of power sources that do not understand the needs of local communities.

Political philosophy [ edit ] Localism as a philosophy is related to the principle of subsidiarity .

In the early 21st century, localists have frequently found themselves aligned with critics of globalisation . Variants of localism are prevalent within the Green movement . According to an article in International Socialism , localism of this sort seeks to "answer to the problems created by globalisation" with "calls to minimise international trade and to seek to establish economies based on ‘local’ self-sufficiency only." [ 6 ] Some localists believe that society should be organised politically along community lines, with each community being free to conduct its own business in whatever fashion its people see fit. The size of the communities is defined such that their members are both familiar and dependent on each other, a size something along the lines of a small town or village [ 7 ] .

In reference to localism, Edward Goldsmith , former editor of The Ecologist magazine, claims: "The problems facing the world today can only be solved by restoring the functioning of those natural systems which once satisfied our needs, i.e. by fully exploiting those incomparable resources which are individual people, families, communities and ecosystems, which together make up the biosphere or real world" [ 8 ] Tip O'Neill , a longtime Democratic Speaker of the House in the US Congress , once famously declared that "All politics is local".

[ 9 ] He eventually wrote a book by that name: All Politics Is Local: And Other Rules of the Game .

Localism and populism [ edit ] Wayne Yeung [ 10 ] questions the assumption that localism is a sub-school of European-American populism . Yeung raised an example in which localism is a cultural or civic value rather than a value that supports ethnic understanding in Hong Kong identity politics.

Jane Wills argued that an increasing number of populist politicians are endorsing localism as a framework for public policy. She defined populism as a form of politics that involves people speaking in a register that is authentic to the experiences and needs of those people. In other words, most likely Populist Party policies would contradict parties that support the elites. She also used the term "anti-politics" to describe localist politicians because they stand against mainstream politics. She used the UK Independence Party (UKIP) as an example of a party adopting localism into their policies. Mainstream politicians from the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties were threatened by the rise of UKIP.

[ 11 ] Localism and developing countries [ edit ] Many localists are concerned with the problems of developing countries . Many advocate that developing countries should aim to rely on their own goods and services to escape from what they see are the unfair trade relations with the developed world .

George Monbiot claims this idea does not recognise the fact that, even if developing countries often get a raw deal in trade relations, refusing to trade at all would be a significant blow, as the countries need the revenue generated by trade.

[ 12 ] Some localists are also against immigration from poor countries to rich ones. One of the problems they claim results from such immigration is the drain on the intellectual resources of poor countries, so called brain drain . For example, in the past decade, Bulgaria is estimated to have lost more than 50,000 qualified scientists and skilled workers through emigration every year. About a fifth of them were highly educated specialists in chemistry, biology, medicine and physics.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] International relations [ edit ] Some localists are against political intervention and peace keeping measures. They believe that communities should find solutions to their own problems and in their own time, in whatever fashion they decide. They believe that all societies are capable of achieving long term peace once given the opportunity to do so.

Localist activism [ edit ] Localism usually describes social measures or trends which emphasise or value local and small-scale phenomena.  This is in contrast to large, all-encompassing frameworks for action or belief.  Localism can therefore be contrasted with globalisation , and in some cases localist activism has parallels with opposition to corporate-led globalization. Localism can be geographical, but there are also transnational linkages. Localist movements are often organized in support of locally owned, independent businesses and nonprofit organizations. Although the focus of this aspect of localist activism is on "buy local," "support local food," and "bank local" campaigns, some organizations and businesses also combine the goal of increased local ownership with environmental sustainability and social fairness goals.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Examples of localism are: Support for local food networks, such as farmers' markets , community-supported agriculture , community gardens , farm-to-table programs, food cooperatives, and restaurants that serve local food. The slow food movement, using diverse, seasonal, natural food in reaction to multinational merchandising of food which is uniform, produced using industrial methods, and called fast food .

Support for locally family businesses, small craftsmans and farmers, traditional and local communities of small owners (craft guilds, farming circles and other), community banks and credit unions, such as the following organizations: American Independent Business Alliance , Business Alliance for Local Living Economies, the Institute for Local Self-Reliance , and Move Your Money .

"The Benefits of Doing Business Locally" Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine an essay by Jeff Milchen, American Independent Business Alliance co-founder, covers many arguments for local business ownership and patronage.

Localism in media to support a diverse news media in the face of increasing corporate control.  The US Federal Communications Commission made use of this term when seeking input on its rules, stating "promoting localism is a key goal of the Commission’s media ownership rules." [ 17 ] Localism in government structures, which can include: Tertiary government where small community councils make relevant decisions, with some degree of independence from local or national government.

Workers' councils , where the employees of a particular workplace discuss and negotiate with their employer, rather have this done by a national union which may be remote from local issues.

Federalism and devolution .

Religion (Protestant): Exclusive localism holds that there can't be more than one legitimate institutionally visible church at one given location, the variation of which varies but is usually held to be either a city or a neighbourhood.

Localism is more generally the congregationalist idea that each local church should be autonomous, only extended to reject any formal association of churches.  It is specially relevant among Baptists , where localists reject the forming of Conventions.

Religion (Churches of Christ): The congregationalist idea of local autonomy is a cornerstone of restoration movement fellowships that identify as churches of Christ or Independent Christian Churches/Churches of Christ .  Founders of the movement declared their independence from various denominations, seeking a fresh start to restore the New Testament church, and abandoning creeds. The names "Church of Christ," "Christian Church" and "Disciples of Christ" were adopted by the movement because they believed these terms to be biblical and not man made.

A converging of Christians across denominational lines in search of a return to a hypothesized original, "pre-denominational" Christianity.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] : 108 Participants in this movement sought to base doctrine and practice on the Bible alone, rather than recognizing the traditional councils and denominational hierarchies that had come to define Christianity since the 1st century.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] : 82, 104–105 Members of the Churches of Christ believe that Jesus founded only one church, that the current divisions between Christians are not God's will, and that the only basis for restoring Christian unity is the Bible.

[ 18 ] They typically prefer to be known simply as "Christians", without any further religious or denominational identification.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] : 213 They see themselves as recreating the New Testament church established by Christ.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] : 106 Churches of Christ generally share these theological beliefs: [ 18 ] Refusal to hold to any formalized creeds or statements of faith, preferring instead a reliance on the Bible alone for doctrine and practice; [ 25 ] : 103 [ 26 ] : 238, 240 [ 27 ] : 123 Autonomous , congregational church organization without denominational oversight; [ 26 ] : 238 [ 27 ] : 124 Local governance [ 26 ] : 238 by a plurality of male elders ; [ 27 ] : 124 [ 28 ] : 47–54 One of the largest divisions within churches of Christ was due to controversy of foreign missionary work.  Opponents of what they dubbed "Institutionalism" argued against it both as a drain on local congregations and as sinful if done in cooperation with other congregations.  This belief extended to cooperative support of orphanages, homes, large-scale radio and TV programs and ministries.

[ 29 ] The Restoration Movement is so averse to association with other congregations that they renounce the term "protestant" distancing their churches from any association to any denomination; even one they would have to "protest" and evolve from.

See also [ edit ] Communitarianism Atomization Accountable autonomy Agrarianism Autonomism (left-wing ideology) Autonomism (political doctrine) Communalism Decentralisation Distributed manufacturing Distributism Global justice Glocalization Indigenism Internationalization and localization Irredentism Knowledge transfer List of micro-regional organizations Local ethnic nationalism (China) Localism Act 2011 – UK law Localism in Thailand Localism in Hong Kong Nationalism Nativism (politics) New localism Open Source Ecology (OSE) Parochialism Posse Comitatus (organization) Secession Self-determination Think globally, act locally Tribalism Political unitarism References [ edit ] ^ Ercan, S.A.; Hendriks, C.H. (2013). "The democratic challenges and potential of localism: Insights from deliberative democracy".

Policy Studies .

31 (4): 422– 440.

doi : 10.1080/01442872.2013.822701 .

S2CID 153558023 .

^ Sale 1980 , p. 45.

^ Wallerstein, Immanuel (1974).

The Modern World-System, Volume I: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century . New York: Academic Press. p. 3.

^ Fischer, Frank (2017). "Relocalization for Sustainable Communities". In Fischer, Frank (ed.).

Climate Crisis and the Democratic Prospect . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

151– 170.

ISBN 9780199594917 .

^ Milburn, Alan (2004), Localism: The need for a new settlement (speech), Demos .

^ Tomas, Mark.

"Feedback: Transport and climate change – a reply to James Woodcock" .

International Socialism . No. 109.

^ Kohr, Leopold (1957).

The Breakdown of Nations: A Study in the Size, Efficiency, and Resources of Human Communities . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

15– 16.

^ De-industrialising society , archived from the original on 2006-05-14 .

^ Politic , River Deep, October 2000 .

^ Yeung, Wayne.

“From Populism to Localism.” New Bloom. Updated on April 15, 2016 ^ Wills, Jane (June 2015). "Populism, localism and the geography of democracy".

Geoforum .

62 : 188– 189.

doi : 10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.04.006 .

^ George Monbiot (September 9, 2003).

"The myth of localism" .

The Guardian .

^ Michaud, Hélène (April 2005), East-West brain drain , Radio Netherlands, archived from the original on 2006-01-17 , retrieved 2006-01-30 .

^ Feser, Edward J.; Sweeney, Stuart H. (1998).

Out-migration, population decline, and regional economic distress . Washington, DC: Economic Development Administration.

^ Hess, David J. (2009).

Localist Movements in a Global Economy: Sustainability, Justice, and Urban Development in the United States . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262512329 . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2012-07-22 .

^ DeYoung, Raymond, & Princen, Thomas (2012).

The Localization Reader: Adapting to the Coming Downshift . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262516877 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ FCC Localism Hearing to be Held in Washington, DC, on October 31st (PDF) , United States: FCC .

^ a b c d Batsell Barrett Baxter , Who are the churches of Christ and what do they believe in?

Available on-line in an "Woodson Chapel Church of Christ" . Archived from the original on June 16, 2006 . Retrieved 2011-10-03 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) , and here Archived 2014-02-09 at the Wayback Machine , here Archived 2008-05-09 at the Wayback Machine and here Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b C. Leonard Allen and Richard T. Hughes, "Discovering Our Roots: The Ancestry of the Churches of Christ," Abilene Christian University Press, 1988, ISBN 0891120068 ^ "The church of Jesus Christ is non-denominational. It is neither Catholic, Jewish nor Protestant. It was not founded in 'protest' of any institution, and it is not the product of the 'Restoration' or 'Reformation.'  It is the product of the seed of the kingdom (Luke 8:11ff) grown in the hearts of men." V. E. Howard, What Is the Church of Christ?

4th Edition (Revised), 1971, p. 29 ^ Batsell Barrett Baxter and Carroll Ellis, Neither Catholic, Protestant nor Jew , tract, Church of Christ (1960) ASIN B00073CQPM . According to Richard Thomas Hughes in Reviving the Ancient Faith: The Story of Churches of Christ in America, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1996, ISBN 978-0802840868 ), this is "arguably the most widely distributed tract ever published by the Churches of Christ or anyone associated with that tradition." ^ Samuel S. Hill, Charles H. Lippy, Charles Reagan Wilson, Encyclopedia of Religion in the South , Mercer University Press, 2005, ISBN 978-0865547582 ) 854 pages ^ "On the cornerstone of the Southside Church of Christ in Springfield, Missouri, is this inscription: 'Church of Christ, Founded in Jerusalem, A.D. 33. This building erected in 1953.'  This is not an unusual claim; for similar wording can be found on buildings of churches of Christ in many parts of the United States. The Christians who use such cornerstones reason that the church of Jesus Christ began on Pentecost, A.D. 33. Therefore, to be true to the New Testament, the twentieth-century church must trace its origins to the first century." Page 1, Robert W. Hooper, A Distinct People: A History of the Churches of Christ in the 20th Century , Simon and Schuster, 1993, ISBN 978-1878990266 , 391 pages ^ "Traditional Churches of Christ have pursued the restorationist vision with extraordinary zeal. Indeed, the cornerstones of many Church of Christ buildings read 'Founded, A.D. 33.' " p. 212, Samuel S. Hill, Charles H. Lippy, Charles Reagan Wilson, Encyclopedia of Religion in the South , Mercer University Press, 2005 ^ a b Stuart M. Matlins , Arthur J. Magida, J. Magida, How to Be a Perfect Stranger: A Guide to Etiquette in Other People's Religious Ceremonies , Wood Lake Publishing Inc., 1999, ISBN 978-1896836287 , 426 pages, Chapter 6 – Churches of Christ ^ a b c Carmen Renee Berry, The Unauthorized Guide to Choosing a Church , Brazos Press, 2003, ISBN 1587430363 ^ a b c Ron Rhodes, The Complete Guide to Christian Denominations , Harvest House Publishers, 2005, ISBN 0736912894 ^ V. E. Howard, What Is the Church of Christ?

4th Edition (Revised) Central Printers & Publishers, West Monroe, Louisiana, 1971 ^ Randy Harshbarger, "A history of the institutional controversy among Texas Churches of Christ: 1945 to the present," M.A. thesis, Stephen F. Austin State University, 2007, 149 pages; AAT 1452110 Sources [ edit ] Berry, Wendell (1977).

The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture . Sierra Club Books.

ISBN 9780871561947 .

Sale, Kirkpatrick (1980).

Human Scale . Coward, McCann & Geoghegan.

ISBN 9781603587129 .

Schumacher, Ernst F.

(2011).

Small Is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered . London: Vintage.

ISBN 9780099225614 .

Katz, Bruce ; Nowak, Jeremy (2018).

The New Localism: How Cities Can Thrive in the Age of Populism . Brookings Institution Press.

ISBN 9780815731641 .

McKibben, Bill (2010).

Eaarth (1st ed.). New York: Time Books / Henry Holt.

ISBN 9780805091861 .

Curtis, Fred (2003). "Eco-localism and Sustainability".

Ecological Economics .

46 (1): 83– 102.

Bibcode : 2003EcoEc..46...83C .

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8009(03)00102-2 .

Pugh, Michael (30 June 2014).

"Centralism versus localism? Democracy versus efficiency? The perennial challenges of Scottish local government organisation" .

History & Policy . Retrieved 1 August 2025 .

O’Neill, Tip ; Hymel, Gary (1994).

All Politics Is Local, and Other Rules of the Game (1st ed.). New York: Times Books.

External links [ edit ] Localism (politics) at Wikipedia's sister projects : Data from Wikidata Foundation for Self-Sufficiency in Central America "Localism" – James Howard Kunstler 's view of "Localism" "The Localization Reader" – De Young and Princen's view on the process of "localization." v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Localism_(politics)&oldid=1306502173 " Categories : Localism (politics) Communitarianism Libertarianism Agrarian politics New Urbanism Political ideologies Political theories Rural culture Social philosophy Social justice Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with single-entry sister bar Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 02:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Localism (politics) 18 languages Add topic

