Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Amateur historiography of science 2 Professional historiography of science Toggle Professional historiography of science subsection 2.1 Internalism and externalism 2.2 Historiographical approaches to theory change in science 2.2.1 Thought collectives 2.2.2 Falsifiability 2.2.3 Revolutions 2.2.4 Science wars 3 History of science in the 21st Century Toggle History of science in the 21st Century subsection 3.1 Questioning postmodernism 3.2 Eurocentrism in the historiography of science 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Historiography of science 10 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی Interlingua עברית Nederlands Shqip Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia History of the history of science The historiography of science or the historiography of the history of science is the study of the history and methodology of the sub-discipline of history, known as the history of science , including its disciplinary aspects and practices (methods, theories, schools) and the study of its own historical development ("History of History of Science", i.e., the history of the discipline called History of Science).

Historiographical debates regarding the proper method for the study of the history of science are sometimes difficult to demarcate from historical controversies regarding the course of science. Early controversies of the latter kind are considered by some to be the inception of the sub-discipline.

Amateur historiography of science [ edit ] Histories of science were originally written by practicing and retired scientists, [ 1 ] a notable early example being William Whewell's History of the Inductive Sciences (1837). Biographies of natural philosophers (early scientists) were also popular in the nineteenth century, helping to create Isaac Newton as a scientific genius and national hero in Great Britain.

[ 2 ] H.G. Wells began a trend for histories of science on the grand scale, a kind of epic of civilisation and progress, with his Outline of History (1919/1920). Popular accounts of science's past were often linked to speculations about its future, [ 3 ] with science fiction authors such as Isaac Asimov and L. Sprague de Camp dabbling in the two.

Professional historiography of science [ edit ] Internalism and externalism [ edit ] In the early 1930s, a paper given by the Soviet historian Boris Hessen prompted many historians to look at the ways in which scientific practices were allied with the needs and motivations of their context.

[ citation needed ] Hessen's work focused on socio-political factors in what science is done, and how.

This method of doing the history of science that became known as externalism looks at the manner in which science and scientists are affected, and guided by, their context and the world in which they exist. It is an approach which eschews the notion that the history of science is the development of pure thought over time, one idea leading to another in a contextual bubble which could exist at any place, at any time, if only given the right geniuses.

[ citation needed ] The method of doing history of science which preceded externalism, became known as internalism . Internalist histories of science often focus on the rational reconstruction of scientific ideas and consider the development of these ideas wholly within the scientific world. Although internalist histories of modern science tend to emphasize the norms of modern science, internalist histories can also consider the different systems of thought underlying the development of Babylonian astronomy or Medieval impetus theory.

[ citation needed ] In practice, the line between internalism and externalism can be incredibly fuzzy.

[ citation needed ] Few historians then, or now, would insist that either of these approaches in their extremes paint a wholly complete picture, nor would it necessarily be possible to practice one fully over the other. However, at their heart they contain a basic question about the nature of science: what is the relationship between the producers and consumers of scientific knowledge? The answer to this question must, in some form, inform the method in which the history of science and technology is conducted; conversely, how the history of science and technology is conducted, and what it concludes, can inform the answer to the question. The question itself contains an entire host of philosophical questions: what is the nature of scientific truth? What does objectivity mean in a scientific context? How does change in scientific theories occur?

[ citation needed ] The historian/sociologist of science Robert K. Merton produced many works following Hessen's thesis, which can be seen as reactions to and refinements of Hessen's argument.

[ citation needed ] In his work on science, technology, and society in the 17th-century England , Merton sought to introduce an additional category — Puritanism — to explain the growth of science in this period. Merton split Hessen's category of economics into smaller subcategories of influence, including transportation, mining, and military technique. Merton also tried to develop empirical , quantitative approaches to showing the influence of external factors on science.

[ citation needed ] Even with his emphasis on external factors, Merton differed from Hessen in his interpretation: Merton maintained that while researchers may be inspired and interested by problems which were suggested by extra-scientific factors, ultimately the researcher's interests were driven by "the internal history of the science in question".

[ citation needed ] Merton attempted to delineate externalism and internalism along disciplinary boundaries, with context studied by the sociologist of science , and content by the historian.

Historiographical approaches to theory change in science [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2008 ) A major subject of concern and controversy in the philosophy of science has been the nature of paradigm shift or theory change in science.

Karl Popper argued that scientific knowledge is progressive and cumulative; Thomas Kuhn , that scientific knowledge moves through " paradigm shifts " and is not necessarily progressive; and Paul Feyerabend , that scientific knowledge is not cumulative or progressive and that there can be no demarcation in terms of method between science and any other form of investigation.

[ 4 ] Thought collectives [ edit ] In 1935, Ludwik Fleck , a Polish medical microbiologist published Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact . Fleck's book focused on the epistemological and linguistic factors that affect scientific discovery, innovation and progress or development.

It used a case study in the field of medicine (of the development of the disease concept of Syphilis) to present a thesis about the social nature of knowledge, and in particular science and scientific "thought styles" (Denkstil), which are the epistemological, conceptual and linguistic styles of scientific (but also non-scientific) ' thought collectives ' (Denkkollektiv). Fleck's book suggests that epistemologically, there is nothing stable or realistically true or false about any scientific fact. A fact has a "genesis" which is grounded in certain theoretic grounds and many times other obscure and fuzzy notions, and it "develops" as it is subject to dispute and additional research by other scientists.

Fleck's monograph was published at almost the same time as Karl Popper 's Logik der Forschung but unlike Popper's work, the book received no review notice in Isis . However, Thomas S. Kuhn acknowledged the influence it had upon the Structure of Scientific Revolutions .

[ citation needed ] Kuhn also wrote the foreword to Fleck's English translation.

Falsifiability [ edit ] Popper coined the term " critical rationalism " to describe his philosophy.

[ 5 ] He distinguished between verification and falsifiability and said that a theory should be considered scientific if, and only if, it is falsifiable. Popper sought to explain the apparent progress of scientific knowledge in All Life is Problem Solving . Popper suggested that our understanding of the universe seems to improve over time because of an evolutionary process. He proposed that the process of "error elimination" in the field of science is like that of natural selection for biological evolution , whereby theories that better survive the process of refutation are not necessarily more "true" but more "fit" or applicable to the problem situation at hand. Popper suggested that the evolution of theories through the scientific method could reflect a certain type of progress: toward more and more interesting problems.

Popper helped to establish the philosophy of science as an autonomous discipline within philosophy, through his own prolific and influential works, and also through his influence on his own contemporaries and students.

Revolutions [ edit ] The mid 20th century saw a series of studies investigating the role of science in a social context . The sociology of science focused on the ways in which scientists work, looking closely at the ways in which they "produce" and "construct" scientific knowledge.

Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) is considered particularly influential. It opened the study of science to new disciplines by suggesting that the evolution of science was in part sociologically determined and that positivism did not explain the actual interactions and strategies of the human participants in science.

As Kuhn put it, the history of science may be seen in more nuanced terms, such as that of competing paradigms or conceptual systems in a wider matrix that includes intellectual, cultural, economic and political themes outside of science. "Partly by selection and partly by distortion, the scientists of earlier ages are implicitly presented as having worked upon the same set of fixed problems and in accordance with the same set of fixed canons that the most recent revolution in scientific theory and method made seem scientific." [ 6 ] In 1965, Gerd Buchdahl wrote "A Revolution in Historiography of Science", referring to the studies of Thomas Kuhn and Joseph Agassi .

[ 7 ] He suggested that these two writers had inaugurated the sub-discipline by distinguishing clearly between the history and the historiography of science, as they argued that historiographical views greatly influence the writing of the history of science.

Further studies, such as Jerome Ravetz's Scientific Knowledge and its Social Problems (1971) referred to the role of the scientific community, as a social construct, in accepting or rejecting (objective) scientific knowledge.

[ 8 ] Since the 1960s, a common trend in science studies (the study of the sociology and history of science) has been to emphasize the "human component" of scientific knowledge, and to de-emphasize the view that scientific data are self-evident, value-free, and context-free.

[ 9 ] The field of Science and Technology Studies , an area that overlaps and often informs historical studies of science, focuses on the social context of science in both contemporary and historical periods.

Corresponding with the rise of the environmentalism movement and a general loss of optimism of the power of science and technology unfettered to solve the problems of the world, this new history encouraged many critics to pronounce the preeminence of science to be overthrown.

[ citation needed ] Science wars [ edit ] The Science wars of the 1990s were about the influence of especially French philosophers, which denied the objectivity of science in general or seemed to do so.

[ citation needed ] They described as well differences between the idealized model of a pure science and the actual scientific practice; while scientism , a revival of the positivism approach, saw in precise measurement and rigorous calculation the basis for finally settling enduring metaphysical and moral controversies.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] History of science in the 21st Century [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2008 ) The discipline today encompasses a wide variety of fields of academic study, ranging from the traditional ones of history, sociology, and philosophy, and a variety of others such as law, architecture, and literature.

[ citation needed ] There is a tendency towards integrating with global history, as well as employing new methodological concepts such as cross-cultural exchange.

[ citation needed ] Historians of science also closely work with scholars from related disciplines such as the history of medicine and science and technology studies .

[ citation needed ] Questioning postmodernism [ edit ] Some critical theorists later argued that their postmodern deconstructions had at times been counter-productive, and had provided intellectual ammunition for reactionary interests.

[ citation needed ] Bruno Latour noted that "dangerous extremists are using the very same argument of social construction to destroy hard-won evidence that could save our lives. Was I wrong to participate in the invention of this field known as science studies? Is it enough to say that we did not really mean what we meant?" [ 12 ] Eurocentrism in the historiography of science [ edit ] Eurocentrism in scientific history are historical accounts written about the development of modern science that attribute all scholarly, technological, and philosophical gains to Europe and marginalize outside contributions.

[ 13 ] Until Joseph Needham's book series Science and Civilisation in China began in 1954, many historians would write about modern science solely as a European achievement with no significant contributions from civilizations other than the Greeks.

[ 14 ] Recent historical writings have argued that there was significant influence and contribution from Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Arabic, Indian, and Chinese astronomy and mathematics.

[ 15 ] The employment of notions of cross-cultural exchange in the study of history of science helps in putting the discipline on the path towards being a non-Eurocentric and non-linear field of study.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Conflict thesis Logology (science) Metascience History of military technology Sociology of the history of science References [ edit ] ^ Reingold, Nathan (1986). "History of Science Today, 1. Uniformity as Hidden Diversity: History of Science in the United States, 1920–1940".

British Journal for the History of Science .

19 (3): 243– 262.

doi : 10.1017/S0007087400023268 .

S2CID 145350145 .

^ Higgitt, Rebekah (2007).

Recreating Newton : Newtonian biography and the making of nineteenth-century history of science . London: Pickering & Chatto.

ISBN 978-1-85196-906-7 .

OCLC 137313664 .

^ Sleigh, Charlotte (2022-04-27).

" 'Not one voice speaking to many': E C Large, wireless, and science fiction fans in the mid-twentieth century" .

Science Museum Group Journal .

8 (8).

doi : 10.15180/170802 .

ISSN 2054-5770 .

S2CID 166096194 .

^ Matthews, Michael Robert (1994).

Science Teaching: The Role of History and Philosophy of Science . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-90899-3 .

^ Popper 1962 , Introduction, XV: "The proper answer to my question 'How can we hope to detect and eliminate error?' is, I believe, 'By criticizing the theories or guesses of others and—if we can train ourselves to do so—by criticizing our own theories or guesses.' (The latter point is highly desirable, but not indispensable; for if we fail to criticize our own theories, there may be others to do it for us.) This answer sums up a position which I propose to call "critical rationalism"." ^ Kuhn, T., 1962, "The Structure of Scientific Revolutions", University of Chicago Press, p. 137 ^ Buchdahl Gerd (1965), "A Revolution in Historiography of Science", History of Science , 4 : 55– 69, Bibcode : 1965HisSc...4...55B , doi : 10.1177/007327536500400103 , S2CID 142838889 ^ Ravetz, Jerome R. (1979).

Scientific knowledge and its social problems . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-519721-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ King Merton, Robert (1979).

The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-52092-6 .

^ Lears, T.J. Jackson (2013-11-06).

"Get Happy!!" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 December 2013 .

...scientism is a revival of the nineteenth-century positivist faith that a reified "science" has discovered (or is about to discover) all the important truths about human life. Precise measurement and rigorous calculation, in this view, are the basis for finally settling enduring metaphysical and moral controversies—explaining consciousness and choice, replacing ambiguity with certainty.

^ Sorell, Thomas (1994), Scientism: Philosophy and the Infatuation with Science , Routledge, pp. 1ff ^ Latour, B (2004).

"Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern" (PDF) .

Critical Inquiry .

30 (2): 225– 248.

doi : 10.1086/421123 .

S2CID 159523434 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 September 2012 . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ Dear, Peter (2001).

Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambitions, 1500-1700 . Princeton N.J.: Princeton University Press. p. 4.

^ Bala, Arun (2006).

The Dialogue of Civilizations in the Birth of Modern Science 1st ed . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 21.

^ Duncan, David Ewing (1999).

Calendar: Humanity's Epic Struggle to Determine a True and Accurate Year . New York: Bard/Avon Books. p. 182.

Bibliography [ edit ] Agassi, Joseph.

Towards an Historiography of Science Wesleyan University Press. 1963 Bennett, J. A. (1997). "Museums and the Establishment of the History of Science at Oxford and Cambridge".

British Journal for the History of Science .

30 (104 Pt 1): 29– 46.

doi : 10.1017/s0007087496002889 .

PMID 11618881 .

S2CID 5697866 .

Buchdahl, Gerd (1965). "A Revolution in Historiography of Science".

History of Science .

4 : 55– 69.

Bibcode : 1965HisSc...4...55B .

doi : 10.1177/007327536500400103 .

S2CID 142838889 .

Dennis, Michael Aaron. "Historiography of Science: An American Perspective," in John Krige and Dominique Pestre, eds., Science in the Twentieth Century , Amsterdam: Harwood, 1997, pp. 1–26.

von Engelhardt, Dietrich.

Historisches Bewußtsein in der Naturwissenschaft : von der Aufklärung bis zum Positivismus , Freiburg [u.a.] : Alber, 1979.

Graham, Loren R. (1985), "The socio-political Roots of Boris Hessen: Soviet Marxism and he History of Science", Social Studies of Science , 15 (4), London: SAGE: 705– 722, doi : 10.1177/030631285015004005 , S2CID 143937146 .

Fleck, Ludwik, Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact , Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1979.

Graham, Loren R . "Soviet attitudes towards the social and historical study of science," in Science in Russia and the Soviet Union: A Short History , Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1993, pp. 137–155.

Kragh, Helge.

An Introduction to the Historiography of Science ,  Cambridge University Press 1990 Kuhn, Thomas.

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , Chicago: University of Chicago, 1962 (third edn, 1996).

Gavroglu, Kostas.

O Passado das Ciências como História , Porto: Porto Editora, 2007.

Golinski, Jan.

Making Natural Knowledge: Constructivism and the History of Science , 2nd ed. with a new Preface. Princeton: University Press, 2005.

Lakatos, Imre. "History of Science and its Rational Reconstructions" in Y.Elkana (ed.) The Interaction between Science and Philosophy ,  pp. 195–241, Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey: Humanities Press and also published in Mathematics Science and Epistemology: Volume 2 of the Philosophical and Scientific Papers of Imre Lakatos Papers Imre Lakatos , Worrall & Currie (eds), Cambridge University Press, 1980 Mayer, Anna K (2000). "Setting up a Discipline: Conflicting Agendas of the Cambridge History of Science Committee, 1936–1950".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science .

31 (4): 665– 89.

Bibcode : 2000SHPSA..31..665M .

doi : 10.1016/s0039-3681(00)00026-1 .

PMID 11640235 .

Mayer. "End of Ideology".' ".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science .

35 : 2004.

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsa.2003.12.010 .

Pestre, Dominique (1995). "Pour une histoire sociale et culturelle des sciences. Nouvelles définitions, nouveaux objets, nouvelles pratiques".

Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales .

50 (3): 487– 522.

doi : 10.3406/ahess.1995.279379 .

S2CID 162390064 .

Popper, Karl R. (1962).

Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge . New York: Basic Books . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

Raina, Dhruv.

Images and Contexts Critical Essays on the Historiography of Science in India , Oxford University Press 2003 Rossi, Paolo, I ragni e le formiche: un'apologia della storia della scienza , Bologna, 1986.

Swerdlow, Noel M. (1993), "Montucla's Legacy: The History of the Exact Sciences", Journal of the History of Ideas , 54 (2): 299– 328, doi : 10.2307/2709984 , JSTOR 2709984 .

Schaffer, Simon (1984), "Newton at the crossroads", Radical Philosophy , 37 : 23– 38 .

Transversal: International Journal for the Historiography of Science External links [ edit ] Media related to Historiography of science at Wikimedia Commons v t e History of science Background Theories and sociology Historiography Pseudoscience History and philosophy of science By era Ancient world Classical Antiquity Medieval European Renaissance Scientific Revolution Age of Enlightenment Romanticism 19th century in science 20th century in science By culture African Argentine Brazilian Byzantine Chinese French Indian Japanese Korean Medieval Islamic Mexican Russian Spanish Natural sciences Astronomy Biology Chemistry Earth science Physics Mathematics Algebra Calculus Combinatorics Geometry Logic Probability Statistics Trigonometry Social sciences Anthropology Archaeology Economics Education History Political science Psychology Sociology Technology Agricultural science Computer science Materials science Engineering Medicine Human medicine Veterinary medicine Anatomy Neuroscience Neurology and neurosurgery Nutrition Pathology Pharmacy Timelines Portal Category v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r9fxq
Cached time: 20250812032554
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.771 seconds
Real time usage: 0.920 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10226/1000000
Revision size: 23987/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 412577/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19115/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101886/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.421/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9694685/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  725.086      1 -total
 33.70%  244.346     17 Template:Navbox
 21.42%  155.299      1 Template:Reflist
 20.94%  151.811      1 Template:Historiography
 20.52%  148.808      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 16.94%  122.795     16 Template:Citation_needed
 15.26%  110.634     17 Template:Fix
 14.28%  103.531      9 Template:Cite_journal
 12.35%   89.552     36 Template:Ill
 11.34%   82.245      1 Template:History_of_science Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:744139:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812032554 and revision id 1300978424. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_science&oldid=1300978424 " Categories : Historiography of science Philosophy of science Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007 Articles to be expanded from June 2008 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of science 10 languages Add topic

