Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beginnings 2 Key individuals 3 Notes 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Tamil Renaissance 1 language தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tamil-speaking social movement in 19th-century India Tamil Renaissance refers to the literary, cultural, social reform and political movements that took place in the Tamil-speaking districts of Southern India starting in the second half of the 19th century and lasting to the culmination of the anti-Hindi agitations of the 1960s.

The period was characterized by a literary revival, spearheaded by Tamil writers of two different factions. One preferred an increased mixture of Sanskrit words with Tamil, believing that such a fusion raised the quality of Tamil language . The other faction favored reducing Sanskrit words to the barest minimum, in the belief that Sanskrit-origin words made the Tamil language lose its individuality. Rapid propagation of Western ideas and formulation of the Dravidian civilization theory during the second half of the 19th century inculcated a sense of pride in educated Tamils, eventually leading to the birth of Tamil nationalism , which inspired the Dravidian movement .

[ 1 ] Beginnings [ edit ] When the British Crown took over the administration of the country from the British East India Company, there was a rapid rise in literacy levels in South India.

Brahmins reaped huge advantages from the reward-for-merit policy of the British Raj and eventually emerged as the foremost elite group among the native Indians. By the beginning of the 20th century, the domination of Brahmins turned into a monopoly, as some favoured members of their own community over others in government appointments.

The second half of the 19th century also saw the rebirth of Tamil pride, based on a distinct non-Aryan Dravidian identity. The Comparative Study of the Dravidian Family of Languages by Bishop Robert Caldwell , for the first time, classified words in Dravidian tongues by their linguistic roots and distinguished them from their Indo-Aryan equivalents.

[ 2 ] The antiquity and greatness of Tamil civilization was further revealed by the archaeological discoveries of Robert Bruce Foote and the rediscovery and reproduction of ancient Tamil classics by U. V. Swaminatha Iyer .

[ 3 ] Dravidian individualism combined with resentment of Brahmin domination eventually led to the birth of the Anti-Brahmin movement and inspired the works of K. N. Sivaraja Pillai , Maraimalai Adigal and Bharathidasan and the socio-political movements of Iyothee Thass and E. V. Ramasami .  It also inspired the romanticism of V. Kanakasabhai and L. D. Swamikannu Pillai .

Tamil nationalism also inspired a pan-Indian anti-British school of thought, thereby strengthening the Indian independence movement in Tamil Nadu. Indian independence activists like Subramanya Bharathy , Chakravarthi Rajagopalachari , V. O. Chidambaram Pillai , V. V. S. Aiyar , Subramania Siva , V. Kalyanasundara Mudaliar and M. P. Sivagnanam were accomplished Tamil writers.

Key individuals [ edit ] Linguists and litterateurs G. U. Pope Robert Caldwell U. V. Swaminatha Iyer C. W. Thamotharampillai S. Vaiyapuri Pillai Historians C. Hayavadana Rao V. Kanakasabhai S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar C. Minakshi K. A. Nilakanta Sastri M. S. Purnalingam Pillai R. Raghava Iyengar V. R. Ramachandra Dikshitar T. R. Sesha Iyengar K. N. Sivaraja Pillai P. T. Srinivasa Iyengar Epigraphists E. Hultzsch H. Krishna Sastri Iravatham Mahadevan C. Sivaramamurti K. V. Subrahmanya Aiyar V. Venkayya Mysticists Devaneya Pavanar L. D. Swamikannu Pillai Science and Mathematics C. V. Raman Srinivasa Ramanujan K. S. Krishnan S. R. Ranganathan Gopalswamy Doraiswamy Naidu G. N. Ramachandran Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan Venki Ramakrishnan Sivaramakrishna Chandrasekhar T. R. Seshadri S. R. Ranganathan M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri M. S. Raghunathan Writers and journalists V. V. S. Aiyar Asokamitran C. S. Chellappa V. Kalyanasundaram Mudaliar C. N. Annadurai M. Karunanidhi Kalki Krishnamurthy Kalki Sadasivam G. A. Natesan Puthumaipithan Samuel Vedanayagam Pillai Subrahmanya Bharathy Notes [ edit ] ^ Bhaskaran, Theodore S. (4 April 2014).

"Seeds of Tamil Renaissance" .

Frontline . Retrieved 11 July 2020 .

^ Comale (1976).

European impact on modern Tamil writing and literature . Dravidian Linguistic Association. p. 53.

^ Karen Prechilis (1999).

The embodiment of bhakti . Oxford University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 0195128133 .

Bibliography [ edit ] K. Nambi Arooran (1980).

Tamil Renaissance and the Dravidian Movement, 1905-1944 . Koodal.

R. E. Asher.

Tamil Renaissance and Beginnings of the Tamil Novel .

Charles A. Ryerson (1988).

Regionalism and religion: the Tamil renaissance and popular Hinduism . Christian Literature Society.

Robert L. Hardgrave.

The Justice Party and the Tamil Renaissance .

Prema Nandakumar (1964). "Bharati and Tamil Renaissance".

Subramania Bharati .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tamil_Renaissance&oldid=1212818889 " Categories : Social history of Tamil Nadu Cultural history of Tamil Nadu Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Use Indian English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English This page was last edited on 9 March 2024, at 18:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tamil Renaissance 1 language Add topic

