Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key concepts Toggle Key concepts subsection 1.1 Virtue and vice 1.2 Virtue and emotion 1.3 Phronesis and eudaimonia 2 History of virtue Toggle History of virtue subsection 2.1 Contemporary "aretaic turn" 3 Lists of virtues Toggle Lists of virtues subsection 3.1 Aristotle's list 3.1.1 Moral virtues 3.1.2 Intellectual virtues 4 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 4.1 Subsumed in deontology and utilitarianism 4.2 Kantian critique 4.3 Utopianism and pluralism 5 Topics in virtue ethics Toggle Topics in virtue ethics subsection 5.1 Virtue ethics as a category 5.2 Virtue and politics 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Virtue ethics 32 languages العربية বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Normative ethical theories Virtue ethics (also aretaic ethics , [ a ] [ 1 ] from Greek ἀρετή [ aretḗ ]) is a philosophical approach that treats virtue and character as the primary subjects of ethics , in contrast to other ethical systems that put consequences of voluntary acts, principles or rules of conduct, or obedience to divine authority in the primary role.

[ 2 ] Virtue ethics is usually contrasted with two other major approaches in ethics, consequentialism and deontology , which make the goodness of outcomes of an action (consequentialism) and the concept of moral duty (deontology) central. While virtue ethics does not necessarily deny the importance to ethics of goodness of states of affairs or of moral duties, it emphasizes virtue and sometimes other concepts, like eudaimonia , to an extent that other ethics theories do not.

[ citation needed ] Key concepts [ edit ] Virtue and vice [ edit ] Main articles: Virtue and Moral character In virtue ethics, a virtue is a characteristic disposition to think, feel, and act well in some domain of life.

[ 3 ] In contrast, a vice is a characteristic disposition to think, feel, and act poorly in some domain of life. Virtues are not everyday habits; they are character traits , in the sense that they are central to someone’s personality and what they are like as a person.

In early versions and some modern versions of virtue ethics, a virtue is defined as a character trait that promotes or exhibits human "flourishing and well being" in the person who exhibits it.

[ 4 ] Some modern versions of virtue ethics do not define virtues in terms of well being or flourishing, and some go so far as to define virtues as traits that tend to promote some other good that is defined independently of the virtues, thereby subsuming virtue ethics under (or somehow merging it with) consequentialist ethics.

[ 5 ] To Aristotle , a virtue was not a skill that made you better able to achieve eudaimonia but was itself an expression of eudaimonia [ 6 ] Virtue and emotion [ edit ] In ancient Greek and modern eudaimonic virtue ethics, virtues and vices are complex dispositions that involve both affective and intellectual components.

[ 7 ] That is, they are dispositions that involve both being able to reason well about the right thing to do (see below on phronesis ), and also to engage emotions and feelings correctly.

For example, a generous person can reason well about when and how to help people, and such a person also helps people with pleasure and without conflict. In this, virtuous people are contrasted not only with vicious people (who reason poorly about what to do and are emotionally attached to the wrong things) and with the incontinent (who are tempted by their feelings into doing the wrong thing even though they know what is right), but also with the merely continent (whose emotions tempt them toward doing the wrong thing but whose strength of will lets them do what they know is right).

According to Rosalind Hursthouse , in Aristotelian virtue ethics, the emotions have moral significance because "virtues (and vices) are all dispositions not only to act, but to feel emotions, as reactions as well as impulses to action... [and] In the person with the virtues, these emotions will be felt on the right occasions, toward the right people or objects, for the right reasons, where 'right' means 'correct'..." [ 8 ] Phronesis and eudaimonia [ edit ] Phronesis ( φρόνησις ; prudence, practical virtue, or practical wisdom) is an acquired trait that enables its possessor to identify the best thing to do in any given situation.

[ 9 ] Unlike theoretical wisdom, practical reason results in action or decision.

[ 10 ] As John McDowell puts it, practical wisdom involves a "perceptual sensitivity" to what a situation requires.

[ 11 ] Eudaimonia ( εὐδαιμονία ) is a state variously translated from Greek as 'well-being', 'happiness', 'blessedness', and in the context of virtue ethics, 'human flourishing'.

[ 12 ] Eudaimonia in this sense is not a subjective, but an objective, state.

[ citation needed ] It characterizes the well-lived life.

According to Aristotle , the most prominent exponent of eudaimonia in the Western philosophical tradition, eudaimonia defines the goal of human life. It consists of exercising the characteristic human quality— reason —as the soul's most proper and nourishing activity. In his Nicomachean Ethics , Aristotle, like Plato before him, argued that the pursuit of eudaimonia is an "activity of the soul in accordance with perfect virtue", [ 13 ] : I which further could only properly be exercised in the characteristic human community—the polis or city-state .

[ 14 ] Although eudaimonia was first popularized by Aristotle , it now belongs to the tradition of virtue theories generally.

[ 15 ] For the virtue theorist, eudaimonia describes that state achieved by the person who lives the proper human life, an outcome that can be reached by practicing the virtues. A virtue is a habit or quality that allows the bearer to succeed at his, her, or its purpose. The virtue of a knife, for example, is sharpness; among the virtues of a racehorse is speed. Thus, to identify the virtues for human beings, one must have an account of what is the human purpose.

Not all modern virtue ethics theories are eudaimonic; some propose another end in place of eudaimonia , while others are non-teleological: that is, they do not account for virtues in terms of the results that the practice of the virtues produce or tend to produce.

[ 16 ] History of virtue [ edit ] Like much of the Western tradition, virtue theory originated in ancient Greek philosophy .

Virtue ethics began with Socrates , and was subsequently developed further by Plato , Aristotle , and the Stoics .

[ 17 ] Virtue ethics concentrates on the character of the individual, rather than the acts (or consequences thereof) of the individual. There is debate among adherents of virtue ethics concerning what specific virtues are praiseworthy. However, most theorists agree that ethics is demonstrated by the practice of virtues.

Plato and Aristotle's treatments of virtues are not the same. Plato believes virtue is effectively an end to be sought, for which a friend might be a useful means. Aristotle states that the virtues function more as means to safeguard human relations, particularly authentic friendship, without which one's quest for happiness is frustrated.

Discussion of what were known as the four cardinal virtues — wisdom , justice , fortitude , and temperance —can be found in Plato's Republic . The virtues also figure prominently in Aristotle's ethical theory found in Nicomachean Ethics .

[ 13 ] Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on the Catholic Church St. Peter's Basilica , Vatican City Overview Pope : Leo XIV Hierarchy History ( timeline ) Theology Liturgy Sacraments Mary Background Jesus Christ Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Early Christianity Peter Paul Fathers History of the Catholic Church History of the papacy Ecumenical councils Magisterium Four Marks of the Church One true church Apostolic succession Organisation Holy See Roman Curia College of Cardinals Ecumenical councils Episcopal polity Latin Church Eastern Churches Canon law Theologies Doctrine God Trinity Father Son Holy Ghost Consubstantialitas Filioque Divinum illud munus Divine law Decalogus Ex Cathedra Deificatio Realms beyond the States of the Church Heaven Purgatory Limbo Hell Paschal mystery Passion of Jesus Crucifixion of Jesus Harrowing of Hell Resurrection of Jesus Ascension of Jesus Blessed Virgin Mary Mariology Veneration Immaculate Conception Mater Dei Perpetual virginity Assumption Dormition Titles Queen Apparition Mediatrix Salvation Baptism of desire Baptism of blood Divine grace Outside the Church there is no salvation Infused righteousness Invincible ignorance Justification Means of grace Merit Mortal sin Satisfaction Moral influence Sanctification Synergism Venial sin Ecclesiology College of Bishops Deposit of faith Infallibility of the Church Mystical Body of Christ Papal primacy People of God Perfect community Subsistit in Other teachings Josephology Morality Body Sexuality Apologetics Amillennialism Original sin Hypostatic union Predestination Seven deadly sins Beatific vision Saints Dogma Texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Official Bible Vulgate Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Peshitta Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Catechism of the Catholic Church Papal bull Apostolic exhortation Epistula Encyclica Philosophy Cardinal virtues Just war Natural law Catholic ethics Personalism Probabilism Social teaching Philosophy of canon law Philosophers Virtue ethics Schools Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Christian humanism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Traditionalist Catholicism Sedevacantism Worship Liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Mass Divine Liturgy Holy Qurbana Holy Qurobo Liturgy of the Hours Liturgical year Sacraments Baptism Penance Eucharist Confirmation Anointing of the Sick Matrimony Holy orders Prayer Devotions Bible Biblical canon Rites Latin liturgy : Roman Post-Vatican II Tridentine Use of Sarum Anglican Use Zaire Use Gallican Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Eastern Catholic liturgy : Alexandrian Antiochene West Syriac Malankara East Syriac Armenian Byzantine Miscellaneous Antipopes Anti-Catholicism Criticism Deism / Pandeism Ecumenism Monasticism Relations with: Islam Judaism ( Zionism ) Orthodoxy Protestantism Societal issues Art Evolution Health care HIV/AIDS Homosexuality Sexual abuse Music Nazi Germany Politics ( in the United States ) Role in civilization Science Sex and gender roles Slavery the Age of Discovery Links and resources Index Outline Glossary Category Media Templates WikiProject Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Virtue theory was inserted into the study of history by moralistic historians such as Livy , Plutarch , and Tacitus . The Greek idea of the virtues was passed on in Roman philosophy through Cicero and later incorporated into Christian moral theology by Ambrose of Milan . During the scholastic period, the most comprehensive consideration of the virtues from a theological perspective was provided by Thomas Aquinas in his Summa Theologiae and his Commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics .

[ 18 ] After the Reformation, Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics continued to be the main authority for the discipline of ethics at Protestant universities until the late seventeenth century, with over fifty Protestant commentaries published on the Nicomachean Ethics before 1682.

[ 19 ] Though the tradition receded into the background of European philosophical thought in the next few centuries, the term "virtue" remained current during this period, and in fact appears prominently in the tradition of classical republicanism or classical liberalism . This tradition was prominent in the intellectual life of 16th-century Italy, as well as 17th- and 18th-century Britain and America. The term "virtue" appears frequently in the work of Tomás Fernández de Medrano , Niccolò Machiavelli , David Hume , the republicans of the English Civil War period, the 18th-century English Whigs , and the prominent figures among the Scottish Enlightenment and the American Founding Fathers .

Contemporary "aretaic turn" [ edit ] Although some Enlightenment philosophers (e.g.

Hume ) continued to emphasise the virtues, with the ascendancy of utilitarianism and deontological ethics , virtue theory moved to the margins of Western philosophy . The contemporary revival of virtue theory is frequently traced to the philosopher Elizabeth Anscombe 's 1958 essay " Modern Moral Philosophy ".

[ 20 ] Following this: In the 1976 paper " The Schizophrenia of Modern Ethical Theories ", Michael Stocker summarises the main aretaic criticisms of deontological and consequentialist ethics.

[ 21 ] Philosopher, psychologist, and encyclopedist Mortimer Adler appealed to Aristotelian ethics , and the virtue theory of happiness or eudaimonia throughout his published work.

Philippa Foot , published a collection of essays in 1978 entitled Virtues and Vices .

[ 22 ] Alasdair MacIntyre made an effort to reconstruct a virtue-based theory in dialogue with the problems of modern and postmodern thought; his works include After Virtue , where he recommends Aristotle 's account of the virtues, and Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry , where he recommends Thomism .

[ 23 ] Paul Ricoeur accorded an important place to Aristotelian teleological ethics in his hermeneutical phenomenology of the subject, most notably in his book Oneself as Another .

[ 24 ] Theologian Stanley Hauerwas found the language of virtue helpful in his own project.

Richard Clyde Taylor argues for the restoration of classical virtues as the basis for morality in Virtue Ethics An Introduction (1991) [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Roger Crisp and Michael Slote edited a collection of important essays titled Virtue Ethics .

[ 27 ] Martha Nussbaum and Amartya Sen employed virtue theory in theorising the capability approach to international development .

Julia Annas wrote The Morality of Happiness (1993).

[ 28 ] Lawrence C. Becker identified current virtue theory with Greek Stoicism in A New Stoicism.

(1998).

[ 29 ] Rosalind Hursthouse published On Virtue Ethics (1999).

[ 30 ] Psychologist Martin Seligman drew on classical virtue ethics in conceptualizing positive psychology .

Psychologist Daniel Goleman opens his book on Emotional Intelligence with a challenge from Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics .

[ 31 ] Michael Sandel discusses Aristotelian ethics to support his ethical theory of justice in his book Justice: What's the Right Thing to Do?

The aretaic turn in moral philosophy is paralleled by analogous developments in other philosophical disciplines. One of these is epistemology , where a distinctive virtue epistemology was developed by Linda Zagzebski and others. In political theory, there has been discussion of "virtue politics", and in legal theory, there is a small but growing body of literature on virtue jurisprudence . The aretaic turn also exists in American constitutional theory , where proponents argue for an emphasis on virtue and vice of constitutional adjudicators [ clarification needed ] .

[ citation needed ] Aretaic approaches to morality, epistemology, and jurisprudence have been the subject of intense debates. One criticism focuses on the problem of guidance; one opponent, Robert Louden in his article "Some Vices of Virtue Ethics", questions whether the idea of a virtuous moral actor, believer, or judge can provide the guidance necessary for action, belief formation, or the resolution of legal disputes.

[ 32 ] Lists of virtues [ edit ] There are several lists of virtues. Socrates argued that virtue is knowledge, which suggests that there is really only one virtue.

[ 33 ] The Stoics identified four cardinal virtues : wisdom, justice, courage, and temperance. Wisdom is subdivided into good sense, good calculation, quick-wittedness, discretion, and resourcefulness. Justice is subdivided into piety, honesty, equity, and fair dealing. Courage is subdivided into endurance, confidence, high-mindedness, cheerfulness, and industriousness. Temperance or moderation is subdivided into good discipline, seemliness, modesty, and self-control.

[ 34 ] John McDowell argues that virtue is a "perceptual capacity" to identify how one ought to act, and that all particular virtues are merely "specialized sensitivities" to a range of reasons for acting.

[ 35 ] Aristotle's list [ edit ] Aristotle identifies 12 virtues that demonstrate a person is performing their human function well.

[ 13 ] He distinguished virtues pertaining to emotion and desire from those relating to the mind.

[ 13 ] : II The first he calls moral virtues, and the second intellectual virtues (though both are "moral" in the modern sense of the word).

Moral virtues [ edit ] Aristotle suggested that each moral virtue was a golden mean between two corresponding vices, one of excess and one of deficiency. Each intellectual virtue is a mental skill or habit by which the mind arrives at truth, affirming what is or denying what is not.

[ 13 ] : VI In the Nicomachean Ethics . he discusses 11 moral virtues: Dimension Excess Golden mean Deficiency Fear and confidence Rashness Courage in the face of fear [ 13 ] : III.6–9 Cowardice Pleasure and pain Self-indulgence Temperance in the face of pleasure and pain [ 13 ] : III.10–12 Insensibility Getting and spending (minor) Prodigality Liberality with wealth and possessions [ 13 ] : IV.1 Illiberality Getting and spending (major) Vulgarity Magnificence with great wealth and possessions [ 13 ] : IV.2 Pettiness Honor and dishonor (major) Vanity Magnanimity with great honors [ 13 ] : IV.3 Pusillanimity Honor and dishonor (minor) Empty vanity Proper ambition with normal honors [ 13 ] : IV.4 Unambitiousness Anger Irascibility Patience [ 13 ] : IV.5 Lack of spirit Self-expression Boastfulness Honesty with self-expression [ 13 ] : IV.7 False modesty Conversation Buffoonery Wittiness in conversation [ 13 ] : IV.8 Boorishness Social conduct Obsequiousness Friendliness in social conduct [ 13 ] : IV.6 Cantankerousness Indignation Envy Justice and righteous indignation in the face of injury [ 13 ] : IV.5 Spitefulness Intellectual virtues [ edit ] Nous (intelligence), which apprehends fundamental truths (such as definitions, self-evident principles) [ 13 ] : VI.11 Episteme (science), which is skill with inferential reasoning (such as proofs, syllogisms , demonstrations) [ 13 ] : VI.6 Sophia (theoretical wisdom), which combines fundamental truths with valid, necessary inferences to reason well about unchanging truths.

[ 13 ] : VI.5 Aristotle also mentions several other traits: Gnome (good sense) – passing judgment, "sympathetic understanding" [ 13 ] : VI.11 Synesis (understanding) – comprehending what others say, does not issue commands Phronesis (practical wisdom) – knowledge of what to do, knowledge of changing truths, issues commands [ 13 ] : VI.8 Techne (art, craftsmanship) [ 13 ] : VI.4 Aristotle's list is not the only list, however. As Alasdair MacIntyre observed in After Virtue , thinkers as diverse as Homer , the authors of the New Testament , Thomas Aquinas , and Benjamin Franklin have all proposed lists.

[ 36 ] Walter Kaufmann proposed as the four cardinal virtues: ambition/humility ("humbition"), love, courage, and honesty.

[ 37 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Proponents of virtue theory [ who?

] sometimes argue that a central feature of a virtue is its universal applicability . In other words, any character trait defined as a virtue must reasonably be universally regarded as a virtue for all people. According to this view, it is inconsistent to claim, for example, servility as a female virtue, while at the same time not proposing it as a male one.

[ 38 ] Other proponents of virtue theory, notably Alasdair MacIntyre, respond to this objection by arguing that any account of the virtues must indeed be generated out of the community in which those virtues are to be practiced: the very word ethics implies ethos . That is to say that the virtues are, and necessarily must be, grounded in a particular time and place. What counts as a virtue in 4th-century BCE Athens would be a ludicrous guide to proper behaviour in 21st-century CE Toronto and vice versa. To take this view does not necessarily commit one to the argument that accounts of the virtues must therefore be static: moral activity—that is, attempts to contemplate and practice the virtues—can provide the cultural resources that allow people to change, albeit slowly, the ethos of their own societies.

MacIntyre appears to take this position in his seminal work on virtue ethics, After Virtue .

Another objection [ whose?

] to virtue theory is that virtue ethics does not focus on what sorts of actions are morally permitted and which ones are not, but rather on what sort of qualities someone ought to foster in order to become a good person. In other words, while some virtue theorists [ who?

] may not condemn, for example, murder as an inherently immoral or impermissible sort of action, they may argue that someone who commits a murder is severely lacking in several important virtues, such as compassion and fairness . Still, antagonists of the theory [ who?

] often object that this particular feature of the theory makes virtue ethics useless as a universal norm of acceptable conduct suitable as a base for legislation [ citation needed ] . Some virtue theorists [ who?

] concede this point, but respond by opposing the very notion of legitimate legislative authority instead, effectively advocating some form of anarchism as the political ideal.

[ citation needed ] Other virtue theorists [ who?

] argue that laws should be made by virtuous legislators, and still another group argue that it is possible to base a judicial system on the moral notion of virtues rather than rules. Aristotle himself saw his Nicomachean Ethics as a prequel for his Politics and felt that the point of politics was to create the fertile soil for a virtuous citizenry to develop in, and that one purpose of virtue was that it helps you to contribute to a healthy polis .

[ 13 ] : X.9 [ 14 ] Some virtue theorists [ who?

] might respond to this overall objection with the notion of a "bad act" also being an act characteristic of vice .

[ citation needed ] That is to say that those acts that do not aim at virtue, or that stray from virtue, would constitute our conception of "bad behavior". Although not all virtue ethicists agree to this notion, this is one way the virtue ethicist can re-introduce the concept of the "morally impermissible". One could raise an objection that he is committing an argument from ignorance by postulating that what is not virtuous is unvirtuous. In other words, just because an action or person 'lacks of evidence' for virtue does not, all else constant , imply that said action or person is unvirtuous.

Subsumed in deontology and utilitarianism [ edit ] Martha Nussbaum suggested that while virtue ethics is often considered to be anti- Enlightenment , "suspicious of theory and respectful of the wisdom embodied in local practices", [ 39 ] it is actually neither fundamentally distinct from, nor does it qualify as a rival approach to deontology and utilitarianism. She argues that philosophers from these two Enlightenment traditions often include theories of virtue. She pointed out that Kant's "Doctrine of Virtue" (in The Metaphysics of Morals ) "covers most of the same topics as do classical Greek theories", "that he offers a general account of virtue, in terms of the strength of the will in overcoming wayward and selfish inclinations; that he offers detailed analyses of standard virtues such as courage and self-control, and of vices, such as avarice, mendacity, servility, and pride; that, although in general, he portrays inclination as inimical to virtue, he also recognizes that sympathetic inclinations offer crucial support to virtue, and urges their deliberate cultivation." [ 39 ] Nussbaum also points to considerations of virtue by utilitarians such as Henry Sidgwick ( The Methods of Ethics ), Jeremy Bentham ( The Principles of Morals and Legislation ), and John Stuart Mill , who writes of moral development as part of an argument for the moral equality of women ( The Subjection of Women ). She argues that contemporary virtue ethicists such as Alasdair MacIntyre, Bernard Williams , Philippa Foot , and John McDowell have few points of agreement and that the common core of their work does not represent a break from Kant.

Kantian critique [ edit ] Immanuel Kant's position on virtue ethics is contested. Those who argue that Kantian deontology conflicts with virtue ethics include Alasdair MacIntyre, Philippa Foot, and Bernard Williams.

[ 40 ] In the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals and the Critique of Practical Reason , Immanuel Kant offers many different criticisms of ethical frameworks and against moral theories before him.

[ citation needed ] Kant rarely mentioned Aristotle by name but did not exclude his moral philosophy of virtue ethics from his critique. Many Kantian arguments against virtue ethics claim that virtue ethics is inconsistent, or sometimes that it is not a real moral theory at all.

[ 41 ] In "What Is Virtue Ethics All About?", [ 42 ] Gregory Velazco y Trianosky identified the key points of divergence between virtue ethicists and what he called "neo-Kantianism", in the form these nine neo-Kantian moral assertions: The crucial moral question is "what is it right/obligatory to do?" Moral judgments are those that concern the rightness of actions.

Such judgments take the form of rules or principles.

Such rules or principles are universal, not respecting persons.

They are not based on some concept of human good that is independent of moral goodness.

They take the form of categorical imperatives that can be justified independently of the desires of the person they apply to.

They are motivating; they can compel action in an agent, also independently of that agent's desires.

An action, in order to be morally virtuous, must be motivated by this sort of moral judgment (not, for example, merely coincidentally aligned with it).

The virtuousness of a character trait, or virtue, derives from the relationship that trait has to moral judgments, rules, and principles.

Trianosky says that modern sympathizers with virtue ethics almost all reject neo-Kantian claim #1, and many of them also reject certain of the other claims.

Utopianism and pluralism [ edit ] Robert B. Louden criticizes virtue ethics on the basis that it promotes a form of unsustainable utopianism . Trying to arrive at a single set of virtues is immensely difficult in contemporary societies as, according to Louden, they contain "more ethnic, religious, and class groups than did the moral community which Aristotle theorized about" with each of these groups having "not only its own interests but its own set of virtues as well". Louden notes in passing that MacIntyre, a supporter of virtue-based ethics, has grappled with this in After Virtue but that ethics cannot dispense with building rules around acts and rely only on discussing the moral character of persons.

[ 43 ] Topics in virtue ethics [ edit ] Virtue ethics as a category [ edit ] Further information: Utilitarianism , Utilitarianism (book) , and On Liberty Virtue contrasts with deontological and consequentialist ethics; the three are the most predominant contemporary normative-ethical theories.

Deontological ethics , sometimes referred to as duty ethics, emphasizes adherence to ethical principles or duties. How these duties are defined, however, is often a subject of debate. One rule scheme used by deontologists is divine command theory . Deontology also depends upon meta-ethical realism in postulating the existence of moral absolutes , regardless of circumstances.

Immanuel Kant is considered a foremost theorist of deontological ethics.

The next predominant school of thought in normative ethics is consequentialism . While deontology emphasizes doing one's duty, consequentialism bases the morality of an action on its outcome. Instead of saying that one has a moral duty to abstain from murder, a consequentialist would say that we should abstain from murder because it has undesirable effects. The main contention is what outcomes should (or can) be identified as objectively desirable.

John Stuart Mill 's greatest happiness principle is a commonly-adopted criterion of what is objectively desirable. Mill asserts that the desirability of an action is the net amount of happiness it brings, the number of people it brings happiness to, and the duration of that happiness. He tries to delineate classes of happiness, some preferable to others, but classifying such a concept is difficult.

A virtue ethicist identifies virtues (also known as desirable characteristics) that a good person embodies. Exhibiting these virtues is the aim of ethics, and one's actions are a reflection of one's virtues. To the virtue philosopher, action cannot be used as a demarcation of morality because a virtue encompasses more than a selection of an action; it is a way of being that leads the person exhibiting the virtue to consistently make certain types of choices. There is disagreement in virtue ethics about what are, and what are not, virtues. There are also difficulties in identifying the "virtuous" action to take in all circumstances, and how to define a virtue.

Consequentialist and deontological theories often still employ the term virtue in a restricted sense: as a tendency (or disposition) to adhere to the system's principles or rules. In those theories, virtue is secondary and the principles (or rules) are primary. These differing senses of what constitutes virtue are a potential source of confusion.

[ 44 ] Dogmatic claims about the purpose of human life, or about what a good life is for human beings, are typically controversial.

Virtue and politics [ edit ] Virtue theory emphasizes Aristotle's belief in the polis as the acme of political organization, [ citation needed ] and the role of the virtues in enabling human beings to flourish in that environment. In contrast, classical republicanism emphasizes Tacitus 's concern that power and luxury can corrupt individuals and destroy liberty, as Tacitus perceived in the transformation of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire . Virtue for classical republicans is a shield against this sort of corruption and a means to preserve the good life one has, rather than a means by which to achieve the good life one does not yet have. Another way to put the distinction between the two traditions is that virtue ethics relies on Aristotle's fundamental distinction between the human-being-as-he-is from the human-being-as-he-should-be, while classical republicanism relies on the Tacitean distinction of the risk-of-becoming.

[ 45 ] Virtue ethics has a number of contemporary applications: Social and political philosophy Within the field of social ethics, Deirdre McCloskey argues that virtue ethics can provide a basis for a balanced approach to understanding capitalism and capitalist societies.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Education Within the field of philosophy of education , James Page argues that virtue ethics can provide a rationale and foundation for peace education .

[ 48 ] Health care and medical ethics Thomas Alured Faunce argued that whistleblowing in healthcare settings would be more respected within clinical governance pathways if it had a firmer academic foundation in virtue ethics.

[ 49 ] He called for whistleblowing to be expressly supported in the UNESCO Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights.

[ 50 ] Barry Schwartz argues that "practical wisdom" is an antidote to much of the inefficient and inhumane bureaucracy of modern health care systems.

[ 51 ] Technology and the virtues In her book Technology and the Virtues , [ 52 ] Shannon Vallor proposed a series of "technomoral" virtues that people need to cultivate in order to flourish in our socio-technological world: Honesty (Respecting Truth), Self-control (Becoming the Author of Our Desires), Humility (Knowing What We Do Not Know), Justice (Upholding Rightness), Courage (Intelligent Fear and Hope), Empathy (Compassionate Concern for Others), Care (Loving Service to Others), Civility (Making Common Cause), Flexibility (Skillful Adaptation to Change), Perspective (Holding on to the Moral Whole), and Magnanimity (Moral Leadership and Nobility of Spirit).

See also [ edit ] Applied ethics – Practical application of moral considerations Arete – Greek philosophical concept Buddhist ethics (discipline) Confucianism – Chinese ethical and philosophical system Cynicism (philosophy) – Ancient school of philosophy Environmental virtue ethics – Way of approaching environmental ethics through the lens of virtue ethics Modern Stoicism – Virtue-focused philosophical system Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Phronesis – Ancient Greek word for a type of wisdom or intelligence Rule according to higher law – Belief that universal principles of morality override unjust laws Seven virtues – Seven virtues in Christian tradition Stoicism – Virtue-focused philosophical system Tirukkuṟaḷ – Ancient Tamil composition on personal ethics and morality Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Virtue epistemology – Philosophical approach Virtue jurisprudence – Virtue ethics applied to jurisprudence Virtue signalling – Pejorative term Notes [ edit ] ^ Pronounced / ˌ ær ə ˈ t eɪ .

ɪ k / .

References [ edit ] ^ Carr, David; Steutel, Jan, eds. (1999).

Virtue Ethics and Moral Education . Routledge. p. 22.

ISBN 9780415170734 .

^ Statman, Daniel (1997). "Introduction to Virtue Ethics".

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 0878402217 .

[Virtue Ethics] refers to a rather new (or renewed) approach to ethics, according to which the basic judgments in ethics are judgments about character.

^ Hursthouse, Rosalind ; Pettigrove, Glen (2018).

"Virtue Ethics" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 2021-02-19 .

Annas, Julia (2015-09-22).

"Virtue and Duty: Negotiating Between Different Ethical Traditions" .

Journal of Value Inquiry .

49 (4): 609.

doi : 10.1007/s10790-015-9520-y .

S2CID 143268990 – via SpringerLink.

^ Statman, Daniel (1997). "Introduction to Virtue Ethics".

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 0878402217 .

Virtues are viewed as necessary conditions for, or as constitutive elements of, human flourishing and wellbeing.

^ Trianosky, Gregory Velazco y (1997). "What is Virtue Ethics All About?". In Statman, Daniel (ed.).

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 48.

ISBN 0878402217 .

What is surprising today is how many of the most influential writers on the virtues today in fact defend some sort of teleological if not specifically utilitarian answer.

^ Trianosky, Gregory Velazco y (1997). "What is Virtue Ethics All About?". In Statman, Daniel (ed.).

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 47.

ISBN 0878402217 .

[Aristotle regards virtue as] a constitutive element of the human good rather than merely a means to its attainment.

^ Annas, Julia (1993).

The Morality of Happiness . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

48– 49.

ISBN 0-19-507999-X .

^ Hursthouse, Rosalind (1997). "Virtue Ethics and the Emotions". In Statman, Daniel (ed.).

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 108.

ISBN 0878402217 .

^ Pincoffs, Edmund (1971). "Quandary ethics".

Mind .

80 (320): 552– 571.

doi : 10.1093/mind/LXXX.320.552 .

^ Kraut, Richard (2016-01-01). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Aristotle's Ethics (Spring 2016 ed.).

Archived from the original on 2019-03-18 . Retrieved 2016-05-05 .

^ McDowell, John (1979). "Virtue and Reason".

The Monist .

62 (3): 331– 350.

doi : 10.5840/monist197962319 .

^ Pojman, L.P.; Fieser, J. (2009). "Virtue Theory".

Ethics: Discovering Right and Wrong (6th ed.). Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. pp.

146– 169.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w Dubey, Damayanti (December 31, 2021).

"12 Virtues of Aristotle" .

evolveinc.io .

^ a b Aristotle.

Politics .

^ Hursthouse, Rosalind (8 Dec 2016).

"Virtue Ethics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2018 . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

Although modern virtue ethics does not have to take a 'neo-Aristotelian' or eudaimonist form..., almost any modern version still shows that its roots are in ancient Greek philosophy by the employment of three concepts derived from it. These are arête (excellence or virtue), phronesis (practical or moral wisdom) and eudaimonia (usually translated as happiness or flourishing).

^ Statman, Daniel (1997). "Introduction to Virtue Ethics".

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 11.

ISBN 0878402217 .

[I]t is important to notice (1.) that virtue ethics is not necessarily tied to the notion of wellbeing; and (2.) that according to some philosophers, virtue ethics is necessarily, or at least typically, of a non -teleological nature.

^ Gardiner, P. (2003-10-01).

"A virtue ethics approach to moral dilemmas in medicine" .

Journal of Medical Ethics .

29 (5): 297– 302.

doi : 10.1136/jme.29.5.297 .

ISSN 0306-6800 .

PMC 1733793 .

PMID 14519840 .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-06.

Bowin, John (2020).

"Aristotle's Virtue Ethics" (PDF) . In Seigneurie, Ken (ed.).

A Companion to World Literature . John Wiley & Sons.

Plato: Oxford Bibliographies Online Research Guide . Oxford University Press, USA. 2010. p.

10 .

ISBN 978-0-19-980902-8 .

^ Aquinas, Thomas (1485).

Summa Theologica .

Aquinas, Thomas (1272).

Commentary on the Ten Books of Ethics .

^ Sytsma, David (2021).

"Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics and Protestantism" .

Academia Letters .

1650 : 1– 8.

doi : 10.20935/AL1650 .

S2CID 237798959 .

^ Anscombe, G. E. M. (1958).

"Modern Moral Philosophy" .

Philosophy .

33 (124): 1– 19.

doi : 10.1017/s0031819100037943 .

JSTOR 3749051 .

S2CID 197875941 .

^ Stocker, Michael (1976). "The Schizophrenia of Modern Ethical Theories".

The Journal of Philosophy .

73 (14): 453– 466.

doi : 10.2307/2025782 .

JSTOR 2025782 .

^ Foot, Philippa (1978).

Virtues and Vices . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

ISBN 0631127496 .

^ MacIntyre, Alasdair (1981).

After Virtue . Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.

ISBN 0-268-00594-X .

MacIntyre, Alasdair (1990).

Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry . Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.

ISBN 0-268-01877-4 .

^ Ricoeur, Paul (1992) [1990].

Oneself as Another . Translated by Blamey, Kathleen. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-71329-6 .

^ Taylor, Richard (2002) [1991].

Virtue Ethics An Introduction . New York: Prometheus Books.

ISBN 9781573929431 .

^ Virtue Ethics an Introduction.

Taylor, Richard. Promethious Books, New York, 2002, See  Foreword by John Donnelly, University of San Diego p. xiii-xiv, isbn 1-57392-943-3 on Google Books ^ Crisp, Roger; Slote, Michael (1997).

Virtue Ethics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Annas, Julia (1993).

The Morality of Happiness . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509652-5 .

^ Becker, Lawrence C. (1998).

A New Stoicism . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0691009643 .

^ Hursthouse, Rosalind (1999).

On Virtue Ethics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-924799-4 .

^ Goleman, Daniel (1995).

Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ . Aristotle's Challenge, pp. xix–xxiv: Bantam Books.

ISBN 978-0-553-38371-3 .

^ Louden, Robert B. (1984). "On some vices of virtue ethics".

American Philosophical Quarterly .

21 (3): 227– 236.

^ Plato, Meno .

^ Stephens, William O.

"Stoic Ethics" .

www.iep.utm.edu . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

Cicero, Marcus Tullius.

"De Officiis" [On Moral Duties].

www.oll.libertyfund.org . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ McDowell, John (1979). "Virtue and reason".

The Monist .

62 (3): 331– 350.

doi : 10.5840/monist197962319 .

^ MacIntyre, Alasdair (1981).

After Virtue . Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press. Chapter 14.

ISBN 0-268-00594-X .

^ Kaufmann, Walter (1961).

The Faith Of A Heretic . Doubleday & Co. pp.

317– 338.

doi : 10.1515/9781400866168-013 .

^ Rachels, James, Stuart (2023).

The Elements of Moral Philosophy (10th ed.). McGraw Hill LLC. pp.

169– 184.

ISBN 978-1-265-23718-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Nussbaum, Martha C. (1999). "Virtue Ethics: A Misleading Category?".

The Journal of Ethics .

3 (3): 163– 201.

doi : 10.1023/A:1009877217694 .

JSTOR 25115613 .

S2CID 141533832 .

^ MacIntyre, Alasdair (1981).

After Virtue . Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press. pp. 42, 112.

ISBN 0-268-00594-X .

^ Sullivan, Roger J. (1974).

"The Kantian Critique of Aristotle's Moral Philosophy: An Appraisal" .

The Review of Metaphysics .

28 (1): 24– 53.

JSTOR 20126582 .

^ Trianosky, Gregory Velazco y (1997). "What is Virtue Ethics All About?". In Statman, Daniel (ed.).

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. pp.

47– 55.

ISBN 0878402217 .

^ Louden, Robert B. (July 1984). "On Some Vices of Virtue Ethics".

American Philosophical Quarterly .

21 (3): 227– 236.

JSTOR 20014051 .

^ Statman, Daniel (1997). "Introduction to Virtue Ethics".

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 0878402217 .

[A] view shared by both deontologists and utilitarians... [is that] the value of character traits is dependent on the value of the conduct that these traits tend to produce, and it is the concept of right behavior that it theoretically prior, not that of virtue. In reversing the order of justification, virtue ethics is calling for a real revolution in ethical thought...

^ Pocock, J.G.A. (1975).

The Machiavellian Moment . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-11472-2 .

LCCN 2002112936 .

^ McCloskey, Deirdre N. (2007).

The Bourgeois Virtues . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-55664-2 .

^ McCloskey, Deirdre N. (2015). "Bourgeois Virtue".

Wiley Encyclopedia of Management . pp.

1– 2.

doi : 10.1002/9781118785317.weom020101 .

ISBN 9781118785317 .

^ Page, James; Page, James Smith (2008).

Peace Education: Exploring Ethical and Philosophical Foundations . Information Age Pub Incorporated.

ISBN 978-1-59311-889-1 .

^ Faunce, T.A. (2004). "Developing and Teaching the Virtue-Ethics Foundations of Healthcare Whistle Blowing".

Monash Bioethics Review .

23 (4): 41– 55.

doi : 10.1007/BF03351419 .

PMID 15688511 .

S2CID 195243797 .

Faunce, T.A.; Jefferys, S. (2007). "Whistleblowing and Scientific Misconduct: Renewing Legal and Virtue Ethics Foundations".

Journal of Medicine and Law .

26 (3): 567– 584.

PMID 17970253 .

^ Faunce, T. A.; Nasu, H. (23 April 2009). "Normative Foundations of Technology Transfer and Transnational Benefit Principles in the UNESCO Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights".

Journal of Medicine and Philosophy .

34 (3). Oxford University Press (OUP): 296– 321.

doi : 10.1093/jmp/jhp021 .

ISSN 0360-5310 .

PMID 19395367 .

^ Schwartz, Barry (16 February 2009).

"Our loss of wisdom" .

www.ted.com .

Archived from the original on 2016-05-07 . Retrieved 2016-05-05 .

^ Technology and the Virtues: A Philosophical Guide to a Future Worth Wanting . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. 2016.

ISBN 978-0190498511 .

Sources [ edit ] Statman, Daniel (1997).

Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0878402217 .

Further reading [ edit ] Yu, Jiyuan (1998).

"Virtue: Confucius and Aristotle" .

Philosophy East and West .

48 (2): 323– 47.

doi : 10.2307/1399830 .

JSTOR 1399830 .

Devettere, Raymond J. (2002).

Introduction to Virtue Ethics . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 9780878403721 .

Taylor, Richard (2002).

An Introduction to Virtue Ethics . Amherst: Prometheus Books.

Darwall, Stephen, ed. (2003).

Virtue Ethics . Oxford: B. Blackwell.

Swanton, Christine (2003).

Virtue Ethics: a Pluralistic View . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gardiner, Stephen M., ed. (2005).

Virtue Ethics, Old and New . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Russell, Daniel C., ed. (2013).

The Cambridge Companion to Virtue Ethics . New York: Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Virtue ethics .

"Virtue Ethics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Hursthouse, Rosalind .

"Virtue Ethics" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Homiak, Marcia.

"Moral Character" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Virtue Ethics – summary, criticisms and how to apply the theory Legal theory lexicon: Virtue ethics by Larry Solum.

The Virtue Ethics Research Hub The Four Stoic Virtues v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Stoicism Philosophers Greek Scholarchs of the Stoa Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Zeno of Tarsus Diogenes of Babylon Antipater of Tarsus Panaetius Aristo of Chios Sphaerus Persaeus Herillus Dioscorides Crates of Mallus Zenodotus Apollodorus of Seleucia Boethus of Sidon Dardanus Mnesarchus Dionysius of Cyrene Hecato of Rhodes Diotimus the Stoic Posidonius Geminus Diodotus Antipater of Tyre Apollonides Athenodorus Cananites Roman Publius Rutilius Rufus Quintus Lucilius Balbus Cato the Younger Quintus Sextius Attalus Papirius Fabianus Seneca Cornutus Chaeremon of Alexandria Paconius Agrippinus Persius Helvidius Priscus Arulenus Rusticus Musonius Rufus Thrasea Paetus Rubellius Plautus Barea Soranus Publius Egnatius Celer Mara bar Serapion Euphrates Epictetus Hierocles Claudius Maximus Basilides Apollonius of Chalcedon Junius Rusticus Marcus Aurelius ( Philosophy ) Philosophical concepts Logic Logos Adiaphora Katalepsis Diairesis Physics Physis Fire Pneuma Ethics Pathos Apatheia Eudaimonia Kathekon Negative visualization Oikeiôsis Prohairesis Sophos Works On Passions (Chrysippus) Paradoxa Stoicorum Letters to Lucilius (Seneca) Seneca's Essays De Providentia De Brevitate Vitae De Vita Beata De Beneficiis De Clementia De Tranquillitate Animi De Ira De Otio De Constantia Sapientis Seneca's Consolations Lectures (Musonius Rufus) Discourses of Epictetus Enchiridion of Epictetus Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta Related articles Stoa Poikile Stoic Opposition Neostoicism v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hq9x6
Cached time: 20250818034205
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.521 seconds
Real time usage: 1.878 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21319/1000000
Revision size: 50718/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 634755/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15511/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 469059/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.803/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18240115/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1418.702      1 -total
 27.70%  392.921      2 Template:Reflist
 18.09%  256.678     42 Template:Cite_book
 12.71%  180.384      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.34%  146.742     24 Template:Navbox
  8.96%  127.064     23 Template:R
  8.44%  119.769     23 Template:R/ref
  7.51%  106.528     15 Template:Annotated_link
  7.07%  100.371      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy
  6.63%   94.049      9 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:261873:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818034205 and revision id 1304483720. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Virtue_ethics&oldid=1304483720 " Categories : Virtue ethics Analytic philosophy Aristotelianism Ethical theories Justice Philosophy of law Morality Normative ethics Platonism Socrates Virtue Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2021 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Virtue ethics 32 languages Add topic

