Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Works on Arabic astronomy 3 Awards and honors 4 Columbia Unbecoming 5 Bibliography 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents George Saliba 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American historian of science (born 1939) George Saliba Born 1939 (age 85–86) Matn , Lebanon Nationality American Alma mater American University of Beirut (B.S., M.A.) University of California, Berkeley (M.A., M.Phil., Ph.D.) Known for Historian of Astronomy, Professor of Arabic and Islamic Science Awards History of Science Prize (1993), History of Astronomy Prize (1996), Kluge Center of the Library of Congress Distinguished Scholar (2005-6) Scientific career Institutions Columbia University (1979-) Website www .columbia .edu /~gas1 /saliba .html George Saliba (Arabic: جورج صليبا) is a Lebanese-American historian who is Professor of Arabic and Islamic Science at the Department of Middle Eastern, South Asian, and African Studies, Columbia University , New York , where he has been since 1979. Saliba is currently the founding director of the Farouk Jabre Center for Arabic & Islamic Science & Philosophy and the Jabre-Khwarizmi Chair in the History Department.

[ 1 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Saliba received a bachelors and master's degree in mathematics from the American University of Beirut . After, he received a master of science degree in Semitic languages and a doctorate in Islamic sciences from the University of California, Berkeley .

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Saliba has been at Columbia University since 1979. He studies the development of scientific ideas from late antiquity till early modern times, with a special focus on the various planetary theories that were developed within the Islamic civilization and the impact of such theories on early European astronomy. He uncovered pathways of transmission of Islamic astronomy to Renaissance Europe. The main thrust of his research has been the connections between Islamic astronomers and Copernicus.

[ 3 ] His  book Islamic Science and the Making of the European Renaissance has been published in multiple languages including Arabic, English, and Turkish.

[ 4 ] Works on Arabic astronomy [ edit ] This section of a biography of a living person does not include any references or sources .

Please help by adding reliable sources . Contentious material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately .

Find sources: "George Saliba" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The following is a translation (Google Translate) of a portion of the French Wikipedia article, to which reference is made on the Talk page of this article.

George Saliba made important contributions to Arabic astronomy, closely intertwined with astrology: “Islamic astronomy has long maintained ambivalent relationships with astrology. At the beginning, astronomy and astrology were both considered complementary disciplines which were referred to under the generic name of "science of the stars" ('ilm al-nujûm). The transmission of the astronomical traditions of India and ancient Greece within the new Muslim civilization provided the opportunity to subject these sciences to more rigorous analysis. [...] This critical work resulted in a separation of astronomy and astrology, primarily because the latter dealt with metaphysical questions [...] which came in one way or another into conflict with the religious dogma of Islam. [...] Furthermore, astrologers constantly needed to call on the work of astronomers, to the extent that any serious astrological operation had to be based on astronomical observations. Due to the close dependence of astrology on the observations and mathematical calculations of astronomy, the boundaries between the two disciplines became extremely blurred in the eyes of laymen.

In his work devoted to Arab astronomy, George Saliba highlighted the remarkable discoveries made up to the 16th century, while it was thought until the end of the 20th century that the progress of Arab astronomers in the theory of the planets had ended with the work of Ibn al-Shatir in the 14th century. Notably in his work on Shams al-Din al-Khafri (died 1550), a Safavid glossator of the writings of the astronomers of Maragha, about whom Saliba writes: “Through his clear perception of the role of mathematics in the description of natural phenomena, this astronomer succeeded in taking the Hay'a tradition to heights unequaled elsewhere, on a mathematical level as well as on an astronomical level. The search for mathematical models capable of supplanting that of Ptolemy, and the examination of the works of his predecessors all in search of a unified mathematical model capable of accounting for all physical phenomena, made him conclude that all mathematical modeling has not has no physical meaning in itself, and that it is only one language among others to describe physical reality. He also convinced himself that the phenomena described by the Ptolemaic models do not admit of a unique mathematical solution subject to the same constraints; that on the contrary there are several mathematical models capable of accounting for Ptolemy's observations; that they arrive at the same predictions on the critical points that Ptolemy had retained to construct his own models (and that thus they do not give a better account of the observations than Ptolemy) while respecting the conditions imposed by Aristotelian cosmology, admitted by the authors of the hay'a tradition5. » He showed the significant influence that Arab astronomy would exert on Indian, Chinese and European astronomy6, studied the work of Alhazen and his challenge to develop a model of spheres that would avoid the errors of Ptolemy's model that he had noted7 as well as the contributions of Ali Qushji to the planetary model of al-Tusi and to the model of the orbit of Mercury8.

The major star observation program undertaken in Damascus and Baghdad under the leadership of Al-Ma'mūn (813-833) made it possible to obtain better measurements, thanks to new observation methods9, than the results of Ptolemy, allowing a work of theoretical recovery of the latter. And more generally, scientists of the time questioned the validity of the models proposed by the Ancients. Thus a document attributed to the eldest of the brothers Banou Moussa mathematically demonstrated the non-existence of a ninth orb supposed to explain the diurnal movement of the stars10.

He studied the similarities between the Arab models and those of Copernicus, particularly for the Moon11. The models proposed mainly in the eastern part of the Arab world, in what is called the Maragha school, with the astronomers Nasir ad-Din at-Tusi and Ibn al-Shatir for example, retain the principle of a rotating sun around the earth12. However, they put in place tools (al-Tusi couple, ibn al-Shatir model) that we find in the work of Copernicus13,14.

Nasir al-Din al-Tusi shows geometrically that it was possible to generate a rectilinear movement only from circular movements thanks to the hypocycloid15.

Saliba was also interested in the Persian and Muslim astronomer Banu Musa, who was the first to refute the Aristotelian conception of the world in the 9th century by asserting that celestial bodies and celestial spheres obey the same physical laws as the earth16. He studied the work of Ali Quchtchi, who participated in the development of the Sultanian Tables and developed a planetary model for the trajectory of Mercury using the tools put in place by Muʾayyad al-Dīn al-ʿUrḍī (en)17.

Awards and honors [ edit ] Saliba has won the History of Science Prize given by the Third World Academy of Science in 1993, and the History of Astronomy Prize in 1996 from the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Science.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 2005 he was named as a Senior Distinguished Scholar at the John W. Kluge Center.

[ 6 ] Columbia Unbecoming [ edit ] Saliba was one of the professors named in the 2004 Columbia Unbecoming controversy as allegedly being intimidating or unfair to students with pro-Israel views. A student of his, Lindsay Shrier, claimed that he told her that those with green eyes (like herself) are not racial "Semites", and have no valid national claim to Middle Eastern lands.

[ 7 ] Saliba claims that this is a fabrication.

[ 8 ] Saliba rejected the accusation and published a rebuttal in Columbia Spectator on 3 November 2004 to that effect.

[ 8 ] [ 7 ] Bibliography [ edit ] "The Pebble That Became A Fist-Full Rock: On the Continued Importance of Edward Said's Orientalism" . Retrieved September 28, 2012 .

Islamic Science and the Making of the European Renaissance , MIT Press (April 1, 2007) ISBN 0-262-19557-7 (hardcover, and in paperback as of 2011. The book has since been translated into Turkish, Arabic, Urdu and Bahasa (Indonesian) (With Linda Komaroff, Catherine Hess) The Arts of Fire : Islamic Influences on Glass and Ceramics of the Italian Renaissance , Getty Trust Publications: J. Paul Getty Museum (June 10, 2004), ISBN 0-89236-757-1 (hardcover) "The Ash'arites and the Science of the Stars" in Richard G. Hovannisian and George Sabagh (eds.), Religion and Culture in Medieval Islam (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 79-92.

A History of Arabic Astronomy: Planetary Theories During the Golden Age of Islam , New York, University Press; (1994) ISBN 0-8147-7962-X (hardcover); (reissue edition: November 1995) ISBN 0-8147-8023-7 (paperback) "The Astronomical Work of Mu’ayyad al-Din al-’Urdi (died 1266): A Thirteenth Century Reform of Ptolemaic Astronomy", Markaz dirasat al-Wahda al-'Arabiya, Beirut , 1990, 1995 "The Crisis of the Abbasid Caliphate" ( Tabari , Ta'rikh Al-Rusul Wa'l-Muluk ; annotated translation), State University of New York Press (November 1985) ISBN 0-87395-883-7 (Hardcover), ISBN 0-7914-0627-X (paperback) (With Sharon Gibbs) Planispheric astrolabes from the National Museum of American History , Smithsonian Institution Press, (1984) ISBN 0-608-11955-5 (paperback) References [ edit ] ^ "AUB Launches its Farouk Jabre Center for Arabic and Islamic Science and Philosophy" . American University of Beirut . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ "George Saliba" . Columbia University. September 28, 2018 . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ "An Interview with Professor George Saliba" . Muslim Heritage Foundation. May 27, 2009 . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ "Islamic Science and the Making of the European Renaissance" . MIT Press . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ Diane Greenberg.

"George Saliba to Give a Talk at Brookhaven Lab on Science in Renaissance Europe, August 19" . Brookhaven National Laboratory . Retrieved June 2, 2018 .

^ a b Helen Dalrymple.

"George Saliba Named Senior Distinguished Scholar at the John W. Kluge Center" . Library of Congress . Retrieved June 2, 2018 .

^ a b "The `Silent Jews' speak out" by Shoshana Kordova Haaretz , February 8, 2005 ^ a b Rebutting a "Misguided Political Project" by George Saliba Columbia Spectator (November 3, 2004) External links [ edit ] George Saliba's home page at columbia.edu Daily Times report on seminar at Pakistan's Government College University [ dead link ] Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Saliba&oldid=1306497169 " Categories : 1939 births Living people 20th-century American historians 21st-century American historians American Islamic studies scholars Columbia University faculty American historians of science Lebanese emigrants to the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from September 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2020 Articles with hCards BLP articles lacking sources from October 2023 All BLP articles lacking sources All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Saliba 7 languages Add topic

