Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Economic Sophisms and the candlemakers' petition 2.2 The Law (1850) 2.3 "What is Seen and What is Not Seen" 2.4 Debate with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 3 Views 4 Bastiat's tomb 5 Books 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Frédéric Bastiat 47 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული La .lojban.

Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French classical liberal theorist and assembly member (1801–1850) "Bastiat" redirects here. For the rugby union player, see Jean-Pierre Bastiat .

Frédéric Bastiat Member of the National Assembly for Landes In office 23 April 1848 – 24 December 1850 Personal details Born Claude-Frédéric Bastiat ( 1801-06-30 ) 30 June 1801 Bayonne , France Died 24 December 1850 (1850-12-24) (aged 49) Rome , Papal States Resting place San Luigi dei Francesi , Rome Academic background Influences Cobden , Dunoyer , Say , Hume , Gibbon , Voltaire , Rousseau , Smith , Turgot Academic work School or tradition French liberal school Notable ideas Legal plunder Parable of the broken window The Law Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Claude-Frédéric Bastiat ( / b ɑː s t i ˈ ɑː / ; French: [klod fʁedeʁik bastja] ; 30 June 1801 – 24 December 1850) was a French economist, writer and prominent member of the French liberal school .

[ 1 ] A member of the French National Assembly , Bastiat developed the economic concept of opportunity cost and introduced the parable of the broken window .

[ 2 ] He was described as "the most brilliant economic journalist who ever lived" by economic theorist Joseph Schumpeter .

[ 3 ] As an advocate of classical economics and the economics of Adam Smith , his views favored a free market and influenced the Austrian School .

[ 4 ] He is best known for his book The Law , where he argued that law must protect rights such as private property, not "plunder" others' property.

Biography [ edit ] Drawing of Bastiat Bastiat was born on 29 June 1801 in Bayonne , Aquitaine , a port town in the south of France on the Bay of Biscay . His father, Pierre Bastiat, was a prominent businessman in the town. His mother died in 1808 when Frédéric was seven years old.

[ 5 ] His father moved inland to the town of Mugron , with Frédéric following soon afterward. The Bastiat estate in Mugron had been acquired during the French Revolution and had previously belonged to the Marquis of Poyanne. Pierre Bastiat died in 1810, leaving Frédéric an orphan. He was fostered by his paternal grandfather and his unmarried aunt Justine Bastiat. He attended a school in Bayonne, but his aunt thought poorly of it and so enrolled him in the school Saint-Sever . At age 17, he left school at Sorèze to work for his uncle in his family's export business. It was the same firm where his father had been a partner.

[ 5 ] Bastiat began to develop an intellectual interest as he no longer wished to work with his uncle and desired to go to Paris for formal studies. This hope was not realized as his grandfather was in poor health and wished to go to the Mugron estate. Bastiat accompanied him and cared for him. The next year when Bastiat was 24, his grandfather died, leaving him the family estate, thereby providing him with the means to further his theoretical inquiries.

[ 5 ] Bastiat developed intellectual interests in several areas including philosophy, history, politics, religion, travel, poetry, political economy and biography. After the middle-class Revolution of 1830 , Bastiat became politically active and was elected justice of the peace of Mugron in 1831 and to the Council General (county-level assembly) of Landes in 1832. Bastiat was elected to the national legislative assembly after the French Revolution of 1848 .

[ 4 ] His public career as an economist began only in 1844, when his first article was published in the Journal des économistes during October of that year and it was ended by his untimely death in 1850. Bastiat contracted tuberculosis , probably during his tours throughout France to promote his ideas and that illness eventually prevented him from making further speeches (particularly at the legislative assembly to which he was elected in 1848 and 1849) and ended his life. In The Law , he wrote: "Until the day of my death, I shall proclaim this principle with all the force of my lungs (which alas! is all too inadequate)".

[ 5 ] This last line is understood by translators to be a reference to the effects of his tuberculosis. During the autumn of 1850, he was sent to Italy by his doctors, and he first traveled to Pisa, then to Rome. On 24 December 1850, Bastiat called those with him to approach his bed and murmured twice the words "the truth" before he died at the age of 49.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Bust of Bastiat in Mugron Bastiat was the author of many works on economics and political economy, generally characterized by their clear organization, forceful argumentation and acerbic wit. Economist Murray Rothbard wrote that "Bastiat was indeed a lucid and superb writer, whose brilliant and witty essays and fables to this day are remarkable and devastating demolitions of protectionism and of all forms of government subsidy and control. He was a truly scintillating advocate of an unrestricted free market ".

[ 4 ] However, Bastiat himself declared that subsidy should be available, albeit limited under extraordinary circumstances, saying the following: "Under extraordinary circumstances, for urgent cases, the State should set aside some resources to assist certain unfortunate people, to help them adjust to changing conditions".

[ 6 ] Among his better-known works is Economic Sophisms , [ 7 ] a series of essays (originally published in the Journal des économistes ) which contain a defence of free trade . Bastiat wrote the work while living in England to advise the shapers of the French Republic on perils to avoid.

Economic Sophisms was translated and adapted for an American readership in 1867 by the economist and historian of money Alexander del Mar , writing under the pseudonym Emile Walter.

[ 8 ] Economic Sophisms and the candlemakers' petition [ edit ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Contained within Economic Sophisms is the satirical parable known as the candlemakers' petition in which candlemakers and tallow producers lobby the Chamber of Deputies of the French July Monarchy (1830–1848) to block out the Sun to prevent its unfair competition with their products.

[ 9 ] Also included in the Sophisms is a facetious petition to the king asking for a law forbidding the usage of everyone's right hand, based on a presumption by some of his contemporaries that more difficulty means more work and more work means more wealth.

[ 10 ] The Law (1850) [ edit ] Bastiat's most famous work is The Law , [ 11 ] originally published as a pamphlet in 1850. It defines a just system of laws and then demonstrates how such law facilitates a free society. In The Law , Bastiat wrote that everyone has a right to protect "his person, his liberty, and his property". The state should be only a "substitution of a common force for individual forces" to defend this right. According to Bastiat, justice (meaning defense of one's life, liberty and property ) has precise limits, but if government power extends further into philanthropic endeavors, then government becomes so limitless that it can grow endlessly. The resulting statism is "based on this triple hypothesis: the total inertness of mankind, the omnipotence of the law, and the infallibility of the legislator". The public then becomes socially engineered by the legislator and must bend to the legislators' will "like the clay to the potter", saying: Socialism, like the ancient ideas from which it springs, confuses the distinction between government and society. As a result of this, every time we object to a thing being done by government, the socialists conclude that we object to its being done at all. We disapprove of state education. Then the socialists say that we are opposed to any education. We object to a state religion. Then the socialists say that we want no religion at all. We object to a state-enforced equality. Then they say that we are against equality. And so on, and so on. It is as if the socialists were to accuse us of not wanting persons to eat because we do not want the state to raise grain.
I do not dispute their right to invent social combinations, to advertise them, to advocate them, and to try them upon themselves, at their own expense and risk. But I do dispute their right to impose these plans upon us by law – by force – and to compel us to pay for them with our taxes.

Bastiat posits that the law becomes perverted when it punishes one's right to self-defense (of his life, liberty and property) in favor of another's right to legalized plunder which he defines as "if the law takes from some persons what belongs to them and gives it to other persons to whom it does not belong. See if the law benefits one citizen at the expense of another by doing what the citizen himself cannot do without committing a crime" in which he includes the tax support of "protective tariffs, subsidies, guaranteed profits, guaranteed jobs, relief and welfare schemes, public education, progressive taxation, free credit, and public works". According to Bastiat, legal plunder can be committed in "an infinite number of ways. Thus, we have an infinite number of plans for organizing it: tariffs, protection, benefits, subsidies, encouragements, progressive taxation, public schools, guaranteed jobs, guaranteed profits, minimum wages, a right to relief, a right to the tools of labor, free credit, and so on, and so on. All these plans as a whole — with their common aim of legal plunder — constitute socialism". Bastiat also made the following humorous point: "If the natural tendencies of mankind are so bad that it is not safe to permit people to be free, how is it that the tendencies of these organizers are always good? Do not the legislators and their appointed agents also belong to the human race? Or do they believe that they themselves are made of a finer clay than the rest of mankind?" [ 12 ] "What is Seen and What is Not Seen" [ edit ] In his 1850 essay "Ce qu'on voit et ce qu'on ne voit pas" (" What is seen and what is not seen "), Bastiat introduced through the parable of the broken window the concept of opportunity cost in all but name. This term was not coined until over sixty years after his death by Friedrich von Wieser in 1914.

Debate with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon [ edit ] Bastiat also famously engaged in a debate between 1849 and 1850 with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon about the legitimacy of interest.

[ 13 ] As Robert Leroux argued, Bastiat had the conviction that Proudhon's anti-interest doctrine "was the complete antithesis of any serious approach".

[ 14 ] Proudhon famously lost his temper and resorted to  personal attacks: "Your intelligence is asleep, or rather it has never been awake. You are a man for whom logic does not exist. You do not hear anything, you do not understand anything. You are without philosophy, without science, without humanity. Your ability to reason, like your ability to pay attention and make comparisons is zero. Scientifically, Mr. Bastiat, you are a dead man." [ 15 ] Views [ edit ] Bastiat asserted that the sole purpose of government is to protect the right of an individual to life, liberty and property and that it is dangerous and morally wrong for government to interfere with an individual's other personal matters. From this, Bastiat concluded that the law cannot defend life, liberty and property if it promotes legal or legalized plunder which he defined as using government force and laws to take something from one individual and give it to others (as opposed to a transfer of property via mutually agreed contracts without using fraud or violent threats against the other party, which Bastiat considered a legitimate transfer of property).

[ 16 ] In The Law , Bastiat explains that if the privileged classes or socialists use the government for legalized plunder, this will encourage the other socioeconomic class to also use legal plunder and that the correct response to the socialists is to cease all legal plunder. Bastiat also explains why his opinion is that the law cannot defend life, liberty and property if it promotes socialist policies. When used to obtain legalized plunder for any group, he says that the law is perverted against the only things (life, liberty and property) it is supposed to defend.

[ 16 ] Bastiat was a strong supporter of free trade who was inspired by and routinely corresponded with Richard Cobden and the English Anti-Corn Law League and worked with free-trade associations in France.

[ 4 ] Because of his emphasis on the mutual gains to be had from free exchange, on subjective value, and on the importance of deductive reasoning (as opposed to mathematical models) in deriving economic conclusions, Bastiat has been described by Mark Thornton , Thomas DiLorenzo and other economists as a forerunner of the Austrian School , with Thornton positing that through taking this position on the motivations of human action he demonstrates a pronounced "Austrian flavor." [ 17 ] Bastiat's tomb [ edit ] Bastiat's tomb in San Luigi dei Francesi , a Catholic church in Rome Bastiat died in Rome and is buried at San Luigi dei Francesi in the center of that city.

Books [ edit ] Bastiat, Frédéric (1848).

Propriété et loi, Justice et fraternité (in French). Paris: Guillaumin et C ie . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Bastiat, Frédéric (1849).

L'État, Maudit argent (in French). Paris: Guillaumin et C ie . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Bastiat, frédéric (1849).

Incomptabilités parlementaires (in French). Paris: Guillaumin et C ie . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Bastiat, Frédéric (1849).

Paix et liberté ou le budget républicain (in French). Paris: Guillaumin et C ie . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Bastiat, Frédéric (1849).

Protectionisme et communisme (in French). Paris: Guillaumin et C ie . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Bastiat, Frédéric (1983).

Oeuvres économiques . Libre échange (in French). Textes présentés par Florin Aftalion. Paris: PUF.

ISBN 978-2130378617 .

Bastiat, Frédéric (2005).

Sophismes économiques . Bibliothèque classique de la liberté (in French). Préface de Michel Leter. Paris: Les Belles Lettres.

ISBN 978-2251390383 .

Bastiat, Frédéric (2009).

Pamphlets . Bibliothèque classique de la liberté (in French). Préface de Michel Leter. Paris: Les Belles Lettres.

ISBN 978-2251390499 .

See also [ edit ] Economics portal Liberalism portal Libertarianism portal Age of Enlightenment Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune Bastiat Prize Harmonies of Political Economy Hippolyte Castille List of liberal theorists Physiocrats References [ edit ] ^ "Frederic Bastiat" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 21 October 2019 .

^ Initiated in 1820 at "La Zélée" lodge in Bayonne (La Franc-maçonnerie à Bayonne, 1980).

^ "Frederic Bastiat" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

^ a b c d Thornton, Mark (11 April 2011) "Why Bastiat Is Still Great" .

Mises Institute . Retrieved 1 August 2019.

^ a b c d e Roche III, George Charles (1971).

Frédéric Bastiat: A Man Alone . New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House.

ISBN 978-0870001161 .

^ "Justice and fraternity" (15 June 1848).

Journal des Économistes . p. 313.

^ Bastiat, Frédéric [1845] (1996).

"Economic Sophisms" . Goddard, A. (trans.). Irvington-on-Hudson, New York: The Foundation for Economic Education . Retrieved 12 December 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Walter, Emile (del Mar, Alexander, pseud.) (1867).

What is free trade? An adaptation of Frederick Bastiat's "Sophismes economiques" . New York: G.P. Putnam and Son, repr. Dodo Press.

ISBN 978-1409938125 .

^ Bastiat, Frédéric.

"Candlemakers' petition" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 October 2005 . Retrieved 12 December 2008 .

^ "Bastiat: Economic Sophisms, Series 2, Chapter 16" . Library of Economics and Liberty . Retrieved 3 March 2013 .

^ Frédéric Bastiat.

"The Law" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2015 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ "The Law" .

Bastiat.org .

^ "Bastiat-Proudhon Debate on Interest" . Praxeology.net . Retrieved 2 December 2008 .

^ Leroux, Robert. "Political Economy and Liberalism: The Economic Contribution of Frédéric Bastiat" Routledge, 2011, p. 118.

^ Roche, Charles George. "Frederic Bastiat: A Man Alone". Arlington House, 1971, p. 153.

^ a b Bastiat, Frédéric.

The Law . Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2007.

^ Thornton, Mark (June 2001).

"Bastiat as an Austrian Economist by Mark Thornton" .

Journal des Économistes et des Études Humaines .

11 (2).

doi : 10.2202/1145-6396.1025 .

S2CID 144928102 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bastiat's Legacy in Economics by Jorg Guido Hulsmann Frédéric Bastiat's Views on the Nature of Money by Mark Thornton Frédéric Bastiat: Two Hundred Years On by Joseph R. Stromberg Foville, A. de. "Bastiat" (1900). In Nouveau dictionnaire de l'économie politique . Deuxième édition. Tome premier.

A–H . Publié sous la direction de M. Léon Say et de M. Joseph Chailley, 170–172. Paris: Guillaumin et C ie (in French) .

Garello, Jacques (16 February 2011).

"Portrait : Bastiat (1801–1850)" .

La Nouvelle Lettre (in French) (1067): 8. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012 . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Henderson, David R.

, ed. (2008).

"Frédéric Bastiat (1801–1850)" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . p. 524–25.

ISBN 978-0865976665 .

Hülsmann, Guido (2008).

"Bastiat, Frédéric (1801–1850)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

Bastiat, Frédéric .

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

25– 27.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n16 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Leroux, Robert (2011).

Political Economy and Liberalism in France : The Contributions of Frédéric Bastiat . Routledge Studies in the History of Economics. London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1136795145 .

Roche, George Charles III (1971).

Frédéric Bastiat: A Man Alone . Architects of Freedom Series. New Rochelle: Arlington House . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

Russell, Dean (1969).

Frédéric Bastiat: Ideas and Influence . Irvington-on-Hudson: Foundation for Economic Education.

Un libéral : Frédéric Bastiat (in French). Toulouse: Presses de l'Institut d'Études Politiques de Toulouse. 1988.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Frédéric Bastiat Wikiquote has quotations related to Frédéric Bastiat .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Frédéric Bastiat ( category ) Works by Frédéric Bastiat at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Frédéric Bastiat at the Internet Archive Works by Frédéric Bastiat at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Bastiat.org publishes and indexes information about Bastiat Cercle Frédéric Bastiat publishes and indexes information about Bastiat The Bastiat Society "Frédéric Bastiat: Libertarian Challenger or Political Bargainer?" article by economist Brian Baugus on the development of Bastiat's thinking The Bastiat Collection Volume 1 , The Bastiat Collection Volume 2 – A collection of Bastiat works published by the Ludwig von Mises Institute Audio version of Russell's translation of The Law The Law – Frederic Bastiat (PDF English) "Frédéric Bastiat" .

JSTOR .

Bastiat's Essays on Political Economy (including The Law ) , in its entirety (free PDF download) Links to related articles v t e Classical economists Francis Hutcheson Bernard Mandeville David Hume Adam Smith Anders Chydenius Jean-Baptiste Say Thomas Malthus James Mill Francis Place David Ricardo Henry Thornton John Ramsay McCulloch James Maitland, 8th Earl of Lauderdale Jeremy Bentham Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi Johann Heinrich von Thünen John Stuart Mill Nassau William Senior Edward Gibbon Wakefield Frédéric Bastiat Thomas Tooke Robert Torrens v t e Austrian school economics Influences Classical economics French liberal school Frédéric Bastiat Jean-Baptiste Say Gustave de Molinari School of Salamanca Physiocracy Founders Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk Friedrich Hayek Carl Menger Ludwig von Mises Friedrich von Wieser Other contributors Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Peter Boettke Thomas DiLorenzo Frank Fetter Roger Garrison Gottfried Haberler Henry Hazlitt Robert Higgs Hans-Hermann Hoppe Steven Horwitz Jesús Huerta de Soto Israel Kirzner Ludwig Lachmann Peter Leeson Fritz Machlup Robert Murphy William H. Peterson David Prychitko Larry Reed George Reisman Richard Ritter von Strigl Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Mark Skousen Gerhard Tintner See also List of Austrian-school economists The Use of Knowledge in Society v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frédéric_Bastiat&oldid=1304785677 " Categories : 1801 births 1850 deaths 19th-century deaths from tuberculosis 19th-century French economists 19th-century French male writers Classical economists Critics of socialism French classical liberal economists French Liberal School French political writers French Roman Catholics Tuberculosis deaths in Italy Members of the 1848 Constituent Assembly Members of the National Legislative Assembly of the French Second Republic Moderate Republicans (France) People from Bayonne Politicians from Nouvelle-Aquitaine French male non-fiction writers Infectious disease deaths in Lazio Natural law ethicists Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox economist as a module Articles with excerpts Pages with French IPA CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 04:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frédéric Bastiat 47 languages Add topic

