Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Truck stop services 2 Australia 3 Germany and Austria 4 United Kingdom 5 United States 6 Corporatization 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Truck stop 2 languages Deutsch 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Refueling facility for truck drivers For the place where trucks are sometimes required to stop for weighing and inspections, see Weigh station .

For other uses, see Truck Stop (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Truck stop" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Husky truck stop in Calgary in Alberta , Canada A truck stop (known as a service station in the United Kingdom , [ 1 ] a travel center by major chains in the United States and a roadhouse in rural Australia) is a commercial facility which provides refueling, rest ( parking ), and food and other services to motorists and truck drivers. Truck stops are usually located on or near a busy road .

[ 2 ] Truck stop services [ edit ] English signs at truck stop in Laxå , Sweden.

Neste 's petrol station for trucks and buses in Helsinki , Finland.

Truck stop on route between Leh and Key Monastery .

Smaller truck stops might consist of only a parking area, a fueling station, and perhaps a diner restaurant , or transport café ( U.K. English ).

[ 3 ] Larger truck stops might have convenience stores of various sizes, showers , a small video arcade , and a TV/movie theater (usually just a projector with an attached DVD player). The largest truck stops, like Iowa 80 (the largest in the world), [ 4 ] might have several independent businesses operating under one roof, catering to a wide range of travelers' needs, and might have several major and minor fast-food chains operating a small food court. Larger truck stops also tend to have full-service maintenance facilities for heavy trucks, as well as vehicle wash services that can handle anything from passenger vehicles to large trucks. Some truck stops operate motels or have them adjacent. Most truck stops now offer separate fueling areas, often with dedicated entrances, for standard-sized passenger vehicles. The truck refueling area almost always offers dual pumps, one on each side, so large trucks can fill both tanks at once. (The second pump is referred to as the "slave pump" or "satellite pump.") The fuel islands at many truck stops can get very crowded. Most trucking companies have accounts with one or two truck stop chains and, after negotiating a specific price for diesel, require their drivers to fuel exclusively at supported locations. Truck stops near a large city, or on the east or west coasts, suffer from the most congestion at their fuel islands.

The retail stores in large truck stops offer a large selection of 12-volt DC products, such as coffee makers, combo television units , toaster ovens , and frying pans primarily targeted towards truck drivers, who often spend extended periods of time on the road. Such shops generally offer a wide selection of maps, road atlases , truck stop and freeway exit guides, truck accessories (such as CB radio equipment and hazmat placards), plus entertainment media such as movies, video games, music, and audiobooks . Increasingly, as interstate truck drivers have become a large market for satellite radio , these retail stores also sell various satellite radio receivers for both XM and Sirius XM as well as subscriptions to those services. Kiosks run by cellular phone providers are also common.

Most long-haul tractors have sleeping berths, and many truck drivers keep their diesel engines running for heating or cooling for the sake of comfort. Because idling diesel engines make considerable noise (and are a source of pollution) they are often banned from such use near residential areas.  Truck stops (along with public rest stops ) are the main places where truck drivers may rest peacefully, as required by regulations. Modern innovations, such as truck heaters and auxiliary power units, are becoming more common, and some truck stops now provide power, air conditioning, and communications through systems such as IdleAir . Many truck stops used to have load board monitors for truck drivers to find real time information on loads, jobs, weather and news. However, DAT Solutions , the largest provider of load boards, [ 5 ] removed its monitors from thousands of truck stops and moved all its services online and to its load board mobile apps. Most chain truck stops also have WLAN Internet access in their parking areas.

Idle reduction —reducing the amount of fuel consumed by truck fleets during idling—is an ongoing economical and environmental effort.

[ 6 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia a roadhouse is a filling station (service station) on a major intercity route. A roadhouse sells fuel and provides maintenance and repairs for cars, but it also has an attached restaurant (usually a café or diner) to sell and serve hot food to travelers. Roadhouses usually also serve as truck stops, providing space for parking of semi-trailer trucks and buses, as well as catering to travelers in private cars. In remote areas such as the Nullarbor Plain , a roadhouse also offers motel-style accommodation and camping facilities.

Approximately two-thirds of truck stops are independently owned with the remainder being owned and run by ' Big Oil ' brands such as Caltex , BP and Shell .

[ 7 ] Germany and Austria [ edit ] Historic German Autohof sign from 1947 The Autohof sign in Germany since 2001 Restaurant at the Autohof Osnabrück In Germany and some parts of Austria there were newer official developments to the existing highway service station. The often state owned service stations on the highway were insufficient to deal with the growing number of lorries and the necessary stops for lorry drivers to rest. Since 2001, the traffic regulations of Germany Straßenverkehrsordnung include a road sign, Autohof , literally car yard or automobile court .

An Autohof is run by a private company, but the government provides the road signs at the highway, indicating an Autohof, if the facility: is no more remote from the highway than one kilometer can be approached by lorries provides at least 50 places for lorries, or at least 100 at higher frequented roads, those places must be apart from the places for other cars is open 24 hours a day, all year through offers gasoline service 24 hours a day offers meals from 11.00 to 22.00; other food for the rest of the day includes sanitary facilities for handicapped people and the proper needs of lorry drivers United Kingdom [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( May 2012 ) In the United Kingdom , the term "truck stop" is not in common use and the equivalent stops are motorway services .

[ citation needed ] There are relatively few areas on motorways just for trucks to stop at. Most designated rest areas are used by every sort of motor vehicle.

On A roads (major routes which are made to a lower standard compared to motorways), a truck stop may have no refueling facilities but simply offer a place for tired drivers to rest and/or get food and drink in a transport cafe . They may not be signposted well, if at all.

Notable truck stop locations in the UK include: Ashford ( M20 , J10) Rothwell ( A14 , J3 ) South Mimms ( M25 , J23/ A1(M) , J1) Ellesmere Port ( M56 , J10) Chippenham ( M4 , J17) United States [ edit ] Signage for Iowa 80 , the world's largest truck stop. It is located in Walcott, Iowa .

The truck stop originated in the United States in the 1940s as a reliable source of diesel fuel not commonly available at filling stations.

[ citation needed ] This, coupled with the growth of the Interstate Highway System , led to the creation of the professional haulage and truck stop industries. They generally consist of, at the very least, a diesel grade fueling station with bays wide and tall enough for modern tractor/trailer rigs, plus a large enough parking area to accommodate from five to over a hundred trucks and other heavy vehicles.  Truck stops should not be confused with rest areas or motorway service areas which cater mostly to cars and are often run by or leased from a government or tollway corporation.

In the United States in the late 1990s, Truckstops of America (T/A) changed its name to TravelCenters of America to reflect this marketing strategy.

[ citation needed ] There is no exact distinction between "truck stop" and the newer term "travel center", but some differences are size, proximity to interstate highways and major roads, the number of services, accessibility to automotive and RV travelers, and a certain extra emphasis on facility appearance.  Many truck stops chains such as Love's , Flying J and T/A also serve the recreational vehicle market. All the national chains have established customer loyalty programs to promote repeated patronage.

In Louisiana, truck stops that meet certain criteria are allowed to have on-site casinos that can operate up to 50 video poker gaming devices.  These truck stops are regulated by the Louisiana Gaming Enforcement Division and must maintain certain amenities to be eligible to keep the lucrative gaming devices operating.  Some of the amenities required are: having a certain number of acres of land, having a certain number of 18-wheeler parking spaces, having an on-site restaurant, and having trucker's supplies, showers, telephones, television lounge, scales, laundry services, and fuel.

Truck stops were often depicted in films and novels as being somewhat seedy places, frequented by aggressive bikers, petty criminals, and prostitutes (e.g. the " lot lizards " in the JT LeRoy novel Sarah ). This may be an outdated stereotype, as most modern truck stops are generally clean and safe, becoming a "home away from home" for many truck drivers. However, most truck stops reflect the social environment of their local area; consequently, one occasionally finds seedy truck stops in seedy areas. According to John McPhee 's book Uncommon Carriers , truck stops in rural areas are typically very safe and wholesome. However, as the distance to major cities decreases the incidence of prostitution, drug peddling etc. increases dramatically. The Vince Lombardi service area on the New Jersey Turnpike near New York City has the most rampant prostitution.

[ 8 ] Corporatization [ edit ] The economics of truck stops have driven most of the small, post-war operations out of business and they have been replaced with large corporate chains or franchises .

[ citation needed ] Truck drivers are a captive market , because the trucks' size and local regulations place severe restrictions on where a truck driver can park.  The initial investment in land, permits, equipment and maintenance requirements are large and growing: accordingly, some large truck stop chains have begun to cater to a wider range of the traveling public by combining trucks stops and traditional gas stations.

See also [ edit ] Caravanserai Dhaba Greasy spoon Iowa 80 – the world's largest truck stop Love's Travel Stops & Country Stores Pilot Flying J Rest area Road Ranger References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of 'service station' " .

collinsdictionary.com .

^ "Truck stop Definition & Meaning - Merriam-Webster" .

Merriam-Webster . April 11, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 20, 2020 . Retrieved April 11, 2022 .

^ "transport café" .

Cambridge Dictionary . Cambridge University Press . Retrieved June 28, 2025 .

^ Webley, Kayla (July 28, 2010).

"Top 50 American Roadside Attractions - TIME" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved November 1, 2017 .

^ "The Five Best Load Boards Every Trucker Should Know | RTS Financial" .

www.rtsfinancial.com . Retrieved August 30, 2018 .

^ "Idle Reduction through Advanced Travel Center Electrification® (ATE)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 26, 2012.

^ "The inconvenient truth of fuel retailing in Australia" .

^ McPhee, John (2007). Farrar Straus and Giroux (ed.).

Uncommon Carriers . Macmillan.

ISBN 9780374280390 .

p.87 External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Truck stops .

Media related to Truck stops at Wikimedia Commons v t e Trucking industry in the United States Regulated by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration Economy of the United States Regulations Commercial driver's license Electronic on-board recorder Federal Bridge Gross Weight Formula Hours of service International Registration Plan Motor Carrier Act of 1980 Motor carrier safety rating National Network Manufacturers Truck manufacturers AM General American LaFrance Autocar Bering Bremach Brockway BYD Auto Caterpillar Inc.

Chase Chevrolet CCC CNH Industrial Dart Diamond Reo Diamond T Reo Dina Dodge Freightliner Ford GMC Hayes Fuso Hino Hyundai Motor America Hyzon International Isuzu Kenworth Marmon-Herrington Mercedes-Benz Moreland Mack Nissan Oshkosh Peterbilt Ram Trucks Selden Schacht Shyft Group Smith Spartan Sterling Tesla Tiger Truck Toyota Traffic UD Trucks VIA Volvo Ward LaFrance Western Star White Workhorse Group Engine manufacturers Caterpillar Inc.

Cummins Detroit Diesel Mack MaxxForce Mercedes-Benz Paccar Volvo Trailer manufacturers Daseke Fontaine Fruehauf Great Dane Hyundai Translead Lufkin Trailers Utility Trailer Manufacturing Company Vanguard Wabash National Wilson Motor carriers Truckload carriers Averitt Express Amazon Logistics Celadon CFI Covenant CRST FFE Transportation J. B. Hunt Knight-Swift Landstar System PAM Transport Patriot Transportation Roehl Transport Schneider Swift Werner Western Express WTI Transport Less than truckload (LTL) ABF Averitt Express Con-way Freight Consolidated Freightways Estes Express Lines FedEx New England Motor Freight Old Dominion Freight Line R+L Carriers Saia Southeastern TForce Freight XPO, Inc.

Yellow Corporation Third-party logistics providers Access America Transport American Lamprecht Transport C.H. Robinson Freightquote CaseStack Ryder Total Quality Logistics Trailer Bridge Trucker Path XPO, Inc.

National parcel carriers DHL FedEx UPS United States Postal Service Regional parcel carriers GLS LaserShip LSO OnTrac Moving companies Allied Atlas Bekins Gentle Giant Moving Company Global Interstate Mayflower National North American PODS Two Men and a Truck United Wheaton Truck stops BETO Junction Bowlin Travel Centers Dixie Travel Plaza Iowa 80 Love's Pilot Flying J Road Ranger Roady's TravelCenters of America Town Pump People Frederick W. Smith Iyman Faris J. Harwood Cochrane Jimmy Hoffa John Hunt Keith Jesperson Kelly Reno Reginald Denny Organizations American Moving & Storage Association American Trucking Associations DAT Solutions (Dial-A-Truck) International Brotherhood of Teamsters National Motor Freight Classification National Motor Freight Traffic Association National Private Truck Council SmartWay Transport Partnership Glossary of the American trucking industry Popular culture Film Black Dog Breakdown Breaker! Breaker!

Convoy Duel F.I.S.T.

High-Ballin' Joy Ride Maximum Overdrive Over The Top Smokey & the Bandit They Drive by Night The Gang's All Here The Great Smokey Roadblock Trucker White Line Fever Hoffa Television American Loggers American Trucker B. J. and the Bear Ice Road Truckers Movin' On Trick My Truck Music A Tombstone Every Mile Big Wheels in the Moonlight Bonnie Jean (Little Sister) Convoy Drivin' My Life Away East Bound and Down Eighteen Wheels and a Dozen Roses Giddyup Go Girl on the Billboard Movin' On Papa Loved Mama Phantom 309 Roll On Big Mama Roll On (Eighteen Wheeler) Six Days on the Road Teddy Bear The White Knight Radio Dale Sommers Red Eye ( Bill Mack ) Road Dog Trucking ( Dave Nemo ) Video games 18 Wheeler: American Pro Trucker 18 Wheels of Steel American Truck Simulator Rig 'n' Roll Big Rigs: Over the Road Racing Other Citizens band radio The Rolling Memorial Note: Defunct companies are shown in italics Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r99fl
Cached time: 20250812015034
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.442 seconds
Real time usage: 0.575 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2248/1000000
Revision size: 14635/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100251/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3778/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46805/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.266/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6689213/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  471.289      1 -total
 22.08%  104.082      1 Template:Reflist
 19.92%   93.903      4 Template:Navbox
 18.84%   88.797      1 Template:Trucking_industry_in_the_United_States
 16.95%   79.884      6 Template:Cite_web
 11.30%   53.236      2 Template:Ambox
 11.26%   53.066      1 Template:Short_description
 11.09%   52.254      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.14%   43.097      1 Template:Wikivoyage
  8.91%   42.013      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1261461:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015034 and revision id 1301510304. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Truck_stop&oldid=1301510304 " Categories : Truck stops Restaurants by type Road transport Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from October 2024 Articles to be expanded from May 2012 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 06:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Truck stop 2 languages Add topic

