Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 Interaction 3 Gallery 4 History 5 Applications 6 Hazards 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Plasma globe 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Decorative electrical device Not to be confused with Plasma lamp .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Plasma globe" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A plasma ball with filaments extending between the inner and outer spheres A plasma ball , plasma globe , or plasma lamp is a clear glass container filled with noble gases , usually a mixture of neon , krypton , and xenon , that has a high-voltage electrode in the center of the container. When voltage is applied, a plasma is formed within the container.

Plasma filaments extend from the inner electrode to the outer glass insulator, giving the appearance of multiple constant beams of colored light. Plasma balls were popular as novelty items in the 1980s.

[ 1 ] The plasma lamp was invented by Nikola Tesla , during his experimentation with high-frequency currents in an evacuated glass tube for the purpose of studying high voltage phenomena.

[ 2 ] Tesla called his invention an " inert gas discharge tube ".

[ 3 ] The modern plasma lamp design was developed by James Falk and MIT student Bill Parker .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] A crackle tube is a related device filled with phosphor-coated beads.

Construction [ edit ] Although many variations exist, a plasma ball is usually a clear glass sphere filled with a mixture of various gases (most commonly neon , sometimes with other noble gases such as argon , xenon and krypton ) at nearly atmospheric pressure.

Plasma balls are driven by high-frequency (approximately 35 kHz ) alternating current at 2–5 kV .

[ 1 ] The drive circuit is essentially a specialized power inverter , in which current from a lower-voltage DC supply powers a high-frequency electronic oscillator circuit whose output is stepped up by a high-frequency, high-voltage transformer , for example a miniature Tesla coil or a flyback transformer . The radio-frequency energy from the transformer is transmitted into the gas within the ball through an electrode at its center. Additionally, some designs utilize the ball as a resonant cavity, which provides positive feedback to the drive transistor through the transformer. A much smaller hollow glass orb can also serve as an electrode when it is filled with metal wool or a conducting fluid that is in communication with the transformer output. In this case, the radio-frequency energy is admitted into the larger space by capacitive coupling right through the glass.

Plasma filaments extend from the inner electrode to the outer glass insulator, giving the appearance of moving tendrils of colored light within the volume of the ball (see corona discharge and electric glow discharge ) . If a hand is placed close to the ball it produces a faint smell of ozone , as the gas is produced by high voltage interaction with atmospheric oxygen.

Some balls have a control knob that varies the amount of power going to the center electrode. At the very lowest setting that will light or "strike" the ball, a single tendril is made. This single tendril's plasma channel engages enough space to transmit this lowest striking energy to the outside world through the glass of the ball. As the power is increased, this single channel's capacity is overwhelmed and a second channel forms, then a third, and so on. The tendrils each compete for a footprint on the inner orb as well. The energies flowing through these are all of the same polarity, so they repel each other as like charges: a thin dark boundary surrounds each footprint on the inner electrode.

The ball is prepared by pumping out as much air as is practical. The ball is then backfilled with neon to a pressure similar to one atmosphere. If the radio-frequency power is turned on, if the ball is "struck" or "lit", now, the whole ball will glow a diffuse red. If a little argon is added, the filaments will form. If a very small amount of xenon is added, the "flowers" will bloom at the ends of the filaments.

[ citation needed ] The neon available for purchase for a neon-sign shop often comes in glass flasks at the pressure of a partial vacuum. These cannot be used to fill a ball with a useful mixture. Tanks of gas, each with its specific, proper, pressure regulator and fitting, are required: one for each of the gases involved.

Of the other noble gases, radon is radioactive , helium escapes through the glass relatively quickly, and krypton is expensive. Other gases such as mercury vapor can be used. Molecular gases may be dissociated by the plasma.

Interaction [ edit ] The effect of a conducting object (a hand) touching the plasma ball Placing a finger tip on the glass creates an attractive spot for the energy to flow because the conductive human body (having an internal resistance less than 1000 ohms) [ 5 ] is more easily polarized than the dielectric material around the electrode (i.e. the gas within the ball) providing an alternative discharge path having less resistance. Therefore, the capacity of the large conducting body to accept radio frequency energy is greater than that of the surrounding air. The energy available to the filaments of plasma within the ball will preferentially flow toward the better acceptor. This flow also causes a single filament, from the inner ball to the point of contact, to become brighter and thinner.

[ 1 ] The filament is brighter because there is more current flowing through it and into the human body, which has a capacitance of about 100 pF.

[ 6 ] The filament is thinner because the magnetic fields around it, augmented by the now-higher current flowing through it, cause a magnetohydrodynamic effect called pinch : the plasma channel's own magnetic fields create a force acting to compress the size of the plasma channel itself.

A "Tesla ball" at the NEMO science museum in Amsterdam Much of the movement of the filaments is due to heating of the gas around the filament. When gas along the filament is heated, it becomes more buoyant and rises, carrying the filament with it. If the filament is discharging into a fixed object (like a hand) on the side of the ball, it will begin to deform into a curved path between the central electrode and the object. When the distance between the electrode and the object becomes too great to maintain, the filament will break and a new filament will reform between the electrode and the hand (see also Jacob's Ladder , which exhibits a similar behavior) .

An electric current is produced within any conductive object near the orb. The glass acts as a dielectric in a capacitor formed between the ionized gas and the hand.

Gallery [ edit ] By adjusting the voltage, frequency, chemical composition and pressure of gas in the globe, many colorful effects can be achieved History [ edit ] Video of plasma ball In U.S. patent 0,514,170 ("Incandescent Electric Light", 1894 February 6), Nikola Tesla describes a plasma lamp. This patent is for one of the first high-intensity discharge lamps. Tesla used an incandescent-type lamp ball with a single internal conductive element and excited the element with high voltage currents from a Tesla coil , thus creating the brush discharge emanation. He gained patent protection on a particular form of the lamp in which a light-giving small body or button of refractory material is supported by a conductor entering a very highly exhausted ball or receiver. Tesla called this invention the single terminal lamp, or, later, the "Inert Gas Discharge Tube".

[ 3 ] The Groundstar style of plasma ball was created by James Falk and marketed to collectors and science museums in the 1970s and 1980s.

[ 1 ] Jerry Pournelle in 1984 praised Orb Corporation's Omnisphere as "the most fabulous object in the entire world" and "magnificent ... a new kind of art object", stating "you can't buy mine for any price".

[ 7 ] The technology needed to formulate gas mixtures used in today's plasma spheres was not available to Tesla.

[ citation needed ] Modern lamps typically use combinations of xenon , krypton and neon , although other gases can be used.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] These gas mixtures, along with different glass shapes and integrated-circuit-driven electronics, create the vivid colors, range of motions, and complex patterns seen in today's plasma spheres.

Applications [ edit ] Plasma balls are mainly used as curiosities or toys for their unique lighting effects and the "tricks" that can be performed on them by users moving their hands around them. They might also form part of a school's laboratory equipment for demonstration purposes. They are not usually employed for general lighting. However, in recent years, some novelty stores have begun selling miniature plasma ball nightlights that can be mounted on a standard light socket.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Plasma balls can be used for experimenting with high voltages . If a conductive plate or wire coil is placed on the ball, capacitive coupling can transfer enough voltage to the plate or coil to produce a small arc or energize a high voltage load . This is possible because the plasma inside the ball and the conductor outside it act as plates of a capacitor, with the glass in between as a dielectric. A step-down transformer connected between the plate and the ball's electrode can produce lower-voltage, higher-current radio frequency output. Careful earth grounding is essential to prevent injury or damage to equipment.

Hazards [ edit ] Bringing conductive materials or electronic devices close to a plasma ball may cause the glass to become hot. The high voltage radio frequency energy coupled to them from within the ball may cause a mild electric shock to the person touching, even through a protective glass casing. The radio frequency field produced by plasma balls can interfere with the operation of touchpads used on laptop computers , digital audio players , cell phones , and other similar devices.

[ 1 ] Some types of plasma ball can radiate sufficient radio frequency interference (RFI) to interfere with cordless telephones and Wi-Fi devices several feet or some meters away.

If an electrical conductor touches the outside of the ball, capacitive coupling can induce enough potential on it to produce a small arc . This is possible because the ball's glass acts as a capacitor dielectric : the inside of the lamp acts as one plate, and the conductive object on the outside acts as the opposite capacitor plate.

[ 3 ] This is a dangerous action that can damage the ball or other electronic devices, and presents a fire ignition hazard.

[ 1 ] Perceptible amounts of ozone can be formed on the surface of a plasma ball. Many people can detect ozone at concentrations of 0.01–0.1 ppm , which is right below the lowest concentration at which ozone is considered harmful to health. Exposure of 0.1 to 1 ppm produces headaches, burning eyes, and irritation to the respiratory passages.

In July 2022, a spark from a plasma globe at the Questacon museum in Australia ignited the alcohol-based hand sanitiser that had been applied to a child's hands leaving them with serious burns.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Plasma lamp .

Fusor List of light sources Sulfur lamp Vacuum arc References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Gache, Gabriel (January 31, 2008).

"How do plasma lamps work?" .

Softpedia .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2009 . Retrieved November 16, 2009 .

^ Tesla, Nikola (1892).

"Experiments with Alternate Currents of High Potential and High Frequency" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2010 . Retrieved July 26, 2010 .

^ a b c d Barros, Sam (2002).

"PowerLabs Plasma Globes Page" .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2009 . Retrieved November 16, 2009 .

^ Ken Shulman (October 24, 2023).

"MIT News: Alumni profile - Making the invisible visible - Bill Parker '74, SM '93" .

^ Fish, Raymond M.; Geddes, Leslie A. (12 Oct 2009).

"Conduction of Electrical Current to and Through the Human Body: A Review" .

ePlasty .

9 : e44.

PMC 2763825 .

PMID 19907637 .

^ Chamberlin, Kent; Smith, Wayne; Chirgwin, Christopher; Appasani, Seshank; Rioux, Paul (Dec 2014).

"Analysis of the Charge Exchange Between the Human Body and Ground: Evaluation of "Earthing" From an Electrical Perspective" .

Journal of Chiropractic Medicine .

13 (4): 239– 246.

doi : 10.1016/j.jcm.2014.10.001 .

PMC 4241473 .

PMID 25435837 .

^ Pournelle, Jerry (April 1984).

"The Most Fabulous Object in the Entire World" .

BYTE . p. 57.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 March 2016 .

^ Plasma Ball Night Light Makes Us Nostalgic For Bed Wetting Archived 2017-09-08 at the Wayback Machine , gizmodo.com, 2007-11-27 ^ Plasma Night Light Archived 2010-12-01 at the Wayback Machine , 4physics.com, 2010-02-17 ^ Twyford, Lottie (2024-08-07).

"Federal government department charged after nine-year-old child's hands allegedly caught fire while touching plasma globe at Questacon" .

ABC News .

Canberra . Retrieved 2024-08-07 .

v t e Nikola Tesla Career and inventions Patents Plasma lamp plasma globe Polyphase system Alternating-current commutatorless induction motor Tesla Experimental Station Teleforce Telegeodynamics Tesla coil history Wireless power Resonant inductive coupling Radio control Tesla turbine Tesla's oscillator Tesla valve Three-phase electric power Wardenclyffe Tower Tesla Electric Light and Manufacturing Writings The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of Nikola Tesla Colorado Springs Notes, 1899–1900 " Fragments of Olympian Gossip " My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla Other War of the currents Westinghouse Electric World Wireless System In popular culture Related Nikola Tesla Museum Nikola Tesla Memorial Center Tesla Science Center at Wardenclyffe IEEE Nikola Tesla Award Tesla Satellite Award Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport New Yorker Hotel The Secret of Nikola Tesla (1980 film) Tesla – Lightning in His Hand (2003 opera) The Prestige (2006 film) Tower to the People (2015 documentary) Tesla (2016 film) The Tesla World Light (2017 film) The Current War (2019 film) " Nikola Tesla's Night of Terror " (2020 TV episode) Tesla (2020 film) Tesla: Man Out of Time Wizard: The Life and Times of Nikola Tesla The Man Who Invented the Twentieth Century Boat SI derived unit Lunar crater Asteroid Tesla, Inc.

v t e Lighting Concepts Accent lighting Color rendering index Color temperature Electric light Glare Light fixture Light pollution Hawaii Hong Kong Lightbulb socket Bi-pin lamp base Edison screw Luminous efficacy Task lighting Methods of generation Incandescent Regular Edison Halogen Nernst Luminescent Cathodoluminescent Electron-stimulated Chemiluminescent Electrochemiluminescence Electroluminescent field-induced polymer Fluorescent Fluorescent lamp ( compact ) Fluorescent induction Photoluminescent Laser headlamp Radioluminescence Solid-state LED lamp Combustion Acetylene/Carbide Argand Campfire Candle Carcel Diya Flare Gas Kerosene Petromax Lantern Fanous Paper Limelight Luchina Magnesium torch Oil Qulliq Rushlight Safety Tilley Torch Electric arc Carbon arc Klieg light Yablochkov candle Gas discharge Deuterium arc Neon Neon lamp Plasma Sulfur Xenon arc Xenon flash High-intensity discharge (HID) Mercury-vapor Metal-halide ceramic Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide (HMI) Hydrargyrum quartz iodide (HQI) Sodium vapor Stationary Reflector Ellipsoidal reflector Multifaceted reflector Parabolic aluminized reflector (PAR) Aviation obstruction Balanced-arm lamp Chandelier Emergency light Gas lighting Gooseneck lamp Intelligent street lighting Light tube Marine aid to navigation light Nightlight Neon lighting Pendant light Recessed light Sconce Street light in the US Torchère Track lighting Troffer Portable Bicycle lighting Flashlight Mechanically powered Tactical Glow stick Headlamp outdoor Lantern Laser pointer Navigation light Searchlight Solar lamp Automotive Automotive light bulb types Daytime running lamp Headlamp hidden high-intensity discharge sealed beam Rear position lights Reversing lights Safety reflector retroreflector Stop lights Turn signals trafficators Display Decorative Aroma lamp Blacklight Bubble light Christmas lights Crackle tube DJ lighting Electroluminescent wire Lava lamp Marquee Plasma globe Strobe light Theatrical Cinematic Floodlight Footlight Gobo Scoop Spotlight ellipsoidal reflector Stage lighting instrument Industrial Scientific Germicidal Grow light Infrared lamp Stroboscope Tanning Related topics Battlefield illumination Bioluminescence Laser Light art Luminous gemstones Signal lamp Sources Reflected Portals : 1980s Electronics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plasma_globe&oldid=1302560622 " Categories : 1980s fads and trends Gas discharge lamps Inventions by Nikola Tesla Novelty items Plasma technology and applications Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Pages using gallery without a media namespace prefix Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 05:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plasma globe 35 languages Add topic

