Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Components Toggle Components subsection 2.1 New Democracy 2.2 Mass line 2.3 Law of contradiction 2.4 Protracted people's war 3 Differences from Mao Zedong Thought 4 International influence Toggle International influence subsection 4.1 Latin America 4.1.1 Peru 4.2 Asia 4.2.1 India 4.2.2 Nepal 4.2.3 Philippines 4.3 United States 4.4 Europe 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Marxism–Leninism–Maoism 16 languages العربية বাংলা Cymraeg Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia مصرى Português Tagalog Türkçe Українська 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political ideology based on Marxism–Leninism and Maoism Not to be confused with Maoism .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Marxism–Leninism–Maoism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Poster produced by the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA showing Marx, Lenin, and Mao Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Marxism–Leninism–Maoism ( MLM ) is a term used by some communist groups to emphasize the significance of Maoism as a new stage in Marxist theory and practice. Adherents of Marxism–Leninism–Maoism claim it to be a unified, coherent higher stage of Marxism. The term is sometimes used interchangeably with "Maoism" and " Marxism–Leninism " [ 1 ] by adherents.

Marxism-Leninism-Maoism has been espoused by a number of insurgent groups in the global periphery , including the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) (which entered government in 2006 [ 2 ] ), the Communist Party of India (Maoist) , and the Communist Party of the Philippines . In developed countries (the " imperial core "), MLM has been promoted by the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA (RCP) in the 1990s, and more recently by smaller groups such as the American Red Guards and Norway's Tjen Folket (Serve the People). In the 1990s the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement (dominated by the RCP [ 3 ] ) served as an international coalition of MLM groups. More recently the International Communist League has served this function.

Origins [ edit ] Communist groups outside of China influenced by Maoism have existed since the Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s. In particular, the Canadian Maoist philosopher J. Moufawad-Paul identifies Charu Mazumdar , Joma Sison , and Ibrahim Kaypakkaya (and their associated revolutionary organizations, all of which were involved in "people's wars") as forebears of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.

[ 4 ] However, Moufawad-Paul argues that prior to 1988 organizations that were called "Maoist" subscribed to " Mao Zedong Thought " or versions of anti-revisionist Marxist-Leninism that privileged China over the USSR, rather than "Maoism-qua-Maoism." [ 5 ] He writes that Marxism-Leninism-Maoism (Maoism as "the third stage for revolutionary science") was first theorized by Shining Path in 1988 and further elaborated by the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement in 1993.

[ 6 ] Moufawad-Paul argues that this is the version of Maoism now " hegemonic " among Maoists worldwide.

[ 7 ] [ a ] The document "On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism," released by Shining Path's central committee in 1988, describes "Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principally Maoism" as "the third, newest and highest stage of the ideology of the international proletariat." [ 8 ] Similarly, RIM's statement "Long Live Marxism-Leninism-Maoism!", published in 1993, describes MLM as the movement's "guiding ideology." [ 9 ] Some other Maoists have expressed similar views, with Tjen Folket stating in 2019 that "Maoism was comprehensed [sic] only through the People’s War in Peru and that the PCP was the only Maoist Party in the world in 1982." [ 10 ] The anarchist author Elliott Liu similarly writes of "the 'Marxism-Leninism-Maoism' synthesis put forward by the Shining Path and the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement in the early 1990s." [ 11 ] Components [ edit ] New Democracy [ edit ] Main article: New Democracy The theory of New Democracy holds that the national-bourgeois in semi-feudal and semi-colonial countries has a dual character in that although it is an exploitative capitalist force, it can also but not always side with the proletariat against colonialism, imperialism and the comprador -bourgeoisie (whose existence is due to imperialism ).

[ citation needed ] Much like the New Economic Policy in Russia, New Democracy is conceived of as a necessary (but temporary) stage for the long-term development of socialism, or in this case for the construction and consolidation of socialism in the first place. It holds that the national-bourgeois in the New Democratic stage must always be firmly under the command of the proletariat and they must be firmly dispensed with as soon as the national situation allows (in other words, when the contradiction between feudalism and the masses is no longer the primary contradiction of the nation, or when the bourgeois-democratic revolution is at a sufficiently advanced stage) for an outright dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ citation needed ] Mass line [ edit ] Main article: Mass line Building on the theory of the vanguard party by Vladimir Lenin , the theory of the mass line outlines a strategy for the revolutionary leadership of the masses, consolidation of the dictatorship of the proletariat and strengthening of the party and for the building of socialism . The mass line can be summarized by the phrase "from the masses, to the masses".

Law of contradiction [ edit ] Main articles: Antagonistic contradiction and One Divides Into Two Marxist–Leninist–Maoists uphold Mao Zedong's philosophical works, particularly his work on dialectics in On Contradiction and on epistemology in On Practice .

Protracted people's war [ edit ] Graffito at Tsinghua University promoting Marxism–Leninism–Maoism: it translates as "Long live Chairman Mao ! Long live Chairman Gonzalo ! Long live the theory of protracted people's war !" People's war is a Maoist military strategy. A joint declaration published by a number of Marxist–Leninist–Maoist organizations ( Communist Party of India (Marxist–Leninist) People's War , Communist Party of the Philippines , Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist , and others) in 1998 stated that “the strategic line of protracted people’s war…is applicable in most countries of the world, where the peasant masses are in the majority among the basic producers” but is “not applicable in industrial capitalist countries” (where power is to be seized instead through "workers' uprisings").

[ 12 ] In contrast, Tjen Folket [ 10 ] and others have argued that people's war is "universally applicable" and represents "the only military strategy of the Proletariat." Differences from Mao Zedong Thought [ edit ] The three most notable differences between Marxism–Leninism–Maoism and Mao Zedong Thought are the following: [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Marxism–Leninism–Maoism is considered to be a higher stage of Marxism–Leninism by its followers, much like Marxism–Leninism is considered a higher stage of Marxism. However, Mao Zedong Thought is considered to just be Marxism–Leninism applied to the particularities of the Chinese Communist Revolution .

[ 16 ] Marxism–Leninism–Maoism is considered to be universally applicable whilst aspects of Mao Zedong Thought are generally not.

Marxism–Leninism–Maoism completely rejects the Three Worlds Theory of Mao Zedong Thought, considering it part of the right-wards turn in the Chinese Communist Party led by Deng Xiaoping near the end of Chairman Mao's life and a deviation from Marxist–Leninist theories of imperialism.

Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought only rejects Deng's application.

[ citation needed ] International influence [ edit ] Perhaps the most notable international was the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement (RIM). RIM was founded in 1984 and included such organizations as the Shining Path and the then-Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), eventually known as the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) . Today, the RIM appears to be defunct or near defunct. The magazine associated with the RIM, A World to Win , has not published an issue since 2006, though A World to Win News Service still publishes regularly on the Internet.

[ 17 ] In addition, many of the one-time RIM organizations have become increasingly critical of each other and this has resulted in many public splits.

[ citation needed ] Latin America [ edit ] Marxist-Leninist-Maoist groups in Latin America include the Communist Party of Brazil (Red Fraction) , the Communist Party of Chile (Red Fraction), the Communist Party of Ecuador–Red Sun , the Red Fraction of the Communist Party of Colombia and the Committee to Reconstitute the Communist Party of Mexico.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Peru [ edit ] In the 1980s and 1990s Shining Path , which claimed Marxism-Leninism-Maoism as its ideology, fought an insurgency against the Peruvian state that resulted in tens of thousands of deaths. This insurgency was largely defeated in the 1990s, although sporadic violence has continued into the present. Remnants of Shining Path are organized as the Militarized Communist Party of Peru .

Asia [ edit ] India [ edit ] The Communist Party of India (Maoist) is a Marxist–Leninist–Maoist political party which aims to overthrow the government of India .

[ 21 ] It was founded on 21 September 2004 through the merger of the Communist Party of India (Marxist–Leninist) People's War and the Maoist Communist Centre of India . The merger was announced to the public on 14 October the same year. In the merger, a provisional central committee was constituted, with the erstwhile people's war leader Muppala Lakshmana Rao (alias Ganapathi) as the general secretary. It is currently proscribed as a terrorist organization by the Indian government.

[ citation needed ] Nepal [ edit ] Mural in Kathmandu reading "Long Live Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and Prachanda Path" The Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) , a national communist party with a revolutionary background, is a follower of Marxism–Leninism–Maoism. However, the party has also developed its own guiding thought known as Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path which was developed taking Nepal's political, sociological and geographical constraints into consideration.

[ 22 ] The Communist Party of Nepal is another Marxist–Leninist–Maoist party in Nepal. It claims that the UCPN(M) is a revisionist organization and is continuing the people's war against the UCPN(M) government.

[ citation needed ] Philippines [ edit ] The Communist Party of the Philippines , which has been fighting an insurgency against the Philippine state since 1968, has espoused Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.

[ 23 ] In its earlier years, party documents referred to Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought rather than Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.

[ 24 ] United States [ edit ] Members of the Austin Red Guards marching in 2019, carrying pictures of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin, Mao, and Abimael Guzmán The Revolutionary Communist Party, USA (RCP) was previously a Marxist–Leninist–Maoist political party in the United States.

[ 25 ] The RCP participated in the founding conference of the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement on 12 March 1984. The RCP signed the "Declaration of the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement" [ 26 ] and supported the RIM's declaration "Long Live Marxism–Leninism–Maoism!" on 26 December 1993 which recognized "Marxism–Leninism–Maoism as the new, third and higher stage of Marxism". However, today the RCP uses the "New Synthesis of Communism" to describe its ideology, although they still call themselves Maoists.

[ 27 ] Because of this, the RCP has been accused of revisionism by several Marxist–Leninist–Maoist groups such as the Communist Party of India (Maoist) [ 28 ] and the Revolutionary Communist Party of Canada.

[ 29 ] Founded in 2015, the Red Guards espoused Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and had branches in several US cities.

[ 30 ] Europe [ edit ] MLM groups in Europe have included Tjen Folket in Norway and Youth Resistance in Germany.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Moufawad-Paul identifies the Maoist Third Worldism associated with the Maoist Internationalist Movement ) as another current within contemporary Maoism ( Continuity and Rupture , page 47 note 3).

References [ edit ] ^ For example: "General Declaration: Mao and People's War" .

Vanguard: An International Marxist-Leninist Publication : 8. Autumn 1999.

^ Nepal: The Maoist dream .

Al-Jazeera .

^ Cailmail, Benoît. “CPN-M’S INTERNATIONAL RElATIONS AFTER SEIZING POWER: THE END OF AN ERA?” Studies in Nepali History & Society, vol. 16, no. 2, Dec. 2011, pp. 207–27. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=sih&AN=82450096&site=eds-live&scope=site. Page 219 ^ Continuity and Rupture . Page 32 ^ Continuity and Rupture . Pages 5-6 ^ Continuity and Rupture . Page 12 ^ Continuity and Rupture . Page 13 ^ [ https://www.bannedthought.net/International/RIM/AWTW/1988-11/AWTW-1988-11-PCP-Docs.pdf "'On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism' & 'On Gonzalo Thought'
Documents from PCP First Congress."] A World To Win . 1988.

^ "Long Live Marxism-Leninism-Maoism!" . Revolutionary Internationalist Movement. 1993.

^ a b Kinera, Ard.

"Defend and apply the universality of Protracted People’s War!" .

Tjen Folket . June 6 2019.

^ Maoism and the Chinese Revolution: A Critical Introduction. 2016.

PM Press .

^ "General Declaration: Mao and People's War" .

Vanguard: An International Marxist-Leninist Publication : 7. Autumn 1999.

^ "The five main contributions of Maoism to communist thought" .

Nuovo PCI . Nuovo Partito Comunista Italiano. 18 October 2007 . Retrieved 6 December 2019 .

^ Brown, Nikolai (5 August 2011).

"What is Maoism?" .

Anti-imperialism . Revolutionary Anti-Imperialist Movement. Archived from the original on 15 June 2014 . Retrieved 6 December 2019 .

^ "Marxism-Leninism-Maoism Basic Course" .

Massalijn . Communist Party of India (Maoist). 11 June 2014 . Retrieved 6 December 2019 .

^ "Deng Xiaoping: Correctly Disseminate Mao Zedong Thought" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

I have discussed the dissemination of Mao Zedong Thought in Shandong and Tianjin and later discussed the subject with other comrades of the central leading bodies. Yesterday I mentioned this matter to Chairman Mao and he agreed with the following views.

^ " "Honour killings" – Who's to blame? A look at Iraqi Kurdistan" .

aworldtowin.org . 15 May 2007. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 November 2011 – via A World to Win News Service.

^ "International May Day Statement 2019" .

Dem Volke Dienen . 30 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2021.

^ "International May Day Report 2019" .

Dem Volke Dienen . 7 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2021.

^ "25th of March: 97th anniversary of the foundation of the Communist Party of Brazil" .

A Nova Democracia (in Portuguese). No. 207. 25 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2021.

Partido Comunista do Brasil na clandestinidade, desenvolve há 20 anos, liderado por sua Fração Vermelha, por meio de duras lutas de duas linhas, o processo de sua reconstituição enquanto verdadeiro e autêntico partido comunista marxista-leninista-maoista, partido comunista militarizado.

[The Communist Party of Brazil in hiding, has been developing for 20 years, led by its Red Fraction, through tough two-line struggles, the process of its reconstitution as a true and authentic Marxist-Leninist-Maoist communist party, a militarized communist party.] ^ "Maoists looking at armed overthrow of state by 2050" .

The Times of India . 6 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2012 . Retrieved 6 March 2010 .

^ Concerning Gonzalo Thought . Communist Party of Peru.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2021.

^ Communiqué of the Second Congress of the Communist Party of the Philippines .

National Democratic Front . March 29, 2017. Republished on the Marxists Internet Archive .

^ History Archive for Philippine Socialism . Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Avakian, Bob .

"Our Ideology is Marxism-Leninism-Maoism" .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2021.

^ "Declaration of the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement" (PDF) . March 1984.

^ "What is Bob Avakian's New Synthesis?" .

Revolution: The voice of the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA . No. 129. 18 May 2008.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2009.

^ "Against Avakianism" (PDF) .

NAXALBARI . No. 4. July 2013. pp.

6– 78.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 October 2021.

^ Revolutionary Communist Party (Canada) (30 April 2016).

"Proletarians of all countries, unite! Long live the 50th anniversary of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution! Long live the Proletarian World Revolution! Long live Maoism!" . Archived from the original on 7 May 2016.

^ Caterine, Joseph (17 February 2017).

"Red Guards and the Modern Face of Protest" .

Austin Chronicle . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Communist Party of India (Maoist) (2019).

Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Basic Course (5th ed.). Paris: Foreign Languages Press.

ISBN 9781539435761 .

Moufawad-Paul, Joshua (2016).

Continuity and Rupture: Philosophy in the Maoist Terrain . Winchester, UK: John Hunt Publishing.

ISBN 9781785354762 .

v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐8487bf5649‐vj9bv
Cached time: 20250813230429
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.645 seconds
Real time usage: 0.826 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4854/1000000
Revision size: 22485/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 235077/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20642/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121361/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.348/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8057024/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  610.264      1 -total
 27.12%  165.479      2 Template:Reflist
 20.20%  123.255      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.02%  109.978      1 Template:Maoism_sidebar
 14.97%   91.368      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.37%   69.362      2 Template:Cite_journal
 10.50%   64.071      1 Template:Short_description
  8.27%   50.468      3 Template:Ambox
  7.73%   47.166     10 Template:Cite_web
  7.34%   44.810      6 Template:Cn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43349749:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813230429 and revision id 1297854872. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxism–Leninism–Maoism&oldid=1297854872 " Categories : Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Anti-revisionism Authoritarianism Eponymous political ideologies Marxist schools of thought Maoism Marxism Marxism–Leninism Shining Path Types of socialism Totalitarian ideologies Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from February 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from June 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 23:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxism–Leninism–Maoism 16 languages Add topic

