Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission Toggle Mission subsection 1.1 Space Superiority 1.2 Global Mission Operations 1.3 Assured Space Access 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 The Defense Department enters space 2.2 Path to a separate space service 2.3 The sixth service 3 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 3.1 Headquarters Space Force 3.2 Field commands, Space Force elements, and direct reporting units 3.3 Bases 4 Department of the Space Force and Army space consolidation Toggle Department of the Space Force and Army space consolidation subsection 4.1 Department of the Space Force 4.2 Consolidating Army space activities 5 Relationships with other space organizations Toggle Relationships with other space organizations subsection 5.1 National Aeronautics and Space Administration 5.2 National Reconnaissance Office 5.3 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 6 Personnel and culture Toggle Personnel and culture subsection 6.1 Symbols 6.1.1 The delta symbol 6.1.2 Guardians 6.1.3 Semper Supra 6.2 Specialties and badges 6.2.1 Spacepower disciplines 6.3 Rank structure 6.3.1 Officers 6.3.2 Enlisted 6.4 Uniforms 6.5 Awards and decorations 6.5.1 Decorations 6.5.2 Unit awards 6.5.3 Campaign, expeditionary, and service awards 7 Spacecraft and space systems Toggle Spacecraft and space systems subsection 7.1 Spacecraft 7.2 Space systems 7.3 Space launch vehicles 8 Modernization and budget 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Space Force 46 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Space service branch of the U.S. military "Semper Supra" redirects here. For the official march of the United States Space Force, see Semper Supra (march) .

Not to be confused with United States Space Command .

United States Space Force Founded 20 December 2019 (5 years, 7 months) Country United States Type Space force Role Space warfare Size 9,400 military personnel [ 1 ] Part of Armed forces of the United States [ 2 ] Department of the Air Force Headquarters The Pentagon Arlington County, Virginia , U.S.

[ 3 ] Motto(s) Semper Supra "Always above" [ 4 ] March " Semper Supra " [ 5 ] Anniversaries 20 December Equipment See spacecraft and space systems Engagements As Air Force Space Command Grenada – Operation Urgent Fury Lebanese Civil War Libya – Operation El Dorado Canyon Persian Gulf – Operation Ernest Will Panama – Operation Just Cause Somalia – Operation United Shield Haiti – Operation Uphold Democracy Bosnia and Herzegovina & Croatia – Operation Joint Endeavor Bosnia and Herzegovina & Croatia – Operation Joint Guard Bosnia and Herzegovina & Croatia – Operation Joint Endeavor Bosnia and Herzegovina & Croatia – Operation Joint Forge Southwest Asia – Operation Vigilant Sentinel Southwest Asia – Maritime Intercept Operations Southwest Asia – Operation Southern Watch Southwest Asia – Operation Northern Watch Southwest Asia – Operation Desert Fox Haiti – Operation Secure Tomorrow Persian Gulf War Kosovo Air Campaign Kosovo Defense Campaign Iraq Campaign [ 6 ] As U.S. Space Force Global War on Terrorism Afghanistan Campaign Inherent Resolve Campaign [ 6 ] Website spaceforce.mil spaceforce.com Commanders Commander-in-Chief President Donald Trump Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth Secretary of the Air Force Troy Meink Chief of Space Operations Gen B. Chance Saltzman Vice Chief of Space Operations Gen Shawn N. Bratton Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force CMSSF John F. Bentivegna Insignia Flag Logo Emblem Military unit The United States Space Force ( USSF ) is the space force branch of the United States Department of Defense . It is one of the six armed forces of the United States and one of the eight uniformed services of the United States .

[ 7 ] It is also one of only two independent space forces in the world, along with that of China .

[ 8 ] The United States Space Force traces its origins to the Air Force, Army, and Navy's military space programs created during the beginning of the Cold War . US military space forces first participated in combat operations during the Vietnam War and have participated in every U.S. military operation since, most notably in the Gulf War , which has been referred to as the "first space war".

[ citation needed ] The Strategic Defense Initiative and creation of Air Force Space Command in the 1980s marked a renaissance for military space operations.

Proposals for a U.S. Space Force were first seriously considered during the Reagan administration as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative. Congress began exploring establishing a Space Corps or Space Force in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The idea of establishing a Space Force was resurrected in the late 2010s in response to Russian and Chinese military space developments, resulting in the Space Force's establishment on 20 December 2019 during the first Trump Administration .

The Space Force is organized as part of the Department of the Air Force alongside the U.S. Air Force , a coequal service. The Department of the Air Force is headed by the civilian secretary of the Air Force , while the U.S. Space Force is led by the chief of space operations . The U.S. Space Force's status as part of the Department of the Air Force is intended to be an interim measure towards a fully independent Department of the Space Force, led by a civilian secretary of the Space Force.

Mission [ edit ] Secure our Nation's interests in, from, and to space.

— Mission statement of the United States Space Force [ 9 ] The Space Force's statutory responsibilities are outlined  in 10 U.S.C.

§ 9081 and originally introduced in the United States Space Force Act , the Space Force is organized, trained, and equipped to: Provide freedom of operation for the United States in, from, and to space; Conduct space operations; and Protect the interests of the United States in space.

The Department of Defense further defines the specified functions of the Space Force to: [ 10 ] Provide freedom of operation for the United States in, from, and to space.

Provide prompt and sustained space operations.

Protect the interests of the United States in space.

Deter aggression in, from, and to space.

Conduct space operations.

The Space Force further breaks down its mission into three core functions, which align directly to its mission statement to "secure our Nation's interests in, from, and to space:" Space Superiority (in space) Global Mission Operations (from space) Assured Space Access (to space) Space Superiority [ edit ] Concept of a future space interception.

Space superiority defends against space and counterspace threats by protecting spacecraft in space or protecting against attacks enabled by adversary spacecraft, requiring that the Space Force establish control of the domain. The Space Force describes that at a time and place of the United States' choosing it must be able to assure continued use of spacecraft and deny adversaries use of their spacecraft or space-enabled capabilities.

[ 9 ] Missions that support space superiority include orbital warfare , electromagnetic warfare , and space battle management .

[ 9 ] Global Mission Operations [ edit ] Missile warning radar at Pituffik Space Base , Greenland Global mission operations integrates joint functions across all domains (land, air, maritime, space, cyberspace) on a global space. Through space, the U.S. military and its allies can see, communicate, and navigate. Global mission operations also protect U.S. forces on Earth through early warning of incoming missiles and other types of attack. The Space Force describes global mission operations as allowing the rest of the U.S. military to defend the air, land, and sea.

[ 9 ] Missions that support global mission operations include missile warning , satellite communications , and positioning, navigation, and timing .

[ 9 ] Assured Space Access [ edit ] USSF Falcon Heavy launch from Kennedy Space Center .

Assured space access ensures that the Space Force can deploy and sustain equipment in outer space. This includes space launches as well as controlling and steering spacecraft out of the way of oncoming space debris to avoid collisions. The Space Force describes assured access to space as being able to make sure it can continue launching and conducting space operations 24/7.

[ citation needed ] Missions supporting space access include launch , range control, cyber , and space domain awareness .

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the United States Space Force The Defense Department enters space [ edit ] In the long haul, our safety as a nation may depend upon achieving "space superiority." Several decades from now, the important battles may not be sea battles or air battles, but space battles, and we should be spending a certain fraction of our national resources to ensure that we do not lag in obtaining space supremacy.

— Major General Bernard Schriever , 19 February 1957 [ 9 ] [ 11 ] Launch of Explorer 1 , America's first satellite, by the U.S. Army (1958).

In the aftermath of World War II the Air Force started examining the potentials and risks of space. General Henry H. Arnold , commander of the Army Air Forces , tasked General Bernard Schriever to identify and develop technologies, with the scientific community, that could be beneficial for the new U.S. Air Force in the next global conflict.

[ 9 ] Identifying the importance of space, the U.S. Army , U.S. Navy , and U.S. Air Force each started their own separate space and rocket programs. The U.S. Air Force created the first military space organization in the world, establishing the Western Development Division in 1954 and placing it under the command of General Schriever.

[ 12 ] The Army followed a year later, creating the Army Ballistic Missile Agency under the leadership of General John Bruce Medaris and Wernher von Braun .

[ 13 ] The Army led the United States into space, launching the first American spacecraft, Explorer 1 , on 31 January 1958.

[ 9 ] Space exploration continued to be a military responsibility until the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was created in 1958.

[ 14 ] The military shifted from conducting their own space exploration programs to supporting NASA's, providing the agency with its astronauts and space launch vehicles , while also conducting astronaut recovery and supporting space launches from the Air Force's Eastern Range .

[ 14 ] The Air Force was recognized as the lead military service for space by the early 1960s, with the Army and Navy operating in supporting roles. Early military space efforts were focused on developing and fielding spacecraft to accomplish national objectives, with a focus on weather , reconnaissance and surveillance , communications , and navigation . On 18 August 1961, the Air Force and National Reconnaissance Office launched the first CORONA reconnaissance mission, recovering 3,000 feet (910 m) of film from space and imaging 1.65 million square miles (4,300,000 km 2 ) of the Soviet Union's territory.

[ 9 ] General Bernard Schriever , father of the Air Force space and missile program.

Concerned about the development of the Soviet Union's own space forces, the Air Force advocated for a military human spaceflight program. General Curtis LeMay described strong parallels between World War I aviation and 1960s space operations, noting how quickly flying evolved from chivalric and unarmed reconnaissance flights to combat efforts designed to destroy enemy air superiority . General LeMay believed that it was naive to believe that the same trends were not expected to be seen in space and must be prepared for. Although the Air Force made significant progress in developing the X-20 spaceplane , Manned Orbiting Laboratory , and Blue Gemini , opposition from the Department of Defense prevented operational fielding.

[ citation needed ] In November 1968, the Central Intelligence Agency reported a successful satellite destruction simulation performed by the Soviet Union as a part of its Istrebitel Sputnikov anti-satellite weapons research programme.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Possibly as a response to the Soviet programme, the United States has earlier began Project SAINT , which was intended to provide anti-satellite capability to be used in the case of war with the Soviet Union.

[ 20 ] [ 15 ] [ 21 ] However the project was cancelled early on due to budget constraints and after details were leaked to The New York Times in 1962.

[ 21 ] Despite these setbacks, the Air Force did successfully field the Program 437 anti-satellite weapon system, which used nuclear Thor missiles to intercept and destroy enemy spacecraft.

[ 14 ] Although most military space forces were organized under the Air Force, they were still fragmented within several different major commands. Recognizing rapid growth of space forces and the need to centralize them under one command, the Air Force established Air Force Space Command in 1982.

[ 9 ] This was followed by the establishment of the joint United States Space Command in 1985, aligning Air Force Space Command, Naval Space Command , and Army Space Command under a single operational commander. These two moves, along with the Strategic Defense Initiative 's establishment by President Ronald Reagan , led to a renaissance of military space operations in the 1980s.

[ 14 ] Air Force Defense Support Program deployment from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on the STS-44 mission (1991).

Space forces were first used in combat operations during the Vietnam War , with Air Force weather and communications spacecraft supporting ground, sea, and air operations.

[ 14 ] During Operation Urgent Fury in Grenada, satellite communications were used to conduct command and control for the first time, while Operation El Dorado Canyon and Operation Just Cause marked the first time that major U.S. forces incorporated information from space-based intelligence systems.

[ 22 ] The Persian Gulf War marked the first time that military space forces were unleashed to their fullest extent. Over sixty spacecraft provided 90% of theater communications and command and control for a multinational army of 500,000 troops, weather support for commanders and mission planners, missile warning of Iraqi Scud missile launches, and satellite navigation for air and land forces moving across a featureless desert.

[ 14 ] [ 23 ] The decisive role that space forces played directly enabled an overwhelming Coalition victory and led to the Persian Gulf War being coined "the first Space War." [ 24 ] While U.S. space forces supported all U.S. military operations in the 1990s, Operation Allied Force marked the first use of Global Positioning System -aided munitions in a conflict, ushering in a new era of precision bombing.

[ 25 ] Following the September 11 attacks , U.S. space forces mobilized to respond as part of the Global War on Terrorism , Operation Enduring Freedom , Operation Iraqi Freedom , and Operation Inherent Resolve .

[ 26 ] Path to a separate space service [ edit ] Creating a new military service...would be a dramatic step. Perhaps a "Space Corps" would be a step toward a Space Force. Maybe the Air Force will preempt these dramatic changes by truly becoming the "Space and Air Force." — Senator Bob Smith , 18 November 1998 [ 9 ] Air Force Space Command activation ceremony in 1982 The idea of a separate service for space originated in the 1960s. Military space activities were briefly consolidated under the Advanced Research Projects Agency in 1958, loosely centralizing space activities under a single organization. The Air Force, Army, and Navy feared that it would evolve into a "fourth service" for space, before authorities were returned to the service.

[ 14 ] The first direct call for a U.S. Space Force occurred in 1982, prior to Air Force Space Command 's establishment or the Strategic Defense Initiative 's public announcement. As part of a report recommending the acceleration U.S. space-based laser weapon development, the Government Accountability Office recommended the U.S. Air Force be reorganized as the U.S. Aerospace Force or that an independent U.S. Space Force be created.

[ 27 ] Ultimately, a congressional proposal to rename the U.S. Air Force as the U.S. Aerospace Force and speculation that President Ronald Reagan may announce the creation of a U.S. Space Force accelerated Air Force plans to create a space command within the service.

[ 14 ] Following the Persian Gulf War , the Air Force and Defense Department declared that "space power has now become as important to the nation as land, sea, and air power." Despite this public pronouncement, a growing section of Congress believed that space was being shortchanged and used only as an auxiliary to air operations. In 1998, drawing parallels between the challenges faced by post-World War I Army Aviators and post–Gulf War Air Force space operators, Senator Bob Smith publicly called for the establishment of a Space Force if the Air Force could not, or would not, embrace spacepower. An independent Department of the Space Force would ensure that space got its fair share of resources within the Defense Department, with Senator Smith calling for the creation of a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force as a bridge to a fully independent Space Force.

[ 27 ] Concept for the Strategic Defense Initiative Brilliant Pebbles space-based interceptor.

In 2000, Senator Smith led Congress in establishing a commission to examine the organization and management of national security space. The Commission to Assess United States National Security Space Management and Organization, better known as the 2001 Space Commission or the Rumsfeld Commission, released its report in 2001. The Rumsfeld Commission noted the strong risk of a "Space Pearl Harbor," harking back to Imperial Japan's surprise attack on the U.S. Pacific Fleet in 1941. It was extremely critical of the Air Force's treatment of space, with few witnesses expressing confidence that the Air Force would address the requirement to provide space capabilities to the other services or move beyond treating space as just a support capability for air operations. The most significant recommendation of the Rumsfeld Commission was the creation of a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force in the mid-term, which would evolve into a Department of the Space Force in the long-term. The Rumsfeld Commission expected the transition from Air Force Space Command to a fully independent Space Force to occur in between 2006 and 2011.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Air Force leadership reacted extremely poorly to the Rumsfeld Commission's recommendations. The day after the commission was publicly released Air Force chief of staff General Michael E. Ryan declared "an independent Space Force or Corps was not warranted for at least another 50 years." General Ryan doubled down over the following year, stating that a Space Force should only be considered once space operations moved beyond Earth orbit. Despite the Air Force's hostility to the idea of a Space Corps or Space Force, they did meet some recommendations by transferring the Space and Missile Systems Center from Air Force Materiel Command to Air Force Space Command and establishing the National Security Space Institute .

[ 27 ] Ultimately, the Rumsfeld Commission's recommendations remained unfulfilled because of the higher priority placed on counterterrorism after the September 11 attacks , canceling plans for a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force or a fully independent Space Force by 2011.

[ 29 ] President Donald Trump congratulating General Jay Raymond after signing the 2020 NDAA that established the U.S. Space Force.

While the United States' focus shifted from space to counterterrorism, the Russian Armed Forces and Chinese People's Liberation Army realized the military benefits that could be gleaned from space, as well as the incredible reliance the United States put on its space forces. Throughout the 2000s, Russian and Chinese space and counterspace capabilities began to increase.

[ 9 ] In 2001, the Russian Space Forces were reestablished as an independent arm and in 2007, China conducted a destructive anti-satellite missile test causing the single largest space debris generating event in history.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] In the aftermath of the Chinese ASAT test, Congress tasked the Allard Commission to reevaluate the Defense Department's space organization and management. The Allard Commission noted that the United States' dependence on space had increased, but comparatively little...[had] been achieved to make them more secure." It also noted, despite the recommendations of the Rumsfeld Commission, authority and responsibility for national security space remained fragmented and unfocused. Like the 2001 Rumsfeld Commission, the 2008 Allard Commission recommended establishing a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force or a separate Department of the Space Force to unify national security space.

[ 27 ] It took until 2017 for members of Congress to act on the recommendations of the Rumsfeld and Allard commissions to create a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force. Representatives Mike Rogers and Jim Cooper unveiled a bipartisan proposal to establish a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force, however it experienced significant opposition from the Air Force and Defense Department, failing in the Senate.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] However, the proposal was resurrected in 2018 when President Donald Trump publicly endorsed the creation of a Space Force and directed the Defense Department to reverse its opposition and develop plans for its establishment.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] The Trump Administration plan for the U.S. Space Force was outlined in Space Policy Directive-4, initially organizing the U.S. Space Force as part of the Department of the Air Force, but with plans to build out a separate Department of the Space Force in the future.

[ 37 ] In 2019, Congress passed legislation establishing the U.S. Space Force as a military service under the Department of the Air Force. On 20 December 2019, the National Defense Authorization Act was signed into law and the U.S. Space Force was established as the sixth armed service, meeting the Rumsfeld and Allard commissions' recommendations to create a Space Corps within the Department of the Air Force, but still falling short of creating a separate Department of the Space Force.

[ 27 ] The sixth service [ edit ] We are at the dawn of a new era for our Nation’s Armed Forces. The establishment of the U.S. Space Force is an historic event and a strategic imperative for our Nation. Space has become so important to our way of life, our economy and our national security that we must be prepared as a Nation to protect it from hostile actions.

— Secretary of Defense Mark Esper , 20 December 2019 [ 38 ] The first 86 Space Force lieutenants commissioned from the United States Air Force Academy (18 April 2020).

As the U.S. Space Force was established on 20 December 2019, General Jay Raymond , commander of U.S. Space Command and Air Force Space Command , became its first member and chief of space operations . Air Force Space Command was immediately redesignated as United States Space Force, however, the command and its 16,000 Airmen technically remained part of the Air Force.

[ 39 ] On 3 April 2020, Chief Master Sergeant Roger A. Towberman became the Space Force's second member and was appointed its first senior enlisted leader .

[ 40 ] The service gained its first new second lieutenants when 86 members of the U.S. Air Force Academy class of 2020 became Space Force members 3 through 88 on 18 April 2020.

[ 41 ] Currently serving Air Force space operators began to become Space Force members in September 2020 and the service gained its first astronaut when Colonel Michael S. Hopkins swore into the Space Force aboard the International Space Station on 18 December 2020.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] The Space Force also began to build out its culture and identity, however, it experienced several public relations challenges due to its perceived ties to science fiction and links to President Trump.

[ 46 ] The Space Force adopted the Army and Air Force's OCP Uniform with blue stitching and a full color U.S. flag , sparking jokes about fighting on the forest moon of Endor from Star Wars: Return of the Jedi , while its distinctive service dress drew comparisons to Colonial Fleet uniforms from Battlestar Galactica or Starfleet uniforms from Star Trek . While the Space Force noted that its camouflage combat uniform was appropriate since space operators deploy to combat zones on the Earth alongside the rest of the joint force and it saved money, it did not have a similar response for its service dress uniform, which were described as a "futuristic-looking" design by General Raymond.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] The Space Force's seal and delta insignia were also incorrectly derided as a rip-off of Star Trek' s Starfleet logo, despite being first adopted as a space symbol by the Air Force Ballistic Missile Division in 1962, four years before Star Trek first aired on television in 1966.

[ 51 ] Star Trek graphic designer Michael Okuda recalled that Starfleet's logo was chosen as an homage to Air Force Space Command, the Space Force's direct predecessor.

[ 51 ] An Atlas V conducts the first U.S. Space Force space launch (26 March 2020).

The service also chose the title "Guardian" to represent its personnel, becoming its counterpart to Soldier and Airman. The term "Guardian" has a long history within Air Force Space Command, originally serving as part of its motto: "Guardians of the High Frontier." [ 52 ] The Space Force also adopted Semper Supra as its official motto and unveiled its service song , sharing the same name.

[ 53 ] The decision on if the Space Force's ranks would mirror the Army, like the Air Force and Marine Corps, or the Navy, generated significant controversy, with Congressman Dan Crenshaw introducing an amendment which would force the Space Force to pattern itself after the Navy's rank structure.

[ 54 ] Ultimately, the amendment failed and the Space Force followed an Air Force/Army/Marine Corps-based rank scheme.

[ 9 ] The Space Force began to officially incorporate former Air Force Space Command units in 2020 and 2021, standing up field commands to serve as counterparts to the Air Force's major commands. It also consolidated Air Force wings and groups into mission deltas, a formation roughly equivalent to an Army Brigade Combat Team or Air Force expeditionary wing, and space base deltas (briefly known as garrisons), equivalent to an Army garrison or Air Force air base wing.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] It also began to rename former Air Force bases and station to Space Force bases and station, starting with Patrick Space Force Base and Cape Canaveral Space Force Station .

[ 57 ] It also established component field commands to serve as Space Force components at the unified combatant commands , assuming space component responsibility from the U.S. Air Force.

[ 58 ] Transfer of the Naval Satellite Operations Center from the Navy to the Space Force (2022).

One of the primary reasons the Space Force was created was to consolidate space forces from across the U.S. Air Force, U.S. Army, and U.S. Navy.

[ 37 ] In 2020, the Space Training and Readiness Delta (Provisional) was established to form the foundation for Space Training and Readiness Command and incorporate Air Force space units spread across Air Combat Command and Air Education and Training Command , while Space Systems Command incorporated space acquisitions activities across Air Force Materiel Command , although, notably it did not incorporate space research and development conducted by the Air Force Research Laboratory .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] The Space Force also began incorporating space personnel transfers from the U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, and U.S. Marine Corps.

[ 61 ] In 2022, it the Naval Satellite Operations Center and Army's Satellite Operations Brigade transferred to the Space Force, putting satellite communications under a single service for the first time in history.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] In 2023, it assumed responsibility for the Army's Joint Tactical Ground Station , putting all space-based missile warning under the Space Force.

[ 64 ] The Space Force's first significant combat action occurred less than a month after its establishment, providing missile warning when Iran launched missile strikes against U.S. troops at Al Asad Airbase on 7 January 2020.

[ 65 ] In 2021, the Russian Federation conducted an anti-satellite weapons test, destroying the Kosmos 1408 and putting the International Space Station at risk.

[ 66 ] Organization [ edit ] Main articles: Structure of the United States Space Force and List of active duty United States Space Force general officers Organization of the United States Space Force within the Department of Defense .

The Space Force is organized into a headquarters staff that provides leadership and guidance for the force; field commands that are responsible for organizing, training, and equipping Guardians; deltas that support field commands and are specialized by mission area; and squadrons which specialize in acquisitions, cyberspace operations, engineering, intelligence, and space operations.

[ 9 ] The Space Force has the following structure of military units: [ 67 ] a section consists of two or more guardians; this is also referred to as an "element" in basic training a flight comprises Individual guardians or sections two or more flights form a squadron (commanded by major or lieutenant colonel ) — the lowest level of command, usually identified by number and function two or more squadrons form a delta (commanded by colonel ); there are three types of deltas: mission delta is responsible for an entire mission set for the service space base delta is responsible for base support on Space Force bases space launch delta is responsible for both base support and the launch mission for its Space Force base field commands (commanded by major general or lieutenant general ) are responsible for organizing, training and equipping thousands of guardians around the world; a field command is organized by mission, such as Space Training and Readiness Command, and reports directly to headquarters at the Pentagon service component field commands (commanded by colonel or brigadier general ) integrate Space Force capabilities with other service branches and combatant commands, serving as the bridge between the Space Force and the broader joint military structure; they are organized under the combatant command they support Headquarters Space Force [ edit ] At the headquarters level, the Space Force is led by the chief of space operations , a four-star general who reports to the secretary of the Air Force and provides military advice to civilian leadership of the Department of Defense and the White House . The Air Force and Space Force combine to form the Department of the Air Force, similar to the Navy and Marine Corps combining to form the Department of the Navy .

[ 9 ] Title Current holder Chief of space operations (CSO) Gen B. Chance Saltzman Vice chief of space operations (VCSO) Gen Shawn Bratton Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force (CMSSF) CMSSF John F. Bentivegna Director of staff (SF/DS) Maj Gen Steven P. Whitney Deputy chief of space operations for human capital (SF/S1) Katharine Kelley Deputy chief of space operations for intelligence (SF/S2) Maj Gen Gregory Gagnon Deputy chief of space operations for operations, cyber, and nuclear (SF/S3/6/10) Lt Gen DeAnna M. Burt Deputy chief of space operations for strategy, plans, programs, requirements, and analysis (SF/S5/8) Vacant Deputy chief of space operations for technology and innovation (SF/S9) Vacant Assistant Chief of Space Operations for Future Concepts and Partnerships AM Paul Godfrey Field commands, Space Force elements, and direct reporting units [ edit ] The Space Force's three field commands (FLDCOM) are purpose-built for specific activities, aligning to the various institutional responsibilities to organize, train, and equip Guardians. Component field commands (C-FLDCOM) coordinate and integrate space forces into planning and current operations within unified combatant commands . Direct reporting units (DRU) are hubs of innovation and intelligence expertise within the Space Force, providing new ideas or deep knowledge about highly specialized issues.

[ 9 ] Field command Mission Headquarters Space Operations Command (SpOC) Generates, presents, and sustains space warfighting capability for combatant commanders Peterson SFB , Colorado Space Systems Command (SSC) Develops, acquires, equips, fields, and sustains lethal and resilient space capabilities Los Angeles AFB , California Space Training and Readiness Command (STARCOM) Increases Guardians' readiness to prevail in competition and conflict through education, training, doctrine, and test Peterson SFB , Colorado Component field command Mission Headquarters U.S. Space Forces – Space (SPACEFOR–SPACE) The U.S. Space Force component to U.S. Space Command which plans, executes, and integrates military spacepower into multi-domain global operations for all U.S. military operations beginning at the Kármán line , 62 miles/100 kilometers above mean sea level Vandenberg SFB , California U.S. Space Forces – Central (SPACEFOR–CENT) The U.S. Space Force component to U.S. Central Command which plans, executes, and integrates military power across an area of responsibility that spans Northeast Africa, the Middle East, and Central and South Asia MacDill AFB , Florida U.S. Space Forces – Europe and Africa (SPACEFOR–EURAF) The U.S. Space Force component to U.S. European Command and U.S. Africa Command which plans, executes, and integrates military spacepower across an area of responsibility that spans Europe, large portions of Asia, the Middle East, Arctic Ocean, and Atlantic Ocean and Africa Ramstein AB , Germany U.S. Space Forces – Indo-Pacific (SPAFOR-INDOPAC) The U.S. Space Force component to U.S. Indo-Pacific Command which plans, executes, and integrates military spacepower across an area of responsibility that spans the Asia-Pacific region JB Pearl Harbor-Hickam , Hawaii Space Force Element Mission Headquarters Space Force Element National Reconnaissance Office (SFELM NRO) Supports the design, development, launch, and maintenance of America's intelligence satellites Chantilly, Virginia Direct Reporting Unit Mission Headquarters Space Development Agency (SDA) Develops, demonstrates, and transitions resilient military space-based sensing, tracking, and data transport capabilities into a proliferated multi-orbit architecture, encompassing government, commercial, and rapid acquisition architectures The Pentagon , Arlington County, Virginia Space Rapid Capabilities Office (SpRCO) Specializes in the expedited development and rapid production and deployment of space capabilities to fulfill short-term critical needs Kirtland AFB , New Mexico Field Operating Agency Mission Headquarters National Space Intelligence Center (NSIC) Delivers unparalleled technical expertise and game-changing intelligence – empowering national leaders, joint force warfighter and acquisition professionals to outwit, out-reach and win in the space domain [ 68 ] Wright-Patterson AFB , Ohio Bases [ edit ] Main article: List of United States Space Force installations While the Space Force's headquarters is in Washington, D.C., the rest of the service is spread across the United States and abroad, across 18 states and territories and 46 bases and installations as of 2024.

[ 9 ] Buckley SFB Peterson SFB Schriever SFB Cheyenne Mountain SFS Cape Cod SFS Cavalier SFS Los Angeles AFB New Boston SFS Patrick SFB Cape Canaveral SFS Vandenberg SFB class=notpageimage| U.S. Space Force installations and locations located within mainland United States.

Clear SFS Kaʻena Point SFS Maui SFS Pituffik SB class=notpageimage| U.S. Space Force installations and locations outside of the contiguous United States.

U.S. Space Force installations Name Location Garrison Buckley Space Force Base Aurora, Colorado Space Base Delta 2 Peterson Space Force Base Colorado Springs , Colorado Space Base Delta 1 Schriever Space Force Base Colorado Springs, Colorado Space Base Delta 1 Los Angeles Air Force Base El Segundo, California Space Base Delta 3 Patrick Space Force Base Satellite Beach , Florida Space Launch Delta 45 Vandenberg Space Force Base Lompoc , California Space Launch Delta 30 Cape Canaveral Space Force Station Cape Canaveral , Florida Space Launch Delta 45 Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station Cheyenne Mountain , Colorado Space Base Delta 1 Cape Cod Space Force Station Sagamore, Massachusetts 6th Space Warning Squadron Cavalier Space Force Station Cavalier, North Dakota 10th Space Warning Squadron Clear Space Force Station Clear, Alaska 13th Space Warning Squadron Kaena Point Space Force Station Kaena Point , Hawaii 21st Space Operations Squadron New Boston Space Force Station Hillsborough County, New Hampshire 23rd Space Operations Squadron Maui Space Force Station Maui , Hawaii 15th Space Surveillance Squadron Pituffik Space Base Pituffik , Greenland 821st Space Base Group Department of the Space Force and Army space consolidation [ edit ] Department of the Space Force [ edit ] As the United States Space Force matures, and as national security requires, it will become necessary to create a separate military department, to be known as the Department of the Space Force.

— Space Policy Directive-4, 2019 [ 37 ] The Space Force is currently organized as a service under the Department of the Air Force , more closely mirroring the concept of a Space Corps rather than a fully independent Space Force. Senator Bob Smith , the 2001 Rumsfeld Commission, and 2008 Allard Commission each envisioned that a Space Corps would first be created under the Department of the Air Force as an interim measure as it grew into a fully independent Space Force.

[ 27 ] In 2019, Space Policy Directive-4 directed the Space Force be initially established under the Department of the Air Force as the first step towards an independent Department of the Space Force, which would take over the entire space mission from the Department of the Air Force. It also directed the secretary of defense to conduct a periodic review to determine when to recommend the president seek legislation to establish the Department of the Space Force.

[ 37 ] Following the Space Force's establishment there have been a number of calls to rename the Department of the Air Force to the Department of the Air and Space Forces to reflect its composition of the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Space Force.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Congress previously explored renaming the Department of the Air Force to the Department of the Aerospace Force in 1981 and congressional efforts were made in the 2000s to rename the Department of the Navy to the Department of the Navy and Marine Corps, however both of these proposals failed under opposition from the Defense Department.

[ 71 ] Space Force advocates have also called for the creation of an undersecretary of the Air Force for space . This provision was included in the Trump administration's original legislative proposal to give the Space Force additional independence and autonomy but was removed by the Senate.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] There have also been numerous calls from inside and outside the Space Force for it to have its own public affairs and judge advocates general, independent from Air Force.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] Consolidating Army space activities [ edit ] Main articles: United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command , 1st Space Brigade , and 100th Missile Defense Brigade Launch of an Army Ground Based Interceptor from Vandenberg Space Force Base .

When the Space Force was established in 2019 it was intended to consolidate the existing military space forces across the Army, Navy, and Air Force.

[ 79 ] While the Navy and Air Force gave up all of their space forces, the greatest resistance to transferring space forces came from the Army.

[ 80 ] While the Army transferred its satellite communications and missile warning assets, there are still calls for it to transfer 1st Space Brigade and 100th Missile Defense Brigade to the Space Force.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] The Heritage Foundation called for the wholesale transfer of United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command , including the 100th Missile Defense Brigade and the 1st Space Brigade .

[ 80 ] The 100th Missile Defense Brigade operates the Ground Based Interceptor system and is located at Schriever Space Force Base , Vandenberg Space Force Base , and Fort Greely .

[ 83 ] Former Air Force space officers have called to move the missile defense and intercontinental ballistic missile mission to the Space Force and the Center for Strategic and International Studies has also proposed moving missile defense into the Space Force.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] The Army also continues to maintain a cadre of Functional Area 40 space operations officers, although over 85% indicated they would transfer to the Space Force if able.

[ 86 ] The Army is also maintaining the 1st Space Brigade , however the RAND Corporation has conducted a study calling for its transfer to the Space Force.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Relationships with other space organizations [ edit ] National Aeronautics and Space Administration [ edit ] Main articles: NASA and List of United States Space Force astronauts The U.S. Space Force and its antecedents have a long history of cooperation with NASA , as the lead government agencies for military and civil spaceflight. The Space Force's predecessors in the Air Force, Navy, and Army provided NASA with its early space launch vehicles and most of its astronauts.

[ 89 ] The Space Force's first two astronauts, Colonel Michael S. Hopkins (left) and Colonel Nick Hague (right) The Space Force hosts NASA launch operations at Vandenberg Space Force Base and Cape Canaveral Space Force Station .

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] NASA occasionally hosts U.S. Space Force heavy launches out of Kennedy Space Center .

[ 92 ] The Space Force continues to support NASA's human spaceflight missions with range support of Space Launch Delta 45 and tracks threats to the International Space Station and other crewed spacecraft.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The Space Force and NASA partner on matters such as space domain awareness and planetary defense .

[ 95 ] Space Force members can be NASA astronauts, with Colonel Michael S. Hopkins , the commander of SpaceX Crew-1 , commissioned into the Space Force from the International Space Station on 18 December 2020.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] National Reconnaissance Office [ edit ] Main article: National Reconnaissance Office The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) is a Department of Defense agency and a member of the United States Intelligence Community , responsible for designing, building, launching, and maintaining intelligence satellites.

[ 96 ] The Space Force executes National Reconnaissance Office space launches and consists of 40% of the agency's personnel.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] Proposals have been put forward, including by the Air Force Association and retired Air Force Lieutenant General David Deptula , to merge the NRO into the Space Force, transforming it into a Space Force Intelligence, Reconnaissance, and Surveillance Command and consolidating the entire national security space apparatus in the Space Force.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] Launch of the NROL-44 mission from Cape Canaveral Space Force Station .

The USSF's Space Systems Command (SSC), in partnership with the National Reconnaissance Office , manages the National Security Space Launch (NSSL) program, which uses government and contract spacecraft to launch sensitive government payloads .

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] NSSL supports both the USSF and NRO.

[ 104 ] NRO director Scolese has characterized his agency as critical to American space dominance and the Space Force, stating that NRO provides "unrivaled situational awareness and intelligence to the best imagery and signals data on the planet." [ 103 ] Additionally, in August 2021, former NRO deputy director Lt Gen Michael Guetlein became commander of Space Systems Command.

[ 105 ] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [ edit ] Main article: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration The Space Force and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) jointly operate the military's weather satellites.

[ 106 ] Additionally, NOAA's Office of Space Commerce is responsible for civilian space situational awareness and space traffic management .

[ 107 ] The decision to transition space traffic management from the military to the Department of Commerce was made due to the significant growth in commercial spacecraft and to mirror how the Federal Aviation Administration , rather than the U.S. Air Force, handles air traffic management.

[ 108 ] Personnel and culture [ edit ] Symbols [ edit ] The delta symbol [ edit ] Main articles: Space Force Delta and Seal of the United States Space Force The delta symbol – an origin story.

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, scientists derived the rocket equation , which made spaceflight possible. In this equation, Δ Δ v {\displaystyle \Delta v} represents the change in velocity. Since the 20th century, the delta has been used to represent a stylized aircraft, missile, or arrow. In 1940, the United States Army Air Forces 36th Fighter Group used the delta on its shield, which is still used by the U.S. Air Force 36th Fighter Wing .

[ 109 ] After World War II, the delta began to be used by the space program, appearing on the joint U.S. Air Force - NASA X-15 . In 1962, the Air Force Ballistic Missile Division became the first of a long line of international military space organizations to use the delta, which, in the Air Force Space Command shield represented the Air Force's upward thrust into space and the launch vehicles used to place satellites into orbit. This delta later evolved into the U.S. Space Force's seal and its logo in 2020, becoming the basic shape for field command and delta emblems.

[ 109 ] Guardians [ edit ] A Space Force specialist with the 4th Space Operations Squadron performing an armed security detail.

Space Force service members have the title of Guardians, similar to how members of the U.S. Marine Corps are called Marines and members of the Air Force are called Airmen. The title of guardian traces its heritage to Air Force Space Command's 1983 motto Guardians of the High Frontier .

[ 110 ] Prior to the announcement of Guardian as the service title on 18 December 2020, members of the Space Force were referred to as space professionals.

[ 111 ] Semper Supra [ edit ] The Space Force's motto, Semper Supra – "Always Above".

[ 112 ] It mirrors the mottos of the Marine Corps ( Semper Fidelis – Always Faithful) and Coast Guard ( Semper Paratus – Always Ready).

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] The Space Force's service song takes its name from the motto.

[ 115 ] Specialties and badges [ edit ] Main articles: List of United States Space Force astronauts and Badges of the United States Space Force Space Operations Intelligence Cyberspace Operations Acquisition and engineering Officer 13A – Astronaut 13S – Space Operations Officer 14N – Intelligence Officer 17S – Cyberspace Effects Operations Officer 62EXA – Aeronautical Engineer 62EXB – Astronautical Engineer 62EXC – Computer Systems Engineer 62EXE – Electrical/Electronic Engineer 62EXH – Mechanical Engineer 62EXI – Human Factors Engineer/Human Systems Integration 63A – Acquisitions Manager Enlisted 5S – Space Systems Operator 5I0 – All Source Intelligence Analyst 5I1 – Geospatial Intelligence Analyst 5I2 – Signals Intelligence Analyst 5I3 – Fusion Analyst 5I8 – Targeting Analyst 5C – Cyberspace Operations Space operators are the largest career field in the Space Force and comprise much of its senior leadership.

[ 116 ] Space operations officers are responsible for leading the Space Force's space operations forces. Space operations officers (13S) are responsible for planning and leading space combat operations across orbital warfare, space electromagnetic warfare, space battle management, and space access and sustainment spacepower disciplines. They also formulate space operations policy, coordinate space operations, and plan, organize, and direct space operations programs.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Enlisted Space Systems Operators (5S) are responsible for conducting orbital warfare, space electromagnetic warfare, space battle management, and space access and sustainment operations.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Space operations officers and enlisted space systems operators are awarded the Space Operations Badge after completing the 533rd Training Squadron 's Undergraduate Space Training program at Vandenberg Space Force Base , with follow-on education provided by the 319th Combat Training Squadron and National Security Space Institute .

[ 121 ] Senior observer badge with the astronaut device as awarded to Space Force astronauts.

The Space Force currently has two astronauts (13A) who flew as Space Force officers on assignment to NASA . Space Force astronauts command, operate, and pilot crewed spacecraft , accomplish on-orbit duties on the International Space Station or other spacecraft, operate Department of Defense payloads, and provide spaceflight consultation to the Department of Defense and other government agencies. Space Force astronauts must complete NASA Astronaut Candidate (ASCAN) training at Johnson Space Center . Once completing a spaceflight, Space Force astronauts are awarded the observer badge with astronaut rating.

[ 118 ] Intelligence officers (14N) lead the Space Force's intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance enterprise, performing intelligence activities and analysis.

[ 122 ] They lead enlisted All Source Intelligence Analysts (5I0), Geospatial Intelligence Analysts (5I1), Signals Intelligence Analysts (5I2), and Fusion Analysts (5I4), and Targeting Analysts (5I8).

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 120 ] Intelligence officers and enlisted analysts are awarded their intelligence badge after completing intelligence training with the 533rd Training Squadron Detachment 1 at Goodfellow Air Force Base , with follow-on education provided by the 319th Combat Training Squadron and National Security Space Institute .

[ 128 ] Colonel Michael S. Hopkins became the U.S. Space Force's first astronaut when he transferred from the U.S. Air Force on the International Space Station (18 December 2020).

Cyberspace effects operations officers (17S) are responsible for operating cyberspace weapons systems, satellite communications systems, and commanding cyber crews.

[ 118 ] They lead enlisted Cyberspace Operations guardians.

[ 129 ] Cyberspace effects operations officers and enlisted cyberspace operators are awarded the cyberspace operator badge after completing Undergraduate Cyber Training with the Air Force's 81st Training Wing at Keesler Air Force Base , with follow-on education provided by the 319th Combat Training Squadron and National Security Space Institute .

[ 130 ] Acquisition and engineering are officer only career fields within the Space Force. Specific developmental engineers (62E) include aeronautical engineers (62EXA), astronautical engineers (62EXB), computer systems engineers (62EXC), electrical/electronic engineer (62EXE), mechanical engineer (62EXH) and the human factors engineer/human systems integration (62EXI). Space Force engineers graduate from the Defense Acquisition University and the U.S. Air Force Flight Test Engineer course, or a comparable program.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Acquisition managers (63A) are responsible for the Space Force's acquisition process.

[ 137 ] Spacepower disciplines [ edit ] Members of the 4th Space Operations Squadron Mobile Operations Flight conducting armed convoy operations.

The U.S. Space Force has seven core spacepower disciplines in which its personnel gain experience: [ 138 ] Orbital Warfare : Knowledge of orbital maneuver as well as offensive and defensive fires to preserve freedom of access to the domain. Skill to ensure United States and coalition space forces can continue to provide capability to the Joint Force while denying that same advantage to the adversary.

Space Electromagnetic Warfare : Knowledge of spectrum awareness, maneuver within the spectrum, and non-kinetic fires within the spectrum to deny adversary use of vital links. Skill to manipulate physical access to communication pathways and awareness of how those pathways contribute to enemy advantage.

Space Battle Management : Knowledge of how to orient to the space domain and skill in making decisions to preserve mission, deny adversary access, and ultimately ensure mission accomplishment. Ability to identify hostile actions and entities, conduct combat identification , target, and direct action in response to an evolving threat environment.

Space Access and Sustainment: Knowledge of processes, support, and logistics required to maintain and prolong operations in the space domain. Ability to resource, apply, and leverage spacepower in, from, and to the space domain.

Military Intelligence : Knowledge to conduct intelligence-led, threat-focused operations based on the insights. Ability to leverage the broader Intelligence Community to ensure military spacepower has the intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities needed to defend the space domain.

Engineering and Acquisition : Knowledge that ensures military spacepower has the best capabilities in the world to defend the space domain. Ability to form science, technology, and acquisition partnerships with other national security space organizations, commercial entities, Allies, and academia to ensure the warfighters are properly equipped.

Cyber Operations : Knowledge to defend the global networks upon which military spacepower is vitally dependent. Ability to employ cyber security and cyber defense of critical space networks and systems. Skill to employ future offensive capabilities .

Rank structure [ edit ] Main article: United States Space Force rank insignia Officers [ edit ] Officer service cap badge.

The United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, considered the premier commissioning source for Space Force officers.

Officers are the leaders of the U.S. Space Force and are responsible for planning operations and managing personnel. Space Force officers enter the service through three different paths: graduating from the United States Air Force Academy , Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps , or Air Force Officer Training School .

[ 139 ] The premier commissioning route for Space Force officers is through the U.S. Air Force Academy, a public university and military academy . Approximately ~10% of each class commissions as U.S. Space Force officers, with the remainder entering into the U.S. Air Force.

[ 140 ] Space Delta 13, Detachment 1 is responsible for providing Space Force training, immersion, and mentorship to cadets. The Air Force Academy has a long history with Air Force space, establishing the world's first Department of Astronautics in 1958 and the Cadet Space Operations Squadron, which operates the FalconSAT satellites, in 1997.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] Additional space programs, such as the Azimuth program, i5 Squadron and Blue Horizon rocketry club have stood up and as of 2023, the Air Force Academy offers two space majors, a space warfighting minor, and 29 space courses across all its academic departments.

[ 145 ] On 18 April 2020, the Air Force Academy commissioned 86 officers into the Space Force, becoming the first group of individuals to enter the service after the first chief of space operations, General Jay Raymond , and the senior enlisted advisor of the Space Force, Chief Master Sergeant Roger Towberman .

[ 146 ] The Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps program is offered at 1,100 colleges and universities. Like the Air Force Academy, it commissions officers directly into either the Air Force or Space Force.

[ 147 ] The Air Force Officer Training School is the final path to commission into the Space Force, graduating its first two Space Force officers on 16 October 2020 and its first all-Space Force flight graduating on 17 March 2023.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] The Space Force partners with Johns Hopkins University 's Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies to provide Intermediate Developmental Education and Senior Developmental Education.

[ 150 ] Additional educational opportunities for officers include the 319th Combat Training Squadron , National Security Space Institute , Air Force Institute of Technology , U.S. Air Force Weapons School , the Acquisition Instructor Course , U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School , the Space Test Course , and Air University 's School of Advanced Air and Space Studies.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] US DoD pay grade O-10 O-9 O-8 O-7 O-6 O-5 O-4 O-3 O-2 O-1 Officer candidate NATO code OF-9 OF-8 OF-7 OF-6 OF-5 OF-4 OF-3 OF-2 OF-1 OF(D) Insignia Various insignia Service dress uniform (Class A) Service uniform (Class B) Mess dress uniform OCP uniform Title General Lieutenant general Major general Brigadier general Colonel Lieutenant colonel Major Captain First lieutenant Second lieutenant Cadet / Officer trainee Abbreviation Gen Lt Gen Maj Gen Brig Gen Col Lt Col Maj Capt 1st Lt 2d Lt Cdt / OT Enlisted [ edit ] Enlisted service cap badge.

Enlisted members participate in and support operations. Space Force enlisted members complete Basic Military Training at Joint Base San Antonio . Space Force Basic Military Training is identical to Air Force Basic Military Training, with the addition of Space Force-specific curriculum.

[ 156 ] On 20 October 2020, the first four individuals enlisted into the Space Force and on 10 December 2020, the first seven enlisted members to enter the Space Force graduated from Basic Military Training.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] In May 2022, the Space Force started running its own all-Guardian Basic Military Training to reinforce Space Force culture.

[ 159 ] Space Force enlisted members are enrolled in the Community College of the Air Force , earning an associate in applied science degree.

[ 160 ] Professional military education is conducted at Space Training and Readiness Command's Forrest L. Vosler Non-Commissioned Officer Academy .

[ 161 ] Other educational opportunities for enlisted members include the 319th Combat Training Squadron , National Security Space Institute , Advanced Instructor Course and the Space Test Course .

[ 162 ] [ 155 ] Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force service cap badge.

The Space Force's enlisted rank design is centered on a hexagon, representing the Space Force's status as the sixth military service in the Armed Forces. The horizontal stripes for Specialist 2, 3, and 4 were inspired by an early proposal for Air Force enlisted ranks known as "Vandenberg stripes". The delta represents the Space Force. The specialist stripes represent terra firma , the solid foundation of skills upon which the Space Force is built. Noncommissioned officer insignia feature traditional chevrons and the "Delta, Globe, and Orbit," representing the totality of the Space Force. Finally, senior noncommissioned officer insignia are topped with "orbital chevrons", representing low Earth orbit for master sergeants, medium Earth orbit for senior master sergeants, and geosynchronous orbit for chief master sergeants. These orbital chevrons signify the higher levels of responsibility and willingness to explore and innovate placed upon senior noncommissioned officers. Finally, the Chief master Sergeant of the Space Force is represented by a "Delta, Globe, and Orbit" in a hexagonal wreath.

[ 163 ] Vice Chief of Space Operations General David D. Thompson swears in the first four enlisted Space Force recruits (20 October 2020).

The first seven enlisted guardians graduate from Basic Military Training (10 December 2020).

US DoD pay grade Special E-9 E-8 E-7 E-6 E-5 E-4 E-3 E-2 E-1 NATO code OR-9 OR-8 OR-7 OR-6 OR-5 OR-4 OR-3 OR-2 OR-1 Insignia Title Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Chief master sergeant Senior master sergeant Master sergeant Technical sergeant Sergeant Specialist 4 Specialist 3 Specialist 2 Specialist 1 Abbreviation SEAC CMSSF CMSgt SMSgt MSgt TSgt Sgt Spc4 Spc3 Spc2 Spc1 Uniforms [ edit ] Main article: Uniforms of the United States Space Force Air Force Mess Dress Uniform (interim) Service Dress Uniform Class "A" Service Uniform Class "B" Air Force Service Dress Uniform (interim) OCP Uniform Physical Training Uniform Space Force insignia worn on Air Force uniforms.

The Space Force is currently in the process of developing its unique mess dress , service dress , and physical training uniforms .

[ 164 ] In the interim period, guardians wear the Air Force Mess Dress, Air Force Service Dress, and Air Force Service uniforms with the following modifications: [ 165 ] Space Force insignia on the coat/shirt Replaced "Hap Arnold Star & Wings" buttons with "Delta, Globe, & Orbit" buttons Replaced Air Force Great Seal of the United States service cap badges with Space Force Delta, Globe, and Orbit service cap badges Replaced Air Force nametag with Space Force hexagonal nametag Space Force enlisted rank worn in place of Air Force enlisted ranks (enlisted only) Replaced Circle U.S. lapel insignia with Hexagonal U.S. insignia (enlisted only) The primary Space Force uniform is the OCP Uniform , adopted from the U.S. Air Force and the U.S. Army. The Space Force uses unique "space blue" thread for ranks and badges, wears a full color flag on the left sleeve, and wears full color patches.

[ 166 ] Space Force cadets in Air Force Academy parade dress with their platinum sashes.

The Space Force's distinctive blue and gray service dress uniform was unveiled at the Air & Space Forces Association 's 2021 Air, Space, and Cyber conference. The dark blue was taken from the Space Force's seal and represents the vastness of outer space, while the six buttons represent that the U.S. Space Force is the sixth armed service.

[ 167 ] The Space Force's Physical Training Uniform was unveiled in September 2021. As of April 2023, the Space Force stated that the Physical Training Uniform would be available by early 2024 and that the Service Dress Uniform would be available by late 2025.

[ 168 ] Space Force cadets at the Air Force Academy wear the same uniform as Air Force cadets; however, in their distinctive blue and white parade dress uniforms they wear a platinum sash in place of the gold sash worn by Air Force cadets.

[ 169 ] Awards and decorations [ edit ] Main article: Awards and decorations of the United States Department of the Air Force Ribbons for the proposed Guardian of the Year Ribbon.

As part of the United States Department of the Air Force , the United States Space Force and United States Air Force share the same awards and decorations or same variations of awards and decorations.

[ 170 ] On 16 November 2020, the Secretary of the Air Force Frank Kendall III renamed the Air Force Commendation Medal, the Air Force Achievement Medal, Air Force Outstanding Unit Award, Air Force Organizational Excellence Award, Air Force Recognition Ribbon, Air Force Overseas Ribbons, Air Force Expeditionary Service Ribbon, Air Force Longevity Service Award, and the Air Force Training Ribbon to replace "Air Force" with "Air and Space" to include the Space Force. He also eliminated Air Force from the Air Force Combat Action Medal and renamed the Air Force Special Duty Ribbon to the Developmental Special Duty Ribbon.

[ 171 ] The Space Force is currently in the process of developing a Space Force Good Conduct Medal to replace the Air Force Good Conduct Medal for enlisted members which was approved on 30 August 2023.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] Congress has also debated changing the Airman's Medal, awarded for non-combat heroism, to the Air and Space Force Medal, mirroring the Navy and Marine Corps Medal .

[ 174 ] Devices Arctic "A" Device Arrowhead Device Combat "C" Device Oak leaf cluster Remote "R" Device Service Star Valor "V" Device Decorations [ edit ] Medal of Honor Air Force Cross Distinguished Service Medal Silver Star Medal Legion of Merit Distinguished Flying Cross Airman's Medal Bronze Star Medal Purple Heart Meritorious Service Medal Air Medal Aerial Achievement Medal Air and Space Commendation Medal Air and Space Achievement Medal Unit awards [ edit ] Presidential Unit Citation Gallant Unit Citation Meritorious Unit Award Air and Space Outstanding Unit Award Air and Space Organizational Excellence Award Campaign, expeditionary, and service awards [ edit ] Combat Action Medal Combat Readiness Medal Space Force Good Conduct Medal Air and Space Recognition Ribbon Remote Combat Effects Campaign Medal Air and Space Campaign Medal Nuclear Deterrence Operations Service Medal Air and Space Overseas Service Ribbon (Short Tour) Air and Space Overseas Service Ribbon (Long Tour) Air and Space Expeditionary Service Ribbon Air and Space Longevity Service Award Developmental Special Duty Ribbon Air Force Enlisted Professional Military Education Graduate Ribbon Basic Military Training Honor Graduate Ribbon Small Arms Expert Marksmanship Ribbon Air and Space Training Ribbon Spacecraft and space systems [ edit ] Spacecraft [ edit ] U.S. Space Force spacecraft Name Spacecraft image Mission Operator Number Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) Satellite communications Space Delta 8 [ 175 ] 6 [ 116 ] Advanced Technology Risk Reduction (ATRR) Space surveillance [ 176 ] Space Delta 9 [ 177 ] 1 [ 116 ] Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Environmental monitoring Mission Delta 2 [ 178 ] 4 [ 116 ] Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS) Satellite communications Space Delta 8 [ 175 ] 6 [ 116 ] Defense Support Program (DSP) Missile warning [ 179 ] Mission Delta 4 Electro-optical/Infrared Weather System – Geosynchronous (EWS-G) [ 180 ] Environmental monitoring Mission Delta 2 [ 178 ] Fleet Satellite Communications System (FLTSAT) Satellite communications Space Delta 8 Global Positioning System (GPS) Positioning, navigation, and timing Mission Delta 31 32 [ 116 ] Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program (GSSAP) Space surveillance [ 181 ] Space Delta 9 [ 177 ] 6 [ 116 ] Milstar Satellite communications Space Delta 8 [ 175 ] 5 [ 116 ] Mobile User Objective System (MUOS) Satellite communications Space Delta 8 Operationally Responsive Space-5 (ORS-5) Space surveillance [ 182 ] Space Delta 9 [ 177 ] 1 [ 116 ] Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS) Missile warning Missile defense Battlespace awareness Technical intelligence [ 183 ] Mission Delta 4 7 [ 116 ] Space Based Space Surveillance (SBSS) Space surveillance Space Delta 9 [ 177 ] 1 [ 116 ] Ultra High Frequency Follow-On (UFO) Satellite communications Space Delta 8 Wideband Global SATCOM (WGS) Satellite communications Space Delta 8 [ 175 ] 10 [ 116 ] X-37B Orbital Test Vehicle Orbital test spaceplane Space Delta 9 [ 177 ] 2 [ 184 ] Space systems [ edit ] U.S. Space Force space systems Name Space system image Mission Operator AN/FPS-85 Space surveillance Mission Delta 2 C-Band Space Surveillance Radar System [ 185 ] Space surveillance Mission Delta 2 Cobra Dane Missile defense Space surveillance [ 186 ] Mission Delta 4 Ground-Based Electro-Optical Deep Space Surveillance (GEODSS) Space surveillance Mission Delta 2 [ 178 ] Long Range Discrimination Radar (LRDR) Missile defense Space surveillance [ 187 ] Mission Delta 4 [ 188 ] Perimeter Acquisition Radar Attack Characterization System (PARCS) Missile warning Space surveillance [ 189 ] Mission Delta 4 Satellite Control Network (SCN) Ground station Space Delta 6 Space Fence Space surveillance Mission Delta 2 Space Surveillance Telescope [ 178 ] Space surveillance Mission Delta 2 Upgraded Early Warning Radar (UEWR) Missile warning Missile defense Space surveillance [ 190 ] Mission Delta 4 Space launch vehicles [ edit ] U.S. Space Force contracted space launch vehicles Name Space launch vehicle image Class Contractor Atlas V Medium-lift launch vehicle United Launch Alliance Electron Small-lift launch vehicle Rocket Lab Falcon 9 Medium to Heavy-lift launch vehicle SpaceX Falcon Heavy Heavy to Super heavy-lift launch vehicle SpaceX Pegasus Air launched small-lift launch vehicle Northrop Grumman Modernization and budget [ edit ] United States Space Force Budget 2020 [ 191 ] 2021 [ 192 ] 2022 [ 193 ] 2023 (Enacted) [ 194 ] 2024 Operation & Maintenance $40,000,000 $2,492,114,000 $3,611,012,000 $4,086,883,000 TBA Procurement — $2,310,994,000 $2,787,354,000 $4,462,188,000 $3,752,194,000 Research, Development, Test & Evaluation — $10,540,069,000 $11,794,566,000 $16,631,377,000 $19,551,449,000 Military Personnel — — — $1,109,400,000 TBA Total $40,000,000 $15,343,177,000 $18,192,932,000 $26,289,848,000 TBA NASA 's return to the Moon through the Artemis program is leading to a greater emphasis on cislunar domain awareness.

Concept for a space-based solar power spacecraft.

SpaceX's Starship , a contender for the Rocket Cargo program.

While a new service, the U.S. Space Force is undergoing intensive modernization efforts. The Deep Space Advanced Radar Capability (DARC) is intended to track objects in geosynchronous orbit with three sites, one in the United States, one in the Indo-Pacific, and one in Europe.

[ 195 ] Oracle, a spacecraft developed by the Air Force Research Laboratory for the Space Force, will demonstrate technologies that the space service needs for cislunar domain awareness – tracking objects outside of geosynchronous orbit and between Earth and the Moon. The spacecraft itself will launch to an area of gravitational stability between the Earth and the Moon to conduct operations, using a wide-field sensor and a more sensitive narrow field sensor to discover and maintain custody of objects operating in this region. Oracle will directly support NASA 's Artemis program as it returns to the Moon and track potentially hazardous near-Earth objects in support of planetary defense operations.

[ 196 ] Also an Air Force Research Laboratory program for the Space Force, Arachne is the keystone experiment in the Space Solar Power Incremental Demonstrations and Research Project , which aims to prove and mature essential technologies for a prototype space-based solar power transmission system capable of powering a forward operating base . Arachne will specifically demonstrate and mature technologies related to more efficient energy generation, radio frequency forming, and radio frequency beam beaming. Current forward operation bases rely on significant logistics convoys to transport fuel for power – space-based solar power would move these supply lines to space, where they are unable to be easily attacked. Much like how GPS started as a military program and was opened to civilian use, Space Force-provided space-based solar power could transition to common use as well.

[ 197 ] Other space-based power beaming demonstrators include the Space Power InfraRed Regulation and Analysis of Lifetime (SPIRRAL) and Space Power INcremental DepLoyable Experiment (SPINDLE) experiments.

[ 198 ] The Navigation Technology Satellite-3 (NTS-3), building on the Space Force's Global Positioning System constellation, is an Air Force Research Laboratory spacecraft that will operate in geosynchronous orbit to test advanced techniques and technologies to detect and mitigate interference to positioning, navigation, and timing capabilities and increase system resiliency for military, civil, and commercial users. NTS-3 is a Vanguard program, which mark potentially game changing technologies.

[ 199 ] The Space Force's Rocket Cargo program is another Air Force Research Laboratory Vanguard program, which is focused on leasing space launch services to quickly transport military materiel to ports across the globe. If proven viable, the Space Force's Space Systems Command is responsible for transitioning it to a program of record.

United States Transportation Command would be the primary user of this capability, rapidly launching up to 100 tons of cargo anywhere in the world.

[ 200 ] See also [ edit ] National Security Space Launch Air & Space Forces Association Militarization of space List of space forces, units, and formations Space National Guard Space Force Association Starlink in the Russo-Ukrainian War Strategic Defense Initiative Women in the United States Space Force References [ edit ] ^ "Frequently Asked Questions - U.S. Space Force" .

www.spaceforce.com .

^ 10 U.S.C.

§ 9081 ^ "U.S. Space Force Fact Sheet" .

Spaceforce.mil . United States Space Force. 20 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ "The U.S. Space Force logo and motto" .

United States Space Force . 22 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2020 . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

^ "Space Force reveals official song: "Semper Supra" " .

United States Space Force . 20 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2022 . Retrieved 20 September 2022 .

^ a b Dudney, Robert S. (1 June 2003).

"Space Power in the Gulf" . Air & Space Forces Magazine.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2023 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ 10 U.S.C.

§ 9081 ^ Gonzalez, Jennifer (20 December 2022).

"U.S. Space Force: The Sixth Branch of the U.S. Armed Forces" .

blogs.loc.gov .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 10 February 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r "Space Force 101" (PDF) .

www.spaceforce.mil .

^ "Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2023.

^ "Schriever's "Space Superiority" Speech" .

^ Spires 1998 , pp. 33–34.

^ "Aircraft, Rockets, Missiles and Radar, 1907-1961" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h Spires 1998 .

^ a b "THE HISTORY OF US ANTI-SATELLITE WEAPONS" (PDF) .

man.fas.org .

^ "The Historic Beginnings Of The Space Arms Race" .

www.spacewar.com . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ Zaitsev, Yury; Novosti, Ria (1 November 2008).

"The historic beginnings of the space arms race" .

Russia Beyond . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ "MilsatMagazine" .

www.milsatmagazine.com . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ "The Hidden History of the Soviet Satellite-Killer" .

Popular Mechanics . 1 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ "istrebitel-sputnikov-is" .

weaponsandwarfare.com . 10 August 2021.

^ a b "SAINT" . 20 August 2016. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ Gallegos, Frank.

"After the Gulf War: Balancing Spacepower's Development" (PDF) .

apps.dtic.mil .

^ "The US Air Force in Space - 1945 to the 21st Century" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ "SMDC History: 25 years since first 'Space War' " . 20 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ "The Emergence of Smart Bombs" .

^ "Master of the Sky to Master of Space" (PDF) .

Schriever Space Force Base . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g Jones, Priscilla Dale.

"Some origins of the idea "Whose time has come" " (PDF) .

www.afhistory.af.mil .

^ "Report to the Commission to Assess United States - National Security Space Management and Organization" (PDF) .

aerospace.csis.org . 11 January 2001.

^ "War on Terror Supersedes 2001 Space Commission Vision" . 23 January 2006.

^ "Russia Re-Establishes Independent Space Forces | Arms Control Association" .

^ NASA identifies Top Ten space junk missions Archived 19 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine ; Michael Cooney, NetworkWorld , 28 July 2010 ^ "U.S. Will Not Let China, Russia Deny Its Space Superiority, DOD Officials Say" .

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Congressman Rogers: A space corps is 'inevitable' " .

SpaceNews.com . 2 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 2 January 2019 .

^ Cohen, Zachary (8 November 2017).

"Lawmakers scrap 'Space Corps' proposal" .

CNN . Retrieved 31 August 2023 .

^ Gould, Joe (15 March 2018).

"Trump touting 'space force' puts Air Force in awkward spot" .

Defense News . Retrieved 2 September 2023 .

^ Mehta, Valerie; Mehta, Aaron (19 June 2018).

"Trump orders creation of independent space force — but Congress will still have its say" .

Defense News . Retrieved 31 August 2023 .

^ a b c d "Space Policy Directive-4" .

^ "Department of Defense Establishes U.S. Space Force" .

^ Myers, Meghann (20 December 2019).

"The Space Force is officially the sixth military branch. Here's what that means" .

Air Force Times .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ "CMSGT Towberman sworn in as the first Senior Enlisted Advisor for the U.S. Space Force" .

United States Space Force . 3 April 2020.

^ Erwin, Sandra (18 April 2020).

"U.S. Space Force adds 86 new officers after academy graduation" .

SpaceNews.com .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

^ "Space Force selects 2.4K space operators for transfer beginning Sept. 1" . 16 July 2020.

^ a b Erwin, Sandra (1 October 2020).

"Space Force members can go to the moon, if they're picked by NASA" .

SpaceNews .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ a b Erwin, Sandra (28 October 2020).

"NASA's Crew-1 commander to be sworn into U.S. Space Force from the International Space Station" .

SpaceNews .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ a b Kramer, Miriam (18 December 2020).

"Astronaut Mike Hopkins sworn into the Space Force from orbit" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ " 'It's a Trap!' the Pros and Mostly 'Khans' of Science Fiction's Influence on the United States Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ Ortiz, Aimee (19 January 2020).

"A Small Step for Space Force is Not a Giant Leap for Uniform Design" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ Chappell, Bill (22 September 2021).

"Space Force Uniforms Are Similar to Battlestar Galactica's" .

NPR .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "New Space Force uniforms draw comparisons to 'Star Trek,' 'Battlestar Galactica' " . 21 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "Space Force Expects to Finalize 'Futuristic' Uniform by End of Year, General Says" . 27 September 2021.

^ a b Hawkins, Derek (25 January 2020).

"Space Force logo mocked for similarities to 'Star Trek' - the Washington Post" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2022 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "U.S. Space Force unveils name of space professionals" . 18 December 2020.

^ "Space Force reveals official song: 'Semper Supra' " .

Air Force .

United States Air Force . 20 September 2022.

^ "Space Admiral? House Lawmakers Want Navy Ranks for Space Force" . 21 July 2020.

^ United States Space Force, Public Affairs (24 June 2020).

"Space Force begins transition into field organizational structure" .

United States Space Force .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Space Force begins transition into field organizational structure" .

United States Space Force . 24 July 2020.

^ Joy, Rachael (9 December 2020).

"Vice President Pence announces official name change of Patrick Space Force Base" .

Florida Today .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Space Force Stands up Its First Geographic Component Command, Prioritizing the Pacific" . 22 November 2022.

^ "STAR Delta (Provisional)" .

Schriever Space Force Base (Archived) .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force establishes Space Systems Command" . 13 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2021 .

^ "Space Force Recruiting is Strong, but Army, Navy, USAF Woes Don't Help" . 21 April 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Navy Unit Transfers into Space Force, Becomes 10th Space Operations Squadron | Air & Space Forces Magazine" . 14 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Army transfers satellite communications mission to USSF: All military SATCOM under one ser" . 15 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force to Take on the Army's Missile Warning Ground Stations in October | Air & Space Forces Magazine" . 7 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 24 March 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ Strout, Nathan (12 January 2021).

"Exclusive: How the Space Force foiled an Iranian missile attack with a critical early warning" .

C4ISRNET .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Russian direct-ascent anti-satellite missile test creates significant, long-lasting space" .

^ "Military Units: Space Force" .

U.S. Department of Defense .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "National Space Intelligence Center" .

^ "The FAA's top space official outlines progress" .

Politico . 23 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "Fighting and Winning in Space with Our New U.S. Space Force | Air & Space Forces Association" . Archived from the original on 5 December 2023.

^ Agrawal, Raj; Brooks, Aaron (Spring 2022).

"One Team, One Fight The Department of the Air and Space Forces" (PDF) . Air&Space Operations Review.

^ "Defense officials: New military branch designed for the 'unique culture' of space" . 2 March 2019.

^ "Senate Armed Services OKs Space Force with conditions" . 23 May 2019.

^ Harrison, Todd (16 May 2024).

"Kill the zombie Space National Guard idea" .

defenseone.com .

^ "Why the Space Force needs its own JAG Corps" . 15 February 2024.

^ "The Space Force Needs Its Own Messaging Shop" . 23 November 2023.

^ "The Space Force needs its own advocate on Capitol Hill" . 9 October 2023.

^ "Two things the Space Force needs from Congress - and one thing it definitely doesn't" . 14 November 2023.

^ "Space Policy Directive-4" .

www.spaceforce.mil .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2023 . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ a b "The Asset Transfer Fight" .

^ "Space Force Takes over All Military Satellite Communications" . 16 August 2022.

^ "Space Force takes over missile-warning ground stations previously run by the Army" . 2 November 2023.

^ "100th Missile Defence Brigade" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 21 January 2024 .

^ Cox, Timothy “Stepchild”; Riordan, John “J R. ”; Dant, Daniel ”Sphinx” (26 June 2020).

"Op-ed | Time to Move ICBM and missile defense units to the Space Force" .

SpaceNews .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ Harrison, Todd.

"How Much Will the Space Force Cost?" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 August 2022 . Retrieved 21 January 2024 .

^ Erwin, Sandra (28 April 2020).

"Survey: Most Army space officers would transfer to the U.S. Space Force" .

SpaceNews .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ Erwin, Sandra (14 August 2022).

"U.S. Army hands over satellite operations to Space Force, but keeps a foothold in space" .

SpaceNews .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ Hitchens, Theresa (16 March 2020).

"Space Force May Be Too Small: RAND" .

Breaking Defense .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2022 . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ "Beyond Horizons - A Half Century of Air Force Space Leadership" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 October 2020 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 .

^ "About Us" .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "2022 Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "Pictures: SpaceX Falcon Heavy launch on USSF-67" . 15 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "NASA - What is the "Range?" " .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "Space Debris and Human Spacecraft" . 13 April 2015.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ Smith, Marcia (5 May 2020).

"NASA and Space Force to Work Together on Planetary Defense" .

SpacePolicyOnline.com .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "About the NRO: Develop. Acquire. Launch. Operate" .

National Reconnaissance Office .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020.

^ Strout, Nathan (16 November 2020).

"National Reconnaissance Office launches new intelligence satellite" .

C4ISRNET .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ Malik, Tariq (14 July 2020).

"The Space Force will launch 4 secret satellites from Virginia Wednesday and you can watch it live" .

Space.com .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ Mehta, Aaron; Gould, Joe (11 April 2019).

"National Reconnaissance Office could join Space Force down the road, Shanahan says" .

Defense News .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ Hitchens, Theresa (22 April 2020).

"Battle For NRO Takes Shape As Space, Air Forces Grapple With Acquisition" .

Breaking Defense .

Archived from the original on 8 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Wright, Bruce "Orville" (23 December 2019).

"Fighting and Winning in Space with Our New U.S. Space Force" .

Air Force Association .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Deptula, Dave (18 May 2020).

"Setting Up The Space Force For Success" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ a b Tadjdeh, Yasmin (20 July 2021).

"JUST IN: National Reconnaissance Office Embracing Commercial Tech" .

National Defense Magazine .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ a b McCall, Stephen (30 December 2020).

"Defense Primer: National Security Space Launch" (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 July 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ Strout, Nathan (14 July 2021).

"Biden nominates deputy director of the National Reconnaissance Office to lead new Space Systems Command" .

C4ISRNET .

Defense News .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 July 2021 .

^ "U.S. Space Force considers a second NOAA weather satellite" . 12 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "NOAA seeking information on commercial space situational awareness data" . 23 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force official: We need the Commerce Department's space traffic office to be successful" . 7 November 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ a b "The Delta Symbol: An Origin Story" .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ Secretary of the Air Force, Public Affairs (18 December 2020).

"U.S. Space Force unveils name of space professionals" .

United States Space Force .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Pawlyk, Oriana (18 December 2020).

" 'Guardians' of the Galaxy: Pence Announces Name of Space Force Members" .

Military.com .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 December 2020 .

^ "Space Force unveils logo, 'Semper Supra' motto" . 22 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Semper Fidelis | Marines" .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Coast Guard Roles and Missions" .

United States Coast Guard Academy .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force reveals official song: "Semper Supra" " .

United States Space Force . 20 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2022 . Retrieved 20 September 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "U.S. Space Force Metrics at Establishment" (PDF) .

airandspaceforces.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Space Operations Officer - Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ a b c "The Official Guide to the Air Force Officer Classification Codes" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Space Systems Operator - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ a b "Enlisted only - USSF specialty code crosswalk" .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Undergraduate Space Training evolves to tackle space threats" . 15 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Intelligence Officer - Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "All Source Intelligence Analyst - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Geospatial Intelligence Analyst - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Signals Intelligence Analyst - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Intelligence Analyst - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Targeting Analyst - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force Det 1 activates on Goodfellow AFB" . 21 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Cyber Operations - Enlisted Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Cyberspace Effects Operations - Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Aeronautical Engineer - Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Astronautical Engineer Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Computer Systems Engineer - Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Electrical/Electronic Engineer - Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Mechanical Engineer Officer - Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Human Factors Engineer/Human Systems Integration - Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Acquisition Manager - Officer Careers - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Wright, Ashley M. (10 August 2020).

"Space Force releases 1st doctrine, defines "spacepower" as distinct form of military power" .

United States Space Force .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Join as Officer - U.S. Space Force" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Kurkowski, Seth (18 November 2021).

"Space Force detachment opens up at US Air Force Academy" .

Space Explored .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Murphy, Ashley D. (27 October 2020).

"New position helps Academy prepare for all things space" .

United States Air Force Academy .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Cohen, Rachel S. (27 October 2020).

"New position helps Academy prepare for all things space" .

United States Air Force Academy .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "FalconSAT Program" .

United States Air Force Academy . 14 April 2009. Archived from the original on 23 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "World's first astronautics department celebrates 50 years" .

U.S. Air Force . 7 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 13 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "Space" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Kirby, Lynn (29 April 2020).

"The first Space Force commissioned officers will graduate this spring" .

United States Space Force .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "U.S. Air Force ROTC" .

Archived from the original on 4 June 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Welty, Charles (16 October 2020).

"OTS commissions first Space Force officers" .

Air Education and Training Command .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Hadley, Greg (17 March 2023).

"First All-Space Force Flight Graduates from Officer Training School" .

Air & Space Forces Magazine .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force to partner with Johns Hopkins University SAIS for service-specific IDE, SDE" .

United States Space Force > News . 26 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Officer Education Opportunities" .

U.S. Space Force .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Oprihory, Jennifer-Leigh (1 November 2020).

"Humble, Approachable Experts" .

Air & Space Forces Magazine .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Acquisition Instructor Course" .

Air Force Materiel Command .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force, Air Force partner to establish new Space Test Course" .

Air Force . 27 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ a b "U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School" .

Edwards Air Force Base .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Military Training" .

U.S. Space Force .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force enlists first trainees, sends to bootcamp" .

United States Space Force . 19 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ Pinthong, Sarayuth (10 December 2020).

"U.S. Space Force makes history at Basic Military Training" .

United States Space Force .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Miller, Amanda (14 April 2022).

"USSF Starts All-Guardian Basic Training in May" .

Air & Space Forces Magazine .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Enlisted Education Opportunities" .

U.S. Space Force .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Lovelace, Amanda (6 November 2020).

"Space Force gains first professional military education center" .

Space Operations Command .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Tanenbaum, Kevin.

"Air Force Weapons School graduates first cadre of Space Warfighters" .

Schriever Space Force Base . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Hadley, Greg (20 September 2021).

"Space Force Reveals Insignia for Enlisted Ranks" .

Air & Space Forces Magazine .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Pawlyk, Oriana (15 September 2020).

"The Space Force Will Soon Let Some Members Test Out Dress, PT Uniforms" .

Military.com .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ "Interim Uniform Changes to USAF Blues" .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "Space Force Details OCP Uniform Requirements" . 27 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "The Space Force's new service dress and PT uniforms have landed" . 21 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "New Space Force PT Gear Coming Soon; Service Dress Skirt Hits Space Symposium" . 21 April 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ Golightly, Chase (16 April 2020).

"Select group of AFA graduates assigned to work with US Space Force" .

KRDO .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Air Force & Space Force Almanac 2020" (PDF) .

Air Force Magazine .

Air Force Association . June 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Military awards manuel" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ "SECAF authorizes Space Force Good Conduct Medal" . 25 September 2023.

^ "A Space Force Good Conduct Medal? Here's the Design Submitted for Approval" . 4 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 7 January 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "House, Senate Approve Defense Authorization Bills" . 23 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ a b c d "4th Space Operations Squadron" .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "1 SOPS gains new mission" . Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ a b c d e "Delta 9" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ a b c d "Space Delta 2 - Space Domain Awareness (SDA)" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "Defense Support Program Satellites" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "USSF and NOAA Begin Joint Operations of Infrared Weather Satellite" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "SMC sets new standard of success for acquisition and operations of SensorSat" . Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "Space Based Infrared System" . Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "USAF & USSF Almanac 2022 - WEAPONS & PLATFORMS" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 .

^ "C-Band (Holt) Radar: One year on" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "COBRA DANE Radar" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Long-Range Discrimination Radar initially fielded in Alaska" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Space Delta 4" .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Perimeter Acquisition Radar Attack Characterization System" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Upgraded Early Warning Radars" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Defense Budget Overview: Irreversible Implementation of the National Defense Strategy (February 2020) - Revised May 13, 2020" (PDF) . Office of the Undersecretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, United States Department of Defense. 13 May 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "RULES COMMITTEE PRINT 116–68 TEXT OF THE HOUSE AMENDMENT TO THE SENATE AMENDMENT TO H.R. 133" (PDF) . p. O&M: PDF 265 in-text 257, Procurement: PDF 287 in-text 279, R&D PDF 290 in-text 282. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2021 . Retrieved 8 June 2021 .

^ Biden, Joseph.

"Statement by the President on S. 1605, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022" (Press release). White House . Retrieved 28 December 2021 .

^ "H.R.2617 - Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023" .

Congress.gov . Congress. 29 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2022 . Retrieved 29 December 2022 .

^ "Space Force says DARC software on track, following GAO concerns" . 16 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "ORACLE – Air Force Research Laboratory" .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "ARACHNE – Air Force Research Laboratory" .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "SPACE POWER BEAMING – Air Force Research Laboratory" .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "NAVIGATION TECHNOLOGY SATELLITE – 3 (NTS-3) – Air Force Research Laboratory" . Archived from the original on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ "ROCKET CARGO FOR AGILE GLOBAL LOGISTICS – Air Force Research Laboratory" .

Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

Neufeld, Jacob (1990).

The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force 1945–1960 (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: Office of Air Force History.

ISBN 978-0912799629 .

OCLC 20826476 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

Spires, David N. (1998).

Beyond Horizons: A Half Century of Air Force Leadership (PDF) (Revised ed.). Washington, D.C.: Air University Press.

ISBN 1585660604 .

OCLC 831675552 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 February 2021 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Library resources about United States Space Force Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Hardwick, C. Stuart, ed. (2024).

Tales of the United States Space Force . Riverdale, NY: Baen Books.

ISBN 978-1-9821-9345-4 .

OCLC 1405189278 .

Anthology of fiction and nonfiction about the U.S. Space Force.

External links [ edit ] United States Space Force at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Official website v t e United States Space Force Leadership Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force Under Secretary of the Air Force Space Staff Chief of Space Operations Vice Chief of Space Operations Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Director of Staff Deputy Chiefs of Space Operations General Officers Generals Lieutenant Generals Oversight House Armed Services Committee Strategic Forces subcommittee Senate Committee on Armed Services Strategic Forces subcommittee Structure Field commands Space Futures Command Space Operations Command Commander Space Systems Command Commander Space Training and Readiness Command Commander Component Field Commands United States Space Forces – Central United States Space Forces – Europe and Africa United States Space Forces – Indo-Pacific United States Space Forces – Korea United States Space Forces – Space Deltas Space Delta 1 Mission Delta 2 Mission Delta 3 Mission Delta 4 Space Delta 5 Space Delta 6 Space Delta 7 Space Delta 8 Space Delta 9 Space Delta 10 Space Delta 11 Space Delta 12 Space Delta 13 Space Delta 15 Space Delta 18 Space Delta 21 Space Delta 23 Space Delta 26 Space Launch Delta 30 Mission Delta 31 Space Launch Delta 45 Space Base Delta 1 Space Base Delta 2 Space Base Delta 3 Squadrons 1st Delta Operations 319th Combat Training 328th Weapons 392d Combat Training 533rd Training 21st Operations Support 15th Space Surveillance 18th Space Defense 19th Space Defense 20th Space Surveillance 3rd Combat Training 4th EW 5th EW 16th EW 23rd EW 2nd Space Warning 3rd satellite Communications 5th Space Warning 6th Space Warning 7th Space Warning 10th Space Warning 11th Space Warning 12th Space Warning 13th Space Warning 55th Training 21st Space Operations 22nd Space Operations 23rd Space Operations 62nd Cyberspace 63rd Cyberspace 64th Cyberspace 65th Cyberspace 68th Cyberspace 69th Cyberspace 645th Cyberspace 71st ISR 72nd ISR 73rd ISR 74th ISR 75th ISR 76th ISR 1st Space Operations 2nd Navigation Warfare 3rd Space Operations 4th Space Operations 10th Space Operations 53rd Space Operations 527th Space Aggressor 1st Test and Evaluation 3rd Test and Evaluation 17th Test and Evaluation 25th Space Range 2nd Space Launch 5th Space Launch 1st Range Operations NSSI Direct reporting units Space Development Agency Space Rapid Capabilities Office Space Warfighting Analysis Center Locations Space Force Bases Buckley Los Angeles Patrick Peterson Schriever Vandenberg Space Bases Pituffik Space Force Stations Cape Canaveral Cape Cod Cavalier Cheyenne Mountain Clear Kaena Point New Boston Personnel and training Astronauts Awards and decorations Badges Ranks Training Academy Reserve Officer Training Corps Officer Training School Basic Military Training Uniforms History and traditions Delta Flag History Seal "Semper Supra" Air & Space Forces Association Space Force Association Former wings and deltas 21st Space Wing 50th Space Wing 460th Space Wing Space Training and Readiness Delta (Provisional) Category Links to related articles v t e United States Armed Forces Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard Leadership President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Vice Chairman Committees on Armed Services Senate House Active duty four-star officers Active duty three-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Components Military departments Department of Defense Secretary Department of the Army Secretary Department of the Navy Secretary Department of the Air Force Secretary Department of Homeland Security Secretary Service branches and heads Chief of Staff of the United States Army Commandant of the Marine Corps Chief of Naval Operations Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Chief of Space Operations Commandant of the Coast Guard Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard : A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified combatant command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Budget Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II Demographics African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Sikh Americans Hispanic Americans Civil War Air Force Coast Guard Marine Corps Navy Academy History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies : A ( prep ) MC/N ( prep ) AF/SF ( prep ) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer : A MEPS ASVAB The Basic School (MC) Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms : A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations : Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges : Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Officer Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers : A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty / Rating / Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System / Tricare Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains : A MC N AF CG Equipment A ( Designations ) MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles ( active ) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N active future AF CG MSC Weapons: N Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active future Aircraft designation Helicopter arms Other WWII equipment Nuclear football Electronics ( designations ) Flags : A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs : Nuclear Biological Chemical Category A MC N AF SF CG Navboxes A MC N AF SF CG v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Pete Hegseth , Secretary of Defense Steve Feinberg , Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including defense agencies and DoD field activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Local Defense Community Cooperation Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Defense Microelectronics Activity Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency White House Communications Agency National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service Director/Chief Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute Defense Travel Management Office Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity American Forces Network Defense Information School Defense Visual Information Distribution Service Stars and Stripes Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services ( White House Military Office ) Reports directly Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Programs Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Energy, Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps : Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations : Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Energy) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff : Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff : Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service v t e Allied Air Command Structure Combined Air Operations Centre NATO air and space forces Albanian Air Force Belgian Air Component Bulgarian Air Force Royal Canadian Air Force Croatian Air Force Czech Air Force Royal Danish Air Force Estonian Air Force Finnish Air Force French Air and Space Force German Air Force Hellenic Air Force Hungarian Air Force Italian Air Force Latvian Air Force Lithuanian Air Force Montenegrin Air Force Royal Netherlands Air Force North Macedonia Air Brigade Royal Norwegian Air Force Polish Air Force Portuguese Air Force Romanian Air Force Slovak Air Force Slovenian Air Force and Air Defence Spanish Air and Space Force Swedish Air Force Turkish Air Force Royal Air Force United States Air Force United States Space Force v t e Uniformed services of the United States Armed Forces United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Non-combatant uniformed services National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps v t e List of space forces and space commands Space forces China Russia United States Air and Space force Colombia France Iran Netherlands Russia Spain Air forces with space units and formations Australia Brazil Canada Germany Iran Israel Japan New Zealand North Korea Pakistan South Korea Thailand Turkey United Kingdom Vietnam Space commands Australia Brazil France India Italy Japan NATO NORAD Peru Russia South Korea United Kingdom United States Ranks and insignia of space forces Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Poland Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xp7hf
Cached time: 20250818065338
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.894 seconds
Real time usage: 3.518 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19622/1000000
Revision size: 176915/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 878744/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 137511/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 794741/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.588/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21481222/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2501.345      1 -total
 49.49% 1237.871      1 Template:Reflist
 41.72% 1043.485    184 Template:Cite_web
  9.30%  232.608      1 Template:Infobox_military_unit
  9.19%  229.950     14 Template:Military_navigation
  8.36%  209.117      1 Template:Infobox
  8.11%  202.932      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.61%  140.268      9 Template:Sfn
  5.44%  136.086      5 Template:Ubl
  4.89%  122.394      1 Template:Allied_Air_Command Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54465810:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818065338 and revision id 1306528675. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Space_Force&oldid=1306528675 " Categories : United States Space Force Space warfare Military space program of the United States Military units and formations established in 2019 2019 establishments in the United States Uniformed services of the United States United States Armed Forces service branches Space units and formations of the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Use American English from June 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 06:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Space Force 46 languages Add topic

