Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose and reaction 2 Text 3 Signatories Toggle Signatories subsection 3.1 List of signatories 4 See also 5 References 6 General references 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Manifesto of the Ninety-Three 15 languages Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia By German intellectuals in support of World War I The " Manifesto of the Ninety-Three " ( German : Manifest der 93 ; originally "To the Civilized World," An die Kulturwelt!

, by "Professors of Germany") is a 4 October 1914 [ 1 ] proclamation by 93 prominent Germans supporting Germany in the start of World War I . The Manifesto galvanized support for the war throughout German schools and universities, but many foreign intellectuals were outraged.

The astronomer Wilhelm Julius Foerster soon repented having signed the document. With the physiologist Georg Friedrich Nicolai , he drew up the Manifesto to the Europeans . They argued: It seems not just a good thing , but a dire necessity, that educated men of all nations direct their influence in such a way that the terms of the peace did not become the wellspring of future wars—uncertain though the outcome of the war may now still seem. The fact that this war has plunged all European relations into an equally unstable and plastic state should rather be put to use to create out of Europe an organic whole.

Whilst various people expressed sympathy with those sentiments, only the philosopher Otto Buek and Albert Einstein signed Foerster and Nicolai's counter manifesto and it remained unpublished at the time. It was subsequently brought to light by Einstein.

[ 2 ] In 1921, a report in The New York Times found that of 76 surviving signatories, 60 expressed varying degrees of regret, and some claimed not to have seen what they had signed.

[ 3 ] Purpose and reaction [ edit ] The manifesto was primarily designed to contradict the negative image of Germany being portrayed in the press by other countries (especially in Britain), which is indicated by the fact that it was published in ten different languages. In addition, the manifesto articulated moral indignation, laying charges against foreign governments, academic institutions, and scholars whom the authors believed had wronged the German nation.

[ 4 ] They also probably hoped to undermine support for the war among the civilian population of the Entente powers by demonstrating that German scientists — who at the time were very highly reputed — were fully in support of their country, thereby inducing the intellectuals of other European nations to put pressure on the governments of their respective countries. The reaction of both the European and American press, and of academic institutions around the world, indicate that the attempt was a failure.

[ 4 ] Text [ edit ] German text Here is the English translation (italics in original) as reprinted after the war: [ 5 ] As representatives of German Science and Art, we hereby protest to the civilized world against the lies and calumnies with which our enemies are endeavoring to stain the honour of Germany in her hard struggle for existence—in a struggle that has been forced on her.

The iron mouth of events has proved the untruth of the fictitious German defeats; consequently misrepresentation and calumny are all the more eagerly at work. As heralds of truth we raise our voices against these.

It is not true that Germany is guilty of having caused this war. Neither the people, the Government, nor the Kaiser wanted war. Germany did her utmost to prevent it; for this assertion the world has
documental proof. Often enough during the twenty-six years of his reign has Wilhelm II shown himself to be the upholder of peace, and
often enough has this fact been acknowledged by our opponents. Nay, even the Kaiser, whom they now dare to call an Attila , has been ridiculed by them for years, because of his steadfast endeavors to maintain universal peace. Not till a numerical superiority which has been lying in wait on the frontiers assailed us did the whole nation rise to a man.

It is not true that we trespassed in neutral Belgium. It has been proved that France and England had resolved on such a trespass, and it has likewise been proved that Belgium had agreed to their doing so. It would have been suicide on our part not to have preempted this.

It is not true that the life and property of a single Belgian citizen was injured by our soldiers without the bitterest self-defense having made it necessary; for again and again, notwithstanding repeated threats, the citizens lay in ambush , shooting at the troops out of the houses, mutilating the wounded, and murdering in cold blood the medical men while they were doing their Samaritan work. There can be no baser abuse than the suppression of these crimes with the view of letting the Germans appear to be criminals, only for having justly punished these assassins for their wicked deeds.

It is not true that our troops treated Louvain brutally. Furious inhabitants having treacherously fallen upon them in their quarters, our troops with aching hearts were obliged to fire a part of the town as a punishment. The greatest part of Louvain has been preserved. The famous Town Hall stands quite intact; for at great self-sacrifice our soldiers saved it from destruction by the flames. Every German would of course greatly regret if in the course of this terrible war any works of art should already have been destroyed or be destroyed at some future time, but inasmuch as in our great love for art we cannot be surpassed by any other nation, in the same degree we must decidedly refuse to buy a German defeat at the cost of saving a work of art.

It is not true that our warfare pays no respect to international laws . It knows no indisciplined cruelty. But in the east the earth is saturated with the blood of women and children unmercifully butchered by the wild Russian troops , and in the west dumdum bullets mutilate the breasts of our soldiers. Those who have allied themselves with Russians and Serbians , and present such a shameful scene to the world as that of inciting Mongolians and negroes against the white race , have no right whatever to call themselves upholders of civilization.

It is not true that the combat against our so-called militarism is not a combat against our civilization, as our enemies hypocritically pretend it is. Were it not for German militarism, German civilization would long since have been extirpated. For its protection it arose in a land which for centuries had been plagued by bands of robbers as no other land had been. The German Army and the German people are one and today this consciousness fraternizes 70,000,000 Germans, all ranks, positions, and parties being one.

We cannot wrest the poisonous weapon—the lie—out of the hands of our enemies. All we can do is to proclaim to all the world that our enemies are giving false witness against us. You, who know us, who with us have protected the most holy possessions of man, we call to you: Have faith in us! Believe, that we shall carry on this war to the end as a civilized nation, to whom the legacy of a Goethe , a Beethoven , and a Kant is just as sacred as its own hearths and homes.

For this we pledge you our names and our honor: Signatories [ edit ] The 93 signatories included Nobel laureates , architects , artists , chemists , composers , philosophers , physicians , physicists , poets , theologians and known college teachers. The German composer Richard Strauss refused to sign, on the basis that "Declarations about war and politics are not fitting for an artist." [ 6 ] List of signatories [ edit ] Adolf von Baeyer , chemist: synthesized indigo, 1905 recipient of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry Peter Behrens , architect and designer Emil Adolf von Behring , physiologist: received the 1901 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Wilhelm von Bode , art historian and curator Alois Brandl [ de ] , Austrian-German philologist Lujo Brentano , economist and social reformer Justus Brinckmann , art historian Johannes Conrad , political economist Franz von Defregger , Austrian artist Richard Dehmel , anti-conservative poet and writer Adolf Deissmann , Protestant theologian Wilhelm Dörpfeld , architect and archeologist (including site of ancient Troy) Friedrich von Duhn , classical archaeologist Paul Ehrlich , awarded the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, initiated chemotherapy, "the magic bullet" Albert Ehrhard , Catholic priest and church historian Karl Engler , chemist Gerhard Esser [ de ] , Catholic theologian Rudolf Christoph Eucken , philosopher: winner of the 1908 Nobel Prize for Literature Herbert Eulenberg , poet and playwright Henrich Finke , Catholic church historian Hermann Emil Fischer , chemist: 1902 recipient of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry Wilhelm Foerster , also signed counter-manifesto Ludwig Fulda , Jewish playwright with strong social commitment Eduard von Gebhardt , painter Jan Jakob Maria de Groot , Sinologist and historian of religion Fritz Haber , chemist: received the 1918 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for synthesizing ammonia Ernst Haeckel , biologist: coined the words "ecology, phylum, stem cell," developed "ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny" Max Halbe , dramatist Adolf von Harnack , Lutheran theologian Carl Hauptmann [ de ] , playwright Gerhart Hauptmann , dramatist and novelist: received the 1912 Nobel Prize in Literature Gustav Hellmann , meteorologist Wilhelm Herrmann , Reformed theologian Andreas Heusler , Swiss medievalist Adolf von Hildebrand , sculptor Ludwig Hoffmann , architect Engelbert Humperdinck , composer: including "Hänsel und Gretel" Leopold Graf von Kalckreuth , painter Arthur Kampf , history painter Friedrich August von Kaulbach , painter Theodor Kipp , jurist Felix Klein , mathematician: group theory, complex analysis, non-Euclidean geometry; "the Klein bottle" Max Klinger , Symbolist painter, sculptor, printmaker, and writer Aloïs Knoepfler , art historian Anton Koch, Catholic theologian Paul Laband , professor of law Karl Lamprecht , historian Philipp Lenard , physicist: winner of the 1905 Nobel Prize for Physics for cathode rays research Maximilian Lenz , painter Max Liebermann , Jewish Impressionist painter and printmaker Franz von Liszt , jurist and legal scholar (cousin of the composer) Ludwig Manzel , sculptor Joseph Mausbach [ de ] , theologian Georg von Mayr [ de ] , statistician Sebastian Merkle [ de ] , Catholic theologian Eduard Meyer , historian Heinrich Morf , linguist Friedrich Naumann , liberal politician and Protestant pastor Albert Neisser , physician who discovered the cause of gonorrhea Walther Hermann Nernst , chemist: third law of thermodynamics, won the 1920 Nobel Prize in chemistry Wilhelm Ostwald , chemist: received the 1909 Nobel Prize in Chemistry Bruno Paul , architect, illustrator, interior designer, and furniture designer.

Max Planck , theoretical physicist: originated quantum theory, awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918 Albert Plohn , professor of medicine Georg Reicke [ de ] , author and politician Max Reinhardt , Austrian-born, American stage and film actor and director Alois Riehl , philosopher Carl Robert , philologist and archeologist Wilhelm Röntgen , physicist: known for X-rays, awarded 1901 Nobel Prize in Physics Max Rubner , physiologist and hygienist Fritz Schaper , sculptor Adolf von Schlatter , Evangelical theologian August Schmidlin [ de ] , theologian Gustav von Schmoller , economist Reinhold Seeberg , theologian Martin Spahn [ fr ] , historian Franz von Stuck , symbolist/Art Nouveau painter, sculptor, engraver, and architect Hermann Sudermann , dramatist and novelist Hans Thoma , painter Wilhelm Trübner , realist painter Karl Vollmöller , playwright and screenwriter Richard Voss , dramatist and novelist Karl Vossler , linguist and scholar Siegfried Wagner , composer, son of Richard Wagner Wilhelm Waldeyer , anatomist: named the chromosome August von Wassermann , bacteriologist: developed the "Wassermann test" for syphilis Felix Weingartner , Austrian conductor, composer and pianist Theodor Wiegand , archeologist Wilhelm Wien , physicist: received the 1911 Nobel Prize for work on heat radiation Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff , classical philologist Richard Willstätter , organic chemist: won the 1915 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for structure of plant pigments Wilhelm Windelband , philosopher Wilhelm Wundt , physician, psychologist, physiologist, philosopher, "father of experimental psychology" See also [ edit ] Septemberprogramm References [ edit ] ^ Jürgen von Ungern-Sternberg and Wolfgang von Ungern-Sternberg, Der Aufruf "An die Kulturwelt!": das Manifest der 93 und die Anfänge der Kriegspropaganda im Ersten Weltkrieg , Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1996, p.13.

^ Grundmann, Siegfried (2005).

The Einstein Dossiers . Berlin: Springer.

^ "The Ninety-Three Today" (PDF) .

The New York Times . March 2, 1921. p. 7.

^ a b Meyer-Rewerts & Stöckmann 2010 , p. 121.

^ To the civilized world ^ Richard Strauss; Romain Rolland (1968). Rollo Myers (ed.).

Richard Strauss & Romain Rolland: Correspondence . Calder, London. p. 160.

General references [ edit ] Herbert Gantschacher "Warpropaganda and the manifesto of the Ninety-Three" in Herbert Gantschacher "VIKTOR ULLMANN ZEUGE UND OPFER DER APOKALYPSE - WITNESS AND VICTIM OF THE APOCALYPSE - Testimone e vittima dell'Apocalisse - Prič in žrtev apokalipse - Svědek a oběť apokalypsy" - Complete original authorized edition in German and English language with summaries in Italian, Slovenian and Czech language, ARBOS-Edition ISBN 978-3-9503173-3-6 , Arnoldstein-Klagenfurt-Salzburg-Vienna-Prora-Prague 2015, page 185.

Meyer-Rewerts, U.; Stöckmann, H. (2010). "Das ′Manifest der 93′: Ausdruck oder Negation der Zivilgesellschaft?". In Johanna Klatt; Robert Lorenz (eds.).

Manifeste: Geschichte und Gegenwart des politischen Appells (in German). Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-83941-679-2 .

External links [ edit ] Original manifesto NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐rq7nv
Cached time: 20250814223002
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.349 seconds
Real time usage: 0.439 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1926/1000000
Revision size: 15907/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 19434/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6782/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 17714/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.234/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15834909/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  391.461      1 -total
 25.63%  100.336      1 Template:Reflist
 23.64%   92.553      1 Template:Langx
 23.24%   90.961      3 Template:Cite_book
 16.10%   63.040      1 Template:Short_description
  9.21%   36.057      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.99%   35.205      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.91%   34.884      2 Template:Sfn
  8.17%   31.973      9 Template:Ill
  5.34%   20.923     16 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5804441:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223002 and revision id 1300161366. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manifesto_of_the_Ninety-Three&oldid=1300161366 " Categories : Cultural history of World War I German Empire in World War I Political manifestos World War I publications 1914 documents Denialism World War I propaganda Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manifesto of the Ninety-Three 15 languages Add topic

