Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 National Review 2.2 Mathematics 2.3 Role in Way of the Dragon 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Conflicts with National Review 4 Personal life 5 Published works 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Interviews Toggle the table of contents John Derbyshire 11 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Malagasy مصرى Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American paleoconservative For the swimmer, see John Derbyshire (swimmer) .

John Derbyshire Derbyshire in June 2001 Born ( 1945-06-03 ) 3 June 1945 (age 80) Northampton , Northamptonshire, England, United Kingdom Citizenship United States Alma mater University College London , University of London Occupation(s) Computer programmer, journalist, political commentator Website JohnDerbyshire.com John Derbyshire (born 3 June 1945) is an American journalist and political commentator. He was one of the last paleoconservatives at the National Review , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] until he was fired in 2012 for writing an article for Taki's Magazine that was widely described as racist.

[ 3 ] Since 2012 he has written for white nationalist website VDARE .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] In the article that caused his firing, Derbyshire suggested that white and East Asian parents should talk to their children about the threats posed to their safety by black people . He also recommended that parents tell their children not to live in predominantly black communities.

[ 3 ] He included the line "If planning a trip to a beach or amusement park at some date, find out whether it is likely to be swamped with blacks on that date." [ 3 ] He has also written for the New English Review . His columns cover political-cultural topics, including immigration, China, history, mathematics, and race .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Derbyshire's 1996 novel about Chinese American immigrants, Seeing Calvin Coolidge in a Dream , was a New York Times "Notable Book of the Year".

[ 7 ] His 2004 non-fiction book Prime Obsession won the Mathematical Association of America 's inaugural Euler Book Prize .

[ 8 ] A political book, We Are Doomed: Reclaiming Conservative Pessimism , was released in September 2009.

[ 9 ] Early life Derbyshire attended the Northampton School for Boys and graduated from University College London , of the University of London , where he studied mathematics.  Before turning to writing full-time, he worked on Wall Street as a computer programmer.

Career National Review Derbyshire worked as a writer at National Review until he was terminated in 2012 because of an article published in Taki's Magazine that was widely perceived as racist.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Derbyshire began writing for the far-right website VDARE in May 2012.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] In his first column for the website, Derbyshire wrote " White supremacy , in the sense of a society in which key decisions are made by white Europeans, is one of the better arrangements History has come up with." [ 4 ] Mathematics Derbyshire's book Prime Obsession : Bernhard Riemann and the Greatest Unsolved Problem in Mathematics was first published in hardcover in 2003 and then paperback in 2004. It focuses on the Riemann hypothesis , one of the Millennium Problems .

[ 12 ] The book is aimed, as Derbyshire puts it in his prologue, "at the intelligent and curious but nonmathematical reader ..." Prime Obsession explores such topics as complex numbers , field theory , the prime number theorem , the zeta function , the harmonic series , and others.  The biographical sections give relevant information about the lives of mathematicians who worked in these areas, including Euler , Gauss , Lejeune Dirichlet , Lobachevsky , Chebyshev , Vallée-Poussin , Hadamard , as well as Riemann himself.

[ citation needed ] In 2006, Joseph Henry Press , an imprint of the National Academies Press , published another Derbyshire book of popular mathematics: Unknown Quantity: A Real And Imaginary History of Algebra .

[ 13 ] Role in Way of the Dragon Derbyshire had an uncredited role in Way of the Dragon (released in the United States as Return of the Dragon ), a 1972 martial arts film directed by and starring, actor and martial artist Bruce Lee .

[ 14 ] Of landing the part, Derbyshire said: "The casting director had obviously just trawled around the low-class guesthouses for unemployed foreigners of a sufficiently thuggish appearance." [ 15 ] Views This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Derbyshire writes in general from a small government conservative perspective. He notably ridiculed George W. Bush 's "itty-bitty tax cut, paid for by dumping a slew of federal debt on your children and grandchildren," [ 16 ] derided Bush as too sure of his religious convictions and for his "rich-kid-ness".

[ 17 ] He has noted that small-government conservatism is unlikely to ever take hold in the United States (although he is personally sympathetic to it), called for immediate U.S. withdrawal from Iraq (but favoured the invasion), opposed market reforms or any other changes in Social Security , supported legal access to abortion, supported euthanasia in a fairly wide range of circumstances, and suggested that he might (in a time of international crisis) vote for Hillary Clinton as president.

[ 18 ] Derbyshire wrote about American schooling in his book We Are Doomed , "Education is a vast sea of lies, waste, corruption, crackpot theorizing, and careerist log-rolling." He further argued that people "had better brace ourselves for the catastrophe" coming as a result.

[ 19 ] Derbyshire once argued that America would be better off if women did not have the right to vote.

[ 20 ] Derbyshire was one of the inaugural speakers at the H.L. Mencken Club, a far-right club formed by Paul Gottfried and Richard B. Spencer , and has spoken at the group several additional times. The H.L. Mencken Club has been described by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a white nationalist organization.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Conflicts with National Review Derbyshire differed from other writers at National Review magazine on many subjects. For example, Derbyshire supported Michael Schiavo 's position in the Terri Schiavo case . Derbyshire's views on the Schiavo case attracted criticism from colleagues such as Ramesh Ponnuru .

[ 23 ] The Derbyshire–Ponnuru dispute arose again over Ponnuru's 2006 book The Party of Death . Derbyshire reviewed the book harshly in the New English Review , [ 24 ] and Ponnuru replied on National Review Online .

[ 25 ] Though Derbyshire broadly agreed with other writers at National Review Online on immigration, he encountered strong opposition from former National Review Online blogger John Podhoretz , who described Derbyshire's comments on restricting immigration to maintain "ethnic balance" in severe terms: "But maintaining 'ethnic balance' is not fine. It is chillingly, horrifyingly not fine." [ 26 ] Personal life Derbyshire's has been married to Lynette Rose Derbyshire, a Chinese immigrant, since 1986.

[ 27 ] The couple were married in the city of Jilin, in Jilin Province, northeast China, and have a daughter and a son. He has lived in Long Island, New York since 1992.

[ 28 ] In early 2012, he underwent treatment for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia .

[ 29 ] Published works Seeing Calvin Coolidge in a Dream (St. Martin's Griffin, 1997) ISBN 0-312-15649-9 Prime Obsession : Bernhard Riemann and the Greatest Unsolved Problem in Mathematics (Plume Books, 2003) ISBN 0-452-28525-9 Unknown Quantity: A Real And Imaginary History of Algebra (Joseph Henry Press, 2006) ISBN 0-309-09657-X We Are Doomed: Reclaiming Conservative Pessimism (Crown Forum, 2009) ISBN 0-307-40958-9 , ISBN 978-0-307-40958-4 From the Dissident Right (Vdare Books, 2013) ISBN 978-1304001542 He has also written numerous articles for various publications, including National Review , The New Criterion , The American Conservative and The Washington Times .

Derbyshire recorded a weekly podcast called "Radio Derb," from 2004 to 2025, in which he comments on current events. The podcast was hosted on the National Review website before being moved to Taki's Magazine . It was later hosted on VDARE and then the ZBlog. The podcast was the longest running Paleoconservative podcast at the time of its completion with 1000 episodes (over 600 hours of content).

[ citation needed ] References ^ "Re: Paleocons On Immigration" .

National Review . 19 March 2003 . Retrieved 7 January 2021 .

^ a b c Matthews, Dylan (6 May 2016).

"Paleoconservatism, the movement that explains Donald Trump, explained" .

Vox . Retrieved 7 January 2021 .

^ a b c Byers, Dylan (7 April 2012).

"National Review fires John Derbyshire" .

POLITICO . Retrieved 9 September 2022 .

^ a b c "VDARE" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

White supremacy, in the sense of a society in which key decisions are made by white Europeans, is one of the better arrangements History has come up with. There have of course been some blots on the record, but I don't see how it can be denied that net-net, white Europeans have made a better job of running fair and stable societies than has any other group.

^ "John Derbyshire archive" .

National Review Online . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ "Articles by John Derbyshire at New English Review" .

New English Review . Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ "Notable Books of the Year 1996" .

The New York Times . 8 December 1996.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

^ "The Mathematical Association of America's Euler Book Prize" . MAA Online. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ Nagle, Angela (2017).

Kill All Normies: Online Culture Wars From 4Chan And Tumblr To Trump And The Alt-Right . John Hunt Publishing.

Right wing voices that claim to have been purged from the conservative movement, like Peter Brimelow and John Derbyshire, have formed part of the alt-right.

^ Lowry, Rich (7 April 2012).

"Parting Ways" .

National Review Online . Retrieved 21 February 2016 .

^ Davidson Sorkin, Amy (9 April 2012).

"Why the National Review Fired John Derbyshire" .

The New Yorker . New York City . Retrieved 15 May 2017 .

^ S. W. Graham.

"Read This: Prime Obsession" .

The Mathematical Association of America . Retrieved 30 October 2009 .

^ Derbyshire, John (2006).

Unknown quantity: a real and imaginary history of algebra . Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press.

doi : 10.17226/11540 .

ISBN 978-0-309-09657-7 .

^ "Twelve questions for John Derbyshire" .

The Economist . 18 July 2009 . Retrieved 30 October 2009 .

^ John Derbyshire (15 October 2003).

"Thug (Uncredited)" .

National Review . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ John Derbyshire (10 May 2005).

"Twilight of Conservatism" .

National Review Online . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ John Derbyshire (5 July 2006).

"Gone, but Not Forgotten" .

National Review Online . Archived from the original on 16 February 2007 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ John Derbyshire (24 June 2005).

"Just Got Back From The Windy City ..." National Review Online . Archived from the original on 20 January 2008 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ Derbyshire, John (7 July 2011).

"The Credentialed Society" .

National Review . Retrieved 8 April 2012 .

^ Shakir, Faiz (30 September 2009).

"National Review's John Derbyshire: Women Should Not Have The Right To Vote" . ThinkProgress.org. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011 . Retrieved 6 March 2024 .

^ Hartzell, Stephanie L. (2018).

"Alt-White: Conceptualizing the "Alt-Right" as a Rhetorical Bridge between White Nationalism and Mainstream Public Discourse" (PDF) .

Journal of Contemporary Rhetoric .

8 (1/2): 6– 18 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ Piggott, Stephen (4 November 2016).

"White Nationalists to Gather in Baltimore for the Ninth Annual H.L. Mencken Club Conference" .

HateWatch . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ Ramesh Ponnuru (23 March 2005).

"Contra Derbyshire" .

National Review . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ John Derbyshire (June 2006).

"A Frigid and Pitiless Dogma" .

New English Review . Archived from the original on 15 April 2007 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ Ponnuru, Ramesh (7 June 2006).

"Unreason John Derbyshire vs. Pro-Lifers" .

National Review . Retrieved 13 May 2013 .

^ John Podhoretz (12 May 2006).

"Ethnic Balance?" .

National Review . Archived from the original on 20 January 2008 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ "Family Album" . Johnderbyshire.com . Retrieved 8 April 2012 .

^ "John Derbyshire" . John Derbyshire . Retrieved 7 July 2013 .

^ O'Connor, Maureen (9 April 2012).

" 'I May Give Up Writing and Work as a Butler': Interview with John Derbyshire" .

Gawker . Archived from the original on 10 April 2012 . Retrieved 10 April 2012 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to John Derbyshire .

John Derbyshire's home page, with archive of web and print articles John Derbyshire at IMDb Interviews Radio Free Indiana: Interview with John Derbyshire Archived 12 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine on The Voice of Reason Broadcast Network Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Korea Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Derbyshire&oldid=1305140187 " Categories : 1945 births Alt-right writers Alumni of University College London American columnists American computer programmers American male non-fiction writers American political commentators American political writers American science writers American white supremacists British white supremacists Critics of multiculturalism English emigrants to the United States English film actors Living people Mathematics popularizers National Review people People educated at Northampton School for Boys People involved in race and intelligence controversies People from Long Island Writers from London Writers from New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2020 Use British English from January 2020 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Webarchive template wayback links People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 08:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Derbyshire 11 languages Add topic

