Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dogmatism 2 Evidence 3 Relatively adequate hypotheses Toggle Relatively adequate hypotheses subsection 3.1 Formism (similarity) 3.2 Mechanism (machine) 3.3 Contextualism (historical act) 3.4 Organicism (living system) 4 Jargon 5 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 5.1 Core publications 5.2 Extensions and applications 6 References Toggle the table of contents World Hypotheses Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Stephen C. Pepper World Hypotheses: A Study in Evidence , by Stephen C. Pepper (1942), presents four relatively adequate world hypotheses (or world views or conceptual systems) in terms of their root metaphors: formism (similarity), mechanism (machine), contextualism (historical act), and organicism (living system).

In World Hypotheses , Pepper argues that logical positivism was in error, because there is no such thing as data free from interpretation, and that root metaphors are necessary in epistemology.  In other words, objectivity is a myth because there is no such thing as pure, objective fact.  Consequently, an analysis is necessary to understand how to interpret these 'facts.'  Pepper does so by developing the "[root metaphor method, ...] and outlines what he considers to be four basically adequate world hypotheses (world views or conceptual systems): formism, mechanism, contextualism, and organicism." He identifies the strengths and weaknesses of each of the world hypotheses as well as the paradoxical and sometimes mystifying effects of the effort to synthesize them.

[ 1 ] Dogmatism [ edit ] Pepper begins by demonstrating the very weak positions of utter skepticism and dogmatism while explaining that each are essentially two sides of the same coin.  He has no problem with relative skepticism, where one suspends belief until justification is provided.  But utter skepticism is essentially a dogmatist who doubts all things, always.  Pepper defines a dogmatist "as one whose belief exceeds his cognitive grounds for belief." [ 2 ] If neither position of utter skepticism and dogmatism are cognitively justifiable, then knowledge about the world will be somewhere in between. Specifically, between common sense and refined knowledge .

Evidence [ edit ] There is a tension between common sense and refined knowledge .  Common sense is ubiquitous and ever present, and therefore gives a strong sense of certainty.  But once you reflect upon common sense, it is no longer common sense and has moved into the realm of refined knowledge.  To a large extent, the philosophy of science, and science in general, is interested in this shift.

Once you embark into refined knowledge, there are certain criteria as to what constitutes 'evidence.'  In other words, there are rules governing how we know what we know (This should be recognized as an epistemological concept).  And depending on the choice of your root metaphor , different criteria exist as to what constitutes good evidence.

Pepper presents two types of world hypotheses: inadequate and relatively adequate hypotheses. The two inadequate systems are identified as mysticism and animism .

Relatively adequate hypotheses [ edit ] Formism (similarity) [ edit ] Why does an orange look and taste like an orange? It's in the nature of an orange to be orange in color and round in shape and to taste like an orange. These are an orange's distinguishing properties, attributes, traits, or features—in short, its essence. The root metaphor for formism is identification of similarities and differences for phenomena. In short, things that appear to go together do in fact go together.

Plato and Aristotle are examples of formist philosophers.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Mechanism (machine) [ edit ] Given 19th and 20th century technologies—steam engines, gas engines, electric motors, and computers—the machine is frequently adopted as a metaphor for understanding phenomena. Machines are described according to the parts from which they are assembled—for example, gears, wires, or chips. Machines remain at rest until energy is supplied from outside. The root metaphor of mechanism (philosophy) is identification of the parts and processes and their response to stimulation from the environment. Mechanistic philosophers include Descartes , Thomas Hobbes , John Locke , and David Hume .

[ 6 ] Contextualism (historical act) [ edit ] Historical events—an election, revolution, or war—have no significance when considered in isolation. The significance of an historical act depends on its context: its relationship with events that precede and follow and the interpretations of these acts. The historical-context, or contextualist , metaphor, is selection among events, contexts, and interpretations and weaving these into coherent and meaningful histories.

Charles Sanders Peirce , William James , Henri Bergson , and John Dewey are examples of contextualist philosophers.

[ 7 ] Organicism (living system) [ edit ] We are immersed in a biological world of living organisms, both plants and animals, including ourselves. Living organisms are organized, self-regulating, and actively functioning systems. A seed planted in favorable conditions, unfolding and maturing into a tree, is an example of an organismic system. The root metaphor for organicism is inquiring how living systems maintain adaptive balances between acting on the environment and being acted on and supported by the environment. Organismic philosophers include Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel .

[ 8 ] Jargon [ edit ] dubitanda: Pepper's jargon for common sense.

data: Pepper's jargon for multiplicative corroboration , which simply refers to repeated empirical observation.  If two people read a thermometer and agree on the reading, there has been multiplicative corroboration.

In layman's terms, we call this data.

danda: Pepper's jargon for structural corroboration, which in layman's terms is similar to logical data .

Publications [ edit ] Core publications [ edit ] Berry, Franklin M. (1984). An introduction to Stephen C. Pepper's philosophical system via World Hypotheses: A Study in Evidence.

Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 22 (5), 446-448.

Hayes, Steven C., Hayes, L. J., & Reese, H W. (1988). Finding the philosophical core: A review of Stephen C. Pepper's World Hypotheses: A study in evidence.

Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior , 50 , 97-111.

Pepper, S. C. (1942).

World hypotheses: A study in evidence . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Extensions and applications [ edit ] Efron, A. (Ed.). (1982). The Pepper papers, a symposium on the meta-philosophy of Stephen C. Pepper: Root metaphor theory (Special issue).

Journal of Mind and Behavior , 3 (3 & 4).

Efron, A. (1980). Pepper's continuing value: In A. Efron & J. Herold (Eds.), Root metaphor: The live thought of Stephen C. Pepper.

Paunch , No. 53-54, 5-53.

Harris, Maxine, Fontana, A. F., & Downs, B. N. (1977). The World Hypotheses Scale: Rationale, reliability and validity.

Journal of Personality Assessment , 41 (5), 537-547.

Meacham, J. A. (2004). Action, voice, and identity in children's lives. In P. B. Pufall and R. P. Unsworth (Eds.), Rethinking childhood . Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press. Pp. 69-84.

Meacham, J. A. (2015). Metaphors for understanding children and their role in culture. In Guner Coskunsu (Ed.), The archaeological study of childhood: Interdisciplinary perspectives on an archaeological enigma . Albany: SUNY Press. Pp. 149-164.

Morris, E. K. (1988). Contextualism: The world view of behavior analysis.

Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 46 , 289-323.

Overton, W. F., & Reese, H. W. (1973). Models of development: Methodological implications. In J. R. Nesselroade & H. W. Reese (Eds.), Life-span developmental psychology: Methodological issues (pp. 65-86). New York: Academic Press.

Peterson, C. Four ways to explain anything . . . but not everything to everyone.

Reese, H. W., & Overton, W. F. (1970). Models of development and theories of development. In L. R. Goulet and P. B. Baltes (Eds.), Life-span developmental psychology: Research and theory (pp. 115-145). New York: Academic Press.

References [ edit ] ^ Pepper's home page ^ Pepper, S.C., (1942).  World Hypotheses: A study of evidence, University of California Press, Berkeley, Los Angeles and London.

^ Pepper, S. C. (1942). World hypotheses: A study in evidence. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pages 151-185.

^ Berry, Franklin M. (1984). An introduction to Stephen C. Pepper's philosophical system via World Hypotheses: A Study in Evidence.

Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 22(5), 446-448.

^ Hayes, Steven C., Hayes, L. J., & Reese, H W. (1988). Finding the philosophical core: A review of Stephen C. Pepper's World Hypotheses: A study in evidence.

Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior , 50, 97-111.

^ Pepper, S. C. (1942). World hypotheses: A study in evidence. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pages 186-231.

^ Pepper, S. C. (1942). World hypotheses: A study in evidence. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pages 232-279.

^ Pepper, S. C. (1942). World hypotheses: A study in evidence. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pages 280-317.

v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Hypotheses&oldid=1269594254 " Categories : Contemporary philosophical literature Epistemology books Metaphysics books Philosophy of science books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 12:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World Hypotheses Add languages Add topic

