Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Career 2 Views Toggle Views subsection 2.1 Panpsychism 2.1.1 Response 2.2 Environmentalism 2.3 Politics 2.4 Religion 3 Publications 4 Personal life 5 Books 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Philip Goff (philosopher) 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher Philip Goff Goff in 2018 Born 1978 (age 46-47) Nationality British Spouse Emma Goff Education Alma mater University of Leeds ( MA ), University of Reading ( PhD ) Philosophical work Era 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Main interests Philosophy of mind Notable ideas Panpsychism Website philipgoffphilosophy .com Philip Goff is a British author, panpsychist philosopher, and professor at Durham University whose research focuses on philosophy of mind and consciousness .

[ 1 ] Specifically, it focuses on how consciousness can be part of the scientific worldview. Goff holds that materialism is "incoherent" and that dualism leads to "complexity, discontinuity and mystery".

[ 2 ] Instead, he advocates a "third way", a version of Russellian monism that attempts to account for reality's intrinsic nature by positing that consciousness is a fundamental, ubiquitous feature of the physical world. "The basic commitment is that the fundamental constituents of reality—perhaps electrons and quarks —have incredibly simple forms of experience." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Goff has written that he has been obsessed with the problem of consciousness for as long as he can remember.

[ citation needed ] At the age of 14, he declined to undergo Catholic confirmation and came to negatively associate philosophical dualism with his religious upbringing.

As a philosophy undergraduate at the University of Leeds , he felt he had to choose between dualism and materialism ; he became a committed materialist.

[ 7 ] : 93 He passionately debated religious dualists, defending the view that the mind and the brain are synonymous. Later, he began to doubt the coherence of this position because it failed to account for personal experiences that have subjective qualities we know firsthand.

[ citation needed ] This cognitive dissonance finally peaked one evening in a bar when the thrum of vivid sensations clashed with his assumed worldview. "I couldn't deny it anymore. I'd already accepted that if materialism was true, then I was a zombie. But I knew I wasn't a zombie; I was a thinking, feeling human being. I could no longer live in denial of my consciousness." [ 7 ] : 93 Yet he had to finish his studies, so Goff became a "closet dualist" while continuing to write a dissertation in which he argued that the problem of consciousness was unresolvable. Disenchanted with philosophy, he went on to teach English in Poland.

Later, when he came across Thomas Nagel 's article "Panpsychism", Goff discovered a neglected third way of connecting matter and consciousness, rekindling his interest in academic philosophy.

Career [ edit ] Goff got his PhD at University of Reading under Galen Strawson , one of the few proponents of panpsychism at that time, who was rediscovering Bertrand Russell 's and Arthur Eddington 's earlier work on monism .

[ 7 ] : 97 Goff then did postdoctoral work at the Centre for Consciousness at the Australian National University.

He was at The University of Hertfordshire and King's College London . He was an Associate Professor of Philosophy at Central European University [ 4 ] and the Department of Philosophy, University of Birmingham.

He is currently an Associate Professor at Durham University.

In 2014, Goff attended the Consciousness Cruise off Greenland , sponsored by Dmitry Volkov and the Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies. It was a floating conference that featured prominent philosophers of mind such as David Chalmers , Paul Churchland , Patricia Churchland , Andy Clark , Daniel Dennett , Keith Frankish , Nicholas Humphrey , Jesse Prinz , and Derk Pereboom . Goff gave a talk about his developing position on and defense of panpsychism.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Goff and Keith Frankish , a colleague who defends the opposing view of illusionism , started the YouTube channel "Mind Chat" in 2021, interviewing scientists and philosophers of consciousness such as Tim O'Connor , Janet Levin , Christof Koch , Anil Seth , and Helen Yetter-Chappel .

[ 10 ] Views [ edit ] Panpsychism [ edit ] Main article: Panpsychism Galileo inaugurated modern science by dividing the world into the quantitative realm of science and, on the other hand, the qualitative realm of subjective experience. While this division ushered in the modern scientific era, Goff argues, it likely made it impossible that scientific naturalism could ever account for consciousness without either eliminating its qualitative aspects or falling victim to the liabilities of dualism. Goff was unconvinced by David Chalmers's and Kelvin McQueen's attempts to establish a type of naturalistic dualism based on quantum mechanics. Though Goff thinks the idea deserves more attention, he concluded that even if dualism is compatible with science, we should be wary of it on the grounds that it is less simple than other theories of consciousness.

[ 7 ] : 43 Goff argued that the qualities of consciousness cannot be captured in the purely quantitative vocabulary of physical sciences. Though the optimistic materialist may hope that further or more detailed quantitative descriptions might someday explain why and how a purely physical brain produces intrinsic personal experiences, Goff used a series of a priori thought experiments to argue that this is likely a false hope.

[ 3 ] In his book Galileo's Error , Goff used Frank Jackson 's Knowledge Argument to show that a purely physical description of the world is not complete. Next, he used Chalmers's Conceivability Argument to argue that materialism cannot possibly be true. Goff concluded, "Materialists who claim both that reality can be exhaustively described in the objective vocabulary of physical science and that there are subjective properties are quite simply contradicting themselves." [ 7 ] : 59 Instead Goff supports a "third way", a version of Russellian monism that attempts to account for reality's intrinsic nature by positing that consciousness is a fundamental, ubiquitous feature of the physical world. "The basic commitment is that the fundamental constituents of reality—perhaps electrons and quarks—have incredibly simple forms of experience." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Because the claim is that consciousness is fundamental, Goff's view does not provide an account of consciousness that reduces it to something else. He says "it is a prejudice of materialism to suppose that this is obligatory." [ 7 ] : 96 Though the idea of electrons having experience is counterintuitive to most people, Goff clarified that most modern panpsychists do not believe that any clump of matter results in complex consciousness. "Most panpsychists will deny that your socks are conscious, while asserting that they are ultimately composed of things that are conscious." [ 7 ] : 94 Response [ edit ] While panpsychism remained a minority view amongst professional philosophers, since the work of Galen Strawson and Goff in the 21st century and their rediscovery of Russell's and Arthur Eddington's 1920's work on consciousness, it's become more widely discussed and debated. Goff has debated panpsychism against thinkers as diverse as physicalist Massimo Pigliucci and idealist Bernardo Kastrup.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In 2021, the Journal of Consciousness Studies published 20 essays by scientists, philosophers, and theologians responding to Goff's work. Goff published a response essay in the same issue.

[ 13 ] Environmentalism [ edit ] Goff sees hope in panpsychism to solve human indifference to the climate crisis. Noting that Naomi Klein blames dualism for our degradation of the environment, Goff speculates that children reared in a panpsychist tradition would be less indifferent to and more protective of the environment.

[ 7 ] : 153,155 Politics [ edit ] Goff calls himself a "vigorous opponent of neoliberalism" and a "huge fan of taxation".

[ 4 ] He has argued against the libertarian idea that taxation is theft, on the basis that people do not own their pretax income.

[ 14 ] In 2011 Goff instigated a protest against singer Bono that involved inflating a balloon in the front row of his concert to draw attention to Bono's band U2 's financial behaviour, which Goff said amounted to Bono being a "tax rogue".

[ 15 ] Goff has written that Bono's behaviour, as revealed in the Paradise Papers , is part of a general trend of the wealthy moving their money to tax havens at developing countries' expense (citing Christian Aid 's estimate that this amounts to $160 billion annually).

[ 15 ] Religion [ edit ] On his website, Goff called himself a "practising agnostic", writing that Christianity might not be true but that he finds its practice enriching.

[ 4 ] His ideas relate to various philosophical projects such as pantheism , Christian atheism , and religious naturalism .

[ 16 ] But in 2024, Goff announced his conversion to a "heretical form of Christianity".

[ 17 ] He said that though he describes himself as a Christian, he is only "close to 50%" sure that his version of Christianity is true.

[ 18 ] Publications [ edit ] Goff has published over 46 academic papers, 10 book reviews, guest edited an issue of Philosophy Now and written over 35 articles in the popular press in outlets such as The Guardian , The Times Literary Supplement . He has appeared in 70 podcasts and various debates.

[ 4 ] In 2021, the Journal of Consciousness Studies featured Goff's work as the topic of 20 essays by scientists, philosophers, and theologians. Goff responded to their essays in the same journal.

[ 13 ] Personal life [ edit ] Goff plays in a rock band, writing on his website that "we still gig occasionally".

[ 4 ] Books [ edit ] Consciousness and Fundamental Reality (2017) ISBN 0190677015 Galileo's Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness (2019) ISBN 0525564772 Is Consciousness Everywhere?

(2022), Goff's reply to responses to Galileo's Error Why? The Purpose of the Universe (Oxford University Press, 2023) References [ edit ] ^ "Panpsychism and the Nature of Consciousness" . CBC Radio. 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

^ Goff, Philip.

"Panpsychism is crazy, but it's also most probably true" .

Aeon .

^ a b c Cook, Gareth (March 2020).

"Does Consciousness Pervade the Universe?" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 1 August 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g Goff, Philip.

"Philip Goff Philosophy" . Retrieved 1 August 2021 .

^ a b Goff, Philip; Seager, William; Allen-Hermanson, Sean (18 July 2017).

"Panpsychism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ "Staff Profile Dr Philip Goff" .

durham.ac.uk/ . Retrieved 13 August 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h Goff, Philip (2019).

Galileo's Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness . Vintage, Pantheon.

ISBN 978-0525564775 .

^ Goff, Philip (3 March 2015).

"Presentation of Philip Goff on consciousness. Greenland cruise 2014" .

YouTube . Retrieved 11 November 2019 .

^ "Greenland cruise" .

hardproblem.ru . Center for Consciousness Studies . Retrieved 11 November 2019 .

^ Goff, Philip; Frankish, Keith .

"MindChat" .

YouTube . Retrieved 29 July 2021 .

^ Pigliucci, Massimo; Goff, Philip (2020).

"Panpsychism and the Science of Consciousness" .

^ Goff, Philip (9 July 2020).

"A conscious universe: Panpsychism vs idealism" .

IAI .

^ a b Goff, Philip (1 August 2021).

"19 Essays on 'Galileo's Error' " .

Conscience and Consciousness Academic Philosophy for a General Audience . Retrieved 18 August 2021 .

^ Goff, Philip (21 September 2017).

"Is taxation theft? The assumption that you own the contents of your pay-packet, although almost universal, is demonstrably confused" .

Aeon.co . Retrieved 11 August 2021 .

^ a b Goff, Philip (7 November 2017).

"Tax rogues like Bono are harming the world's poorest people" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 August 2021 .

^ Burnett, Thomas (13 November 2023).

"Why? The Purpose of the Universe" .

John Templeton Foundation .

^ Goff, Philip (1 October 2024).

"My leap across the chasm" . Retrieved 4 October 2024 .

^ Goff, Philip (1 October 2024).

"Why This Famous Atheist Became a Progressive Christian (Dr. Philip Goff)" (Interview). Interviewed by Bertuzzi, Cameron. Capturing Christianity.

External links [ edit ] Official website Goff's author page at The Guardian Goff's author page at Scientific American Philip Goff at IMDb v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philip_Goff_(philosopher)&oldid=1305285412 " Categories : 20th-century British philosophers 21st-century British philosophers Academics of Durham University Living people British philosophers of mind Converts to Anglicanism from atheism or agnosticism Alumni of the University of Leeds Panpsychism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Use British English from August 2021 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Official website not in Wikidata Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 04:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philip Goff (philosopher) 1 language Add topic

