Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Development and construction Toggle Development and construction subsection 2.1 Design 2.2 Interiors 2.3 Construction and trials 2.4 Comparison with the Olympic class 3 Career Toggle Career subsection 3.1 Hudson Fulton Celebration 4 Rogue wave crash 5 Outbreak of the First World War 6 1915 7 Sinking 8 Aftermath Toggle Aftermath subsection 8.1 100th commemoration 9 Wreck Toggle Wreck subsection 9.1 Simon Lake's attempt to salvage in the 1930s 9.2 Argonaut expedition, 1935 9.3 Gregg Bemis's salvage efforts 9.4 Diving accidents 10 Cultural significance 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 14.1 Books 14.2 Newspapers, journals and other media 14.3 Online 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents RMS Lusitania 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 51°24′45″N 08°32′52″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.41250°N 8.54778°W ﻿ / 51.41250; -8.54778 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British ocean liner that was sunk in 1915 during WW1 This article is about the British ship in general. For her sinking in 1915, see Sinking of the RMS Lusitania .

For other ships with the same name, see List of ships named Lusitania .

RMS Lusitania arriving in New York City in 1907 History United Kingdom Name RMS Lusitania Namesake Lusitania Owner Cunard Line Port of registry Liverpool Route Liverpool – Queenstown – New York Builder John Brown & Co , Clydebank Yard number 367 Laid down 17 August 1904 Launched 7 June 1906 [ 1 ] Christened Mary, Lady Inverclyde Acquired 26 August 1907 Maiden voyage 7 September 1907 In service 1907 – 1915 Out of service 7 May 1915 Identification UK official number 124082 code letters HLJW by 1913: wireless call sign MFA Fate Torpedoed and sunk on 7 May 1915 General characteristics Type Ocean liner Tonnage 31,550 GRT , 12,611 NRT Displacement 44,060 long tons (44,767.0 t) Length 787 ft (239.9 m ) overall [ a ] 762.2 ft (232.3 m) registered Beam 87.8 ft (26.8 m) Height 65 ft (19.8 m) to boat deck, 165 ft (50.3 m) to aerials, 104 ft (31.7 m) from keel to top of boat deck, 144 ft (43.9 m) from keel to top of funnels Draught 33.6 ft (10.2 m) Depth 56.6 ft (17.3 m) Decks 6 passenger decks, 10 overall [ 2 ] Installed power 25 fire-tube boilers ; four direct-acting Parsons steam turbines producing 76,000 hp (57 MW) Propulsion as built: four triple blade propellers from 1909: quadruple blade propellers Capacity 552 first class, 460 second class, 1,186 third class; 2,198 total.

Crew 850 Notes First British four-funnelled ocean liner RMS Lusitania was a British ocean liner launched by the Cunard Line in 1906 as a Royal Mail Ship . She was the world's largest passenger ship until the completion of her sister Mauretania three months later. In 1907, she gained the Blue Riband appellation for the fastest Atlantic crossing, which had been held by German ships for a decade.

Though reserved for conversion as an armed merchant cruiser [ 3 ] [ 4 ] , Lusitania was not commissioned as such during WWI but continued a transatlantic passenger service, sometimes carrying war materials, including a quantity of .303 ammunition , in its cargo.

[ 5 ] The German submarine U-20 hit her with a torpedo on 7 May 1915 at 14:10, 11 miles (18 km) off the Old Head of Kinsale , Ireland, leading to her sinking about 18 minutes later. Only six of several dozen lifeboats and rafts [ 6 ] were successfully lowered; there were 767 survivors out of the 1,960 people on board, while 1,193 perished.

[ 7 ] The sinking killed more than a hundred US citizens and significantly increased American public support for entering the war , which occurred in 1917 with the United States declaration of war on Germany .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Overview [ edit ] German shipping lines were Cunard 's main competitors for the custom of transatlantic passengers in the early 20th century, and Cunard responded by building two new 'ocean greyhounds': Lusitania and RMS Mauretania . Cunard used assistance from the British Admiralty to build both new ships, on the understanding that the ship would be available for military duty in time of war. During construction gun mounts for deck cannons were installed but no guns were ever fitted. Both Lusitania and Mauretania were fitted with steam turbine engines that enabled them to maintain a service speed of 24 knots (44 km/h; 28 mph). They were equipped with lifts, wireless telegraph , and electric light, and provided 50 percent more passenger space than any other ship; the first-class decks were known for their sumptuous furnishings.

[ 10 ] : 45 A series of tit-for-tat moves intensified the naval portion of World War I . The Royal Navy had blockaded the Germany at the start of the war; as a reprisal to German naval mining efforts, the United Kingdom then declared the North Sea a military area in the autumn of 1914 and mined the approaches. As their own reprisal, Germany had declared the seas around the United Kingdom a war zone, wherein all Allied ships would be liable to be sunk without warning. Britain then declared all food imports for Germany were contraband.

[ 11 ] : 28 When submarines failed to sink many ships, the German authorities loosened U-boat rules of engagement. The German embassy in the United States also placed fifty newspaper advertisements warning people of the dangers of sailing on a British ship in the area, which happened to appear just as RMS Lusitania left New York for Britain on 1 May 1915. Objections were made by the British and Americans that threatening to torpedo all ships indiscriminately was wrong, whether it was announced in advance or not.

[ 11 ] : 6–7 On the afternoon of 7 May, a German U-boat torpedoed Lusitania 11 miles (18 km) off the southern coast of Ireland inside the declared war zone. A second internal explosion occurred. The damage caused her to sink in 18 minutes, killing 1,197 passengers and crew. Hundreds of bodies washed ashore, but most were never found.

The German government attempted to find justifications for sinking Lusitania . Special justifications focused on the small declared cargo of 173 tons of war materials on board the 44,000-ton displacement ship, and false claims that she was an armed warship and carried Canadian troops. In defence of indiscriminately sinking ships without warning, they asserted that cruiser rules were obsolete, as British merchant ships could be armed and had been instructed to evade or ram U-boats if the opportunity arose, and that the general warning given to all ships in the war zone was sufficient.

[ 11 ] : 273 [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] After the First World War, successive British governments maintained that there were no "munitions" (apart from small arms ammunition) on board Lusitania , and the Germans were not justified in treating the ship as a naval vessel.

[ 16 ] But the most important protests at the time came from the US. Under neutrality inspections, the US was aware the ship was not armed, was acting in accordance with American law, and was chiefly a passenger vessel carrying almost two thousand civilian passengers and crew, including over a hundred American citizens (including many celebrities) among the dead. The US government argued that whatever the circumstances, nothing could justify the killing of large numbers of un-resisting civilians, and that the United States had a responsibility to protect the lives of law-abiding Americans. The Americans had already warned the Germans repeatedly about their actions, and the Germans had also demonstrated that submarines were able to sink merchant ships under cruiser rules.

[ 17 ] The sinking shifted public and leadership opinion in the United States against Germany. US and internal German pressure led to a suspension of German Admiralty policy of deliberately targeting passenger ships, as well as later stronger restrictions.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] War was eventually declared in 1917 after the German government chose to violate these restrictions, deliberately attacking American shipping and preparing the way for conflict with the Zimmermann Telegram .

Development and construction [ edit ] Lusitania , shortly before her launch Lusitania and Mauretania were commissioned by Cunard, responding to increasing competition from rival transatlantic passenger companies, particularly the German Norddeutscher Lloyd (NDL) and Hamburg America Line (HAPAG). They had larger, faster, more modern, and more luxurious ships than Cunard, and they were better placed to capture the lucrative trade in emigrants leaving Europe for North America. The NDL liner Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse captured the Blue Riband from Cunard's Campania in 1897, before the prize was taken in 1900 by the HAPAG ship Deutschland . NDL regained the prize in 1903 with the Kaiser Wilhelm II and Kronprinz Wilhelm , and Cunard saw its passenger numbers affected as a result of the " Kaiser-class ocean liners ".

[ 18 ] RMS Lusitania – built 1904–1906 American businessman J. P. Morgan had decided to invest in transatlantic shipping by creating International Mercantile Marine (IMM). He purchased the British freight shipper Frederick Leyland & Co.

in 1901, as well as a controlling interest in the British passenger White Star Line , and folded them into IMM. In 1902, IMM, NDL, and HAPAG entered into a "Community of Interest" to fix prices and divide the transatlantic trade. The partners also acquired a 51-percent stake in the Dutch Holland America Line . IMM made offers to purchase Cunard which was now its principal rival, along with the French Compagnie Générale Transatlantique (CGT).

[ 19 ] Cunard chairman Lord Inverclyde approached the British government for assistance. The government was faced with the impending collapse of the British liner fleet and the consequent loss of national prestige, as well as the reserve of shipping for war purposes which it represented, and they agreed to help. Under the terms of an agreement signed in June 1903, Cunard was given a loan of £2.6 million to finance two ships, repayable over 20 years at a favourable interest rate of 2.75-percent. The ships would receive an annual operating subsidy of £75,000 each plus a mail contract worth £68,000. In return, the ships would be built to Admiralty specifications so that they could be used as auxiliary cruisers in wartime.

[ 20 ] Lusitania and her sister ship received special permission to fly the Blue Ensign , as a Royal Naval Reserve Merchant Vessel.

[ 21 ] Design [ edit ] Lusitania unloading Christmas mail to a post office boat Cunard established a committee to decide upon the design for the new ships, of which James Bain, Cunard's Marine Superintendent was the chairman. Other members included Rear Admiral H. J. Oram, who had been involved in designs for steam turbine -powered ships for the Royal Navy , and Charles Parsons , whose company Parsons Marine was now producing turbine engines.

[ citation needed ] Parsons maintained that he could design engines capable of maintaining a speed of 25 knots (46 km/h; 29 mph), which would require 68,000 shaft horsepower (51,000 kW). The largest turbine sets built so far had been of 23,000 shp (17,000 kW) for the battleship Dreadnought , and 41,000 shp (31,000 kW) for Invincible -class battlecruisers , which meant the engines would be of a new, untested design. Turbines offered the advantages of generating less vibration than the reciprocating engines and greater reliability in operation at high speeds, combined with lower fuel consumption. Having initially turned down the use of this relatively untried type of engine, Cunard was persuaded by the Admiralty to set up a committee of marine professionals to look at its possible use on the new liners. The relative merits of turbines and reciprocating engines were investigated in a series of trials between Newhaven and Dieppe using the turbine-driven cross-Channel ferry Brighton and the similarity-designed Arundel, which had reciprocating engines. The Turbine Committee was convinced by these and other tests that turbines were the way forward and recommended on 24 March 1904 that they should be used on the new express liners. In order to gain some experience of these new engines, Cunard asked John Brown to fit turbines on Carmania , the second of a pair of 19,500 GRT intermediate liners under construction at the yard.

Carmania was completed in 1905 and this gave Cunard almost two years of experience before the introduction of their new super liners in 1907.

[ citation needed ] The ship was designed by Leonard Peskett [ 22 ] and built by John Brown and Company of Clydebank , Scotland. The ship's name was taken from Lusitania, an ancient Roman province on the west of the Iberian Peninsula —the region that is now southern Portugal and Extremadura (Spain). Her sister ship, Mauretania , was named for the ancient land on the nearby northwest African coast.  The name Lusitania had also been used by a previous ship built in 1871 and wrecked in 1901, making the name available from Lloyd's for Cunard's giant.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Early concept art of Lusitania with three funnels Peskett had built a large model of the proposed ship in 1902 showing a three-funnel design. A fourth funnel was implemented into the design in 1904 as it was necessary to vent the exhaust from additional boilers fitted after steam turbines had been settled on as the power plant. The original plan called for three propellers, but this was altered to four because it was felt the necessary power could not be transmitted through just three. Four turbines would drive four separate propellers, with additional reversing turbines to drive the two inboard shafts only. To improve efficiency, the two inboard propellers rotated inward, while those outboard rotated outward. The outboard turbines operated at high pressure; the exhaust steam then passing to those inboard at relatively low pressure.

[ citation needed ] The propellers were driven directly by the turbines, for sufficiently robust gearboxes had not yet been developed, and only became available in 1916. Instead, the turbines had to be designed to run at a much lower speed than those normally accepted as being optimum. Thus, the efficiency of the turbines installed was less at low speeds than a conventional reciprocating steam engine , but considerably superior when the engines were run at high speed, as was usually the case for an express liner. The ship was fitted with 23 double-ended and two single-ended boilers (which fitted the forward space where the ship narrowed), operating at a maximum 195 psi (1,340 kPa) and containing 192 individual furnaces.

[ 25 ] Deck plans of Lusitania . Modifications were made both during and after the ship's construction. By 1915 the lifeboat arrangement had been changed to 11 fixed boats on either side, plus collapsible boats stored under each lifeboat and on the poop deck.

Work to refine the hull shape was conducted in the Admiralty experimental tank at Haslar , Gosport. As a result of experiments, the beam of the ship was increased by 10 ft (3.0 m) over that initially intended to improve stability. The hull immediately in front of the rudder and the balanced rudder itself followed naval design practice to improve the vessel's turning response. The Admiralty contract required that all machinery be below the waterline, where it was considered to be better protected from gunfire, and the aft third of the ship below water was used to house the turbines, the steering motors and four 375-kilowatt (503 hp) steam-driven turbo-generators. The central half contained four boiler rooms, with the remaining space at the forward end of the ship being reserved for cargo and other storage.

[ citation needed ] Coal bunkers were placed along the length of the ship outboard of the boiler rooms, with a large transverse bunker immediately in front of that most forward (number 1) boiler room. Apart from convenience ready for use, the coal was considered to provide added protection for the central spaces against attack. At the very front were the chain lockers for the huge anchor chains and ballast tanks to adjust the ship's trim.

[ citation needed ] The hull space was divided into 13 watertight compartments, any two of which could be flooded without risk of the ship sinking, connected by 35 hydraulically operated watertight doors. A critical flaw in the arrangement of the watertight compartments was that sliding doors to the coal bunkers needed to be open to provide a constant feed of coal whilst the ship was operating, and closing these in emergency conditions could be problematic. The ship had a double bottom with the space between divided into separate watertight cells. The ship's exceptional height was due to the six decks of passenger accommodation above the waterline, compared to the customary four decks in existing liners.

[ 26 ] High-tensile steel was used for the ship's plating, as opposed to the more conventional mild steel . This allowed a reduction in plate thickness, reducing weight but still providing 26 per cent greater strength than otherwise. Plates were held together by triple rows of rivets. The ship was heated and cooled throughout by a thermo-tank ventilation system, which used steam-driven heat exchangers to warm air to a constant 65 °F (18.3 °C), while steam was injected into the airflow to maintain steady humidity.

[ citation needed ] Forty-nine separate units driven by electric fans provided seven complete changes of air per hour throughout the ship, through an interconnected system, so that individual units could be switched off for maintenance. A separate system of exhaust fans removed air from galleys and bathrooms. As built, the ship conformed fully with Board of Trade safety regulations which required sixteen lifeboats with a capacity of about 1,000 people.

[ 27 ] At the time of her completion, Lusitania was briefly the largest ship ever built, but was soon eclipsed by the slightly larger Mauretania which entered service shortly afterwards. She was 3 ft (0.91 m) longer, a full 2 knots (3.7 km/h; 2.3 mph) faster, and had a capacity of 10,000 gross register tons over and above that of the most modern German liner, Kronprinzessin Cecilie . Passenger accommodation was 50% larger than any of her competitors, providing for 552 saloon class, 460 cabin class and 1,186 in third class. Her crew comprised 69 on deck, 369 operating engines and boilers and 389 to attend to passengers. Both she and Mauretania had a wireless telegraph, electric lighting, electric lifts, sumptuous interiors and an early form of air-conditioning.

[ 28 ] Interiors [ edit ] Painting of Lusitania by Norman Wilkinson Lusitania and Mauretania possessed the most luxurious, spacious, and comfortable interiors afloat at the time. Scottish architect James Miller was chosen to design Lusitania ' s interiors, while Harold Peto was chosen to design Mauretania . Miller chose to use plasterwork to create interiors, whereas Peto made extensive use of wooden panelling, with the result that the overall impression given by Lusitania was brighter than Mauretania .

The ship's passenger accommodation was spread throughout six decks. From the top deck down to the waterline, they were: Boat Deck (A Deck), the Promenade Deck (B Deck), the Shelter Deck (C Deck), the Upper Deck (D Deck), the Main Deck (E Deck), and the Lower Deck (F Deck), with each of the three passenger classes being allotted their own space on the ship. First-class, second-class, and third-class passengers were strictly segregated from one another, as was the norm for cruise ships at the time. She was designed to carry 2,198 passengers and 827 crew members, according to her original configuration in 1907.

Lounge and music room Verandah cafe Lusitania ' s first-class accommodation was in the centre section of the ship on the five uppermost decks, mostly concentrated between the first and fourth funnels. She could cater to 552 first-class passengers when fully booked.

Lusitania ' s first-class interiors were decorated with a mélange of historical styles. The first-class dining saloon was the grandest of the ship's public rooms, arranged over two decks with an open circular well at its centre and crowned by an elaborate dome measuring 29 feet (8.8 m), decorated with frescos in the style of François Boucher , realised throughout in the neoclassical Louis XVI style . The lower floor measured 85 feet (26 m) and could seat 323, with a further 147 on the 65-foot (20 m) upper floor. The walls were finished with white and gilt carved mahogany panels, with Corinthian decorated columns which were required to support the floor above. The one concession to seaborne life was that furniture was bolted to the floor, meaning that passengers could not rearrange their seating for their personal convenience.

[ 29 ] Promotional material showing the first-class dining room Finished first-class dining room All other first-class public rooms were situated on the boat deck and composed of a lounge, reading and writing room, smoking room, and veranda café. The café was an innovation on a Cunard liner; one side could be opened up in warm weather to give the impression of sitting outdoors. This would have been a rarely used feature given the often inclement weather of the North Atlantic.

[ 30 ] The first-class lounge was decorated in Georgian style with inlaid mahogany panels surrounding a jade green carpet with a yellow floral pattern, measuring overall 68 ft (21 m). It had a barrel vaulted skylight rising to 20 ft (6.1 m) with stained glass windows each representing one month of the year.

First-class smoking room First-class reading and writing room Each end of the lounge had a 14-foot (4.3 m) high green marble fireplace incorporating enamelled panels by Alexander Fisher . The design was linked overall with decorative plasterwork. The library walls were decorated with carved pilasters and mouldings marking out panels of grey and cream silk brocade. The carpet was rose, with Rose du Barry silk curtains and upholstery. The chairs and writing desks were mahogany , and the windows featured etched glass. The smoking room was Queen Anne style, with Italian walnut panelling and Italian red furnishings. The grand stairway linked all six decks, with wide hallways on each level and two lifts. First-class cabins ranged from one shared room through various suite arrangements in a choice of decorative styles, culminating in the two regal suites which had two bedrooms, dining room, parlour, and bathroom. The port suite decoration was modelled on the Petit Trianon .

[ 31 ] Lusitania ' s second-class accommodation was confined to the stern behind the aft mast, with quarters for 460 passengers. The second-class public rooms were situated on partitioned sections of boat and promenade decks housed in a separate section of the superstructure aft of the first-class passenger quarters. Design work was deputised to Robert Whyte , who was the architect employed by John Brown. The design of the dining room reflected that of first class, with just one floor of diners under a ceiling with a smaller dome and balcony. Walls were panelled and carved with decorated pillars, all in white. The dining room was situated lower down in the ship on the saloon deck. The smoking and ladies' rooms occupied the accommodation space of the second-class promenade deck, with the lounge on the boat deck.

The 42-foot (13 m) room had mahogany tables, chairs, and settees set on a rose carpet. The smoking room was 52 ft (16 m) with mahogany panelling, white plaster work ceiling and dome. One wall had a mosaic of a river scene in Brittany, while the sliding windows were blue-tinted. Second-class passengers were allotted shared two- and four-berth cabins arranged on the shelter, upper, and main decks.

[ 32 ] Third class aboard Lusitania was praised for the improvement in travel conditions that it provided to passengers; Lusitania proved to be a popular ship for emigrants.

[ 33 ] Third-class accommodation in most ships of the time consisted of large open spaces where hundreds of people would share open berths and hastily constructed public spaces, often consisting of no more than a small portion of open deck space and a few tables constructed within their sleeping quarters. In an attempt to break that mould, the Cunard Line began designing ships such as Lusitania with more comfortable third-class accommodation. Third-class accommodation aboard Lusitania was located at the forward end of the ship on the shelter, upper, main, and lower decks, and it was comfortable and spacious compared with other ships of the time. The 79-foot (24 m) dining room was at the bow of the ship on the saloon deck, finished in polished pine, as were the smoke room and ladies room on the shelter deck.

When Lusitania was fully booked in third class, the smoking and ladies room could easily be converted into overflow dining rooms for added convenience. Meals were eaten at long tables with swivel chairs and there were two sittings for meals. A piano was provided for passenger use. What greatly appealed to emigrants and lower class travellers was the honeycomb of two, four, six, and eight berth cabins allotted to third-class passengers on the main and lower decks, instead of being confined to open berth dormitories.

[ 34 ] The Bromsgrove Guild had designed and constructed most of the trim on Lusitania .

[ 35 ] Waring and Gillow supplied a number of the furnishings.

Construction and trials [ edit ] Lusitania ' s launch, 7 June 1906 Lusitania ' s keel was laid at John Brown on Clydebank as yard no. 367 on 17 August 1904, Lord Inverclyde hammering home the first rivet. Cunard nicknamed her 'the Scottish ship' in contrast to Mauretania whose contract went to Swan Hunter in England and who started building three months later. Final details of the two ships were left to designers at the two yards so that the ships differed in details of hull design and finished structure. The ships may most readily be distinguished in photographs through the flat-topped ventilators used on Lusitania , whereas those on Mauretania used a more conventional rounded top.

The shipyard at John Brown had to be reorganised because of her size so that she could be launched diagonally across the widest available part of the river Clyde where it met a tributary (the River Cart ), the ordinary width of the river being only 610 feet (190 m) compared to the 786-foot (240 m) long ship. The new slipway took up the space of two existing ones and was built on reinforcing piles driven deeply into the ground to ensure it could take the temporary concentrated weight of the whole ship as it slid into the water. In addition, the company spent £8,000 to dredge the Clyde, £6,500 on new gas plant, £6,500 on a new electrical plant, £18,000 to extend the dock and £19,000 for a new crane capable of lifting 150 tons as well as £20,000 on additional machinery and equipment.

[ 36 ] Construction commenced at the bow working backwards, rather than the traditional approach of building both ends towards the middle. This was because designs for the stern and engine layout were not finalised when construction commenced. Railway tracks were laid alongside the ship and across deck plating to bring materials as required. The hull, completed to the level of the main deck but not fitted with equipment weighed about 16,000 tons.

[ 37 ] The ship's stockless bower anchors weighed 10 1 ⁄ 4 tons, attached to 125 ton, 600 metres (330 fathoms) chains all manufactured by N. Hingley & Sons Ltd . The steam capstans to raise them were constructed by Napier Brothers Ltd, of Glasgow . The turbines were 25 ft (7.6 m) long with 12 ft (3.7 m) diameter rotors, the large diameter necessary because of the relatively low speeds at which they operated. The rotors were constructed on site, while the casings and shafting were constructed in John Brown's Atlas works in Sheffield . The machinery to drive the 56-ton rudder was constructed by Brown Brothers of Edinburgh . A main steering engine drove the rudder through worm gear and clutch operating on a toothed quadrant rack, with a reserve engine operating separately on the rack via a chain drive for emergency use. The 17 ft (5.2 m) three-bladed propellers were fitted and then cased in wood to protect them during the launch.

[ 38 ] The ship was launched on 7 June 1906, eight weeks later than planned due to labour strikes and eight months after Lord Inverclyde's death.

Princess Louise was invited to name the ship but could not attend, so the honour fell to Inverclyde's widow Mary.

[ 39 ] [ 1 ] The launch was attended by 600 invited guests and thousands of spectators.

[ 40 ] One thousand tons of drag chains were attached to the hull by temporary rings to slow it once it entered the water.

[ 41 ] The wooden supporting structure was held back by cables so that once the ship entered the water it would slip forward out of its support. Six tugs were on hand to capture the hull and move it to the fitting out berth.

[ 42 ] Testing of the ship's engines took place in June 1907 prior to full trials scheduled for July. A preliminary cruise, or Builder's Trial , was arranged for 27 July with representatives of Cunard, the Admiralty, the Board of Trade, and John Brown aboard. The ship achieved speeds of 25.6 knots (47.4 km/h; 29.5 mph) over a measured 1 mile (1.6 km) at Skelmorlie with turbines running at 194 revolutions per minute producing 76,000 shp. At high speeds the ship was found to suffer such vibration at the stern as to render the second-class accommodation uninhabitable. VIP invited guests now came on board for a two-day shakedown cruise during which the ship was tested under continuous running at speeds of 15, 18 and 21 knots but not her maximum speed. On 29 July, the guests departed and three days of full trials commenced. The ship travelled four times between the Corsewall Light off Scotland to the Longship Light off Cornwall at 23 and 25 knots, between the Corsewall Light and the Isle of Man , and the Isle of Arran and Ailsa Craig . Over 300 mi (480 km) an average speed of 25.4 knots was achieved, comfortably greater than the 24 knots required under the Admiralty contract. The ship could stop in 4 minutes in 3/4 of a mile starting from 23 knots at 166 rpm and then applying full reverse. She achieved a speed of 26 knots over a measured mile loaded to a draught of 33 feet (10 m), and managed 26.5 knots over a 60-mile (97 km) course drawing 31.5 ft (9.6 m). At 180 revolutions a turning test was conducted and the ship performed a complete circle of diameter 1000 yards in 50 seconds. The rudder required 20 seconds to be turned hard to 35 degrees.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The vibration was determined to be caused by interference between the wake of the outer propellers and inner and became worse when turning. At high speeds the vibration frequency resonated with the ship's stern making the matter worse. The solution was to add internal stiffening to the stern of the ship but this necessitated gutting the second-class areas and then rebuilding them. This required the addition of a number of pillars and arches to the decorative scheme. The ship was finally delivered to Cunard on 26 August although the problem of vibration was never entirely solved and further remedial work went on throughout her life.

[ 45 ] Comparison with the Olympic class [ edit ] The White Star Line's Olympic -class vessels were almost 100 ft (30 m) longer and slightly wider than Lusitania and Mauretania . This made the White Star vessels about 15,000 tons larger than the Cunard vessels. Both Lusitania and Mauretania were launched and had been in service for several years before Olympic , Titanic and Britannic were ready for the North Atlantic run. Although significantly faster than the Olympic class would be, the speed of Cunard's vessels was not sufficient to allow the line to run a weekly two-ship transatlantic service from each side of the Atlantic. A third ship was needed for a weekly service, and in response to White Star's announced plan to build the three Olympic -class ships, Cunard ordered a third ship: Aquitania . Like Olympic , Cunard's Aquitania had a lower service speed, but was a larger and more luxurious vessel.

Due to their increased size the Olympic -class liners could offer many more amenities than Lusitania and Mauretania . Both Olympic and Titanic offered swimming pools, Victorian-style Turkish baths , a gymnasium, a squash court , large reception rooms, À la Carte restaurants separate from the dining saloons, and many more staterooms with private bathroom facilities than their two Cunard rivals.

Heavy vibrations as a by-product of the four steam turbines on Lusitania and Mauretania would plague both ships throughout their voyages. When Lusitania sailed at top speed the resultant vibrations were so severe that second- and third-class sections of the ship could become uninhabitable.

[ 10 ] : 46 In contrast, the Olympic -class liners used two traditional reciprocating engines and only one turbine for the central propeller, which greatly reduced vibration. Because of their greater tonnage and wider beam, the Olympic -class liners were also more stable at sea and less prone to rolling.

Lusitania and Mauretania both featured straight prows in contrast to the angled prows of the Olympic class. Designed so that the ships could plunge through a wave rather than crest it, the unforeseen consequence was that the Cunard liners would pitch forward alarmingly, even in calm weather, allowing huge waves to splash the bow and forward part of the superstructure.

[ 10 ] : 51–52 This would be a major factor in damage that Lusitania suffered at the hands of a rogue wave in January 1910.

Olympic arriving at port on maiden voyage June 1911, with Lusitania departing in the background The vessels of the Olympic class also differed from Lusitania and Mauretania in the way in which they were compartmented below the waterline. The White Star vessels were divided by transverse watertight bulkheads . While Lusitania also had transverse bulkheads, it also had longitudinal bulkheads running along the ship on each side, between the boiler and engine rooms and the coal bunkers on the outside of the vessel. The British commission that had investigated the sinking of Titanic in 1912 heard testimony on the flooding of coal bunkers lying outside longitudinal bulkheads. Being of considerable length, when flooded, these could increase the ship's list and "make the lowering of the boats on the other side impracticable" [ 46 ] —and this was precisely what later happened with Lusitania . The ship's stability was insufficient for the bulkhead arrangement used: flooding of only three coal bunkers on one side could result in negative metacentric height .

[ 47 ] On the other hand, Titanic was given ample stability and sank with only a few degrees list, the design being such that there was very little risk of unequal flooding and possible capsize.

[ 48 ] Lusitania did not carry enough lifeboats for all her passengers, officers and crew on board at the time of her maiden voyage (carrying four lifeboats fewer than Titanic would carry in 1912). This was a common practice for large passenger ships at the time, since the belief was that in busy shipping lanes help would always be nearby and the few boats available would be adequate to ferry all aboard to rescue ships before a sinking. After the Titanic sank, Lusitania and Mauretania were equipped with an additional six clinker-built wooden boats under davits , making for a total of 22 boats rigged in davits. The rest of their lifeboat accommodations were supplemented with 26 collapsible lifeboats, 18 stored directly beneath the regular lifeboats and eight on the after deck. The collapsibles were built with hollow wooden bottoms and canvas sides, and needed assembly in the event they had to be used.

[ 49 ] This contrasted with Olympic and Britannic which received a full complement of lifeboats all rigged under davits. This difference would have been a major contributor to the high loss of life involved with Lusitania ' s sinking, since there was not sufficient time to assemble collapsible boats or life-rafts, had it not been for the fact that the ship's severe listing made it impossible for lifeboats on the port side of the vessel to be lowered, and the rapidity of the sinking did not allow the remaining lifeboats that could be directly lowered (as these were rigged under davits) to be filled and launched with passengers. When Britannic , working as a hospital ship during the First World War, sank in 1916 after hitting a mine in the Kea Channel the already davited boats were swiftly lowered saving nearly all on board, but the ship took nearly three times as long to sink as Lusitania and thus the crew had more time to evacuate passengers.

Career [ edit ] Lusitania arriving in New York on her maiden voyage Lusitania , commanded by Commodore James Watt, moored at the Liverpool landing stage for her maiden voyage at 4:30 pm on Saturday 7 September 1907 as the onetime Blue Riband holder RMS Lucania vacated the pier. At the time Lusitania was the largest ocean liner in service and would continue to be until the introduction of Mauretania in November that year. A crowd of 200,000 people gathered to see her departure at 9:00 pm for Queenstown , where she was to take on more passengers. She anchored again at Roche's Point , off Queenstown, at 9:20 am the following morning, where she was shortly joined by Lucania , which she had passed in the night, and 120 passengers were brought out to the ship by tender bringing her total of passengers to 2,320.

At 12:10 pm on Sunday Lusitania was again under way and passing the Daunt Rock Lightship. In the first 24 hours she achieved 561 mi (903 km), with further daily totals of 575, 570, 593 and 493 mi (793 km) before arriving at Sandy Hook at 9:05 am Friday 13 September, taking in total 5 days and 54 minutes, 30 minutes outside the record time held by Kaiser Wilhelm II of the North German Lloyd line. Fog had delayed the ship on two days, and her engines were not yet run in. In New York hundreds of thousands of people gathered on the bank of the Hudson River from Battery Park to pier 56. All New York's police had been called out to control the crowd. From the start of the day, 100 horse-drawn cabs had been queuing, ready to take away passengers. During the week's stay the ship was made available for guided tours. At 3 pm on Saturday 21 September, the ship departed on the return journey, arriving at Queenstown at 4:00 am 27 September and Liverpool 12 hours later. The return journey was 5 days 4 hours and 19 minutes, again delayed by fog.

[ 50 ] On her second voyage in better weather, Lusitania arrived at Sandy Hook on 11 October 1907 in the Blue Riband record time of 4 days, 19 hours and 53 minutes. She had to wait for the tide to enter harbour where news had preceded her and she was met by a fleet of small craft, whistles blaring.

Lusitania averaged 23.99 knots (44.43 km/h) westbound and 23.61 knots (43.73 km/h) eastbound. In December 1907, Mauretania entered service and took the record for the fastest eastbound crossing.

Lusitania made her fastest westbound crossing in 1909 after her propellers were changed, averaging 25.85 knots (47.87 km/h). She briefly recovered the record in July of that year, but Mauretania recaptured the Blue Riband the same month, retaining it until 1929, when it was taken by SS Bremen .

[ 51 ] During her eight-year service, she made a total of 201 crossings on the Cunard Line's Liverpool-New York Route, carrying a total of 155,795 passengers westbound [ 52 ] and another 106,180 eastbound.

[ 53 ] Lusitania at the end of the first leg of her maiden voyage, New York City, September 1907. (The photo was taken with a panoramic camera.) Hudson Fulton Celebration [ edit ] Stereo picture of Wright Flyer, Lusitania (Europe-bound), and the Statue of Liberty , during Hudson Fulton Celebration. In a generation the aeroplane would replace ocean queens like Lusitania as the mainstay of trans-atlantic travel.

Lusitania and other ships participated in the Hudson-Fulton Celebration in New York City from the end of September to early October 1909. The celebration was also a display of the different modes of transportation then in existence, Lusitania representing the newest advancement in steamship technology. A newer mode of travel was the aeroplane .

Wilbur Wright had brought a Flyer to Governors Island and made demonstration flights before millions of New Yorkers who had never seen an aeroplane. Some of Wright's trips were directly over Lusitania ; several photographs of Lusitania from that week still exist.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Rogue wave crash [ edit ] On 10 January 1910, Lusitania was two days into a voyage from Liverpool to New York when she encountered a rogue wave 75 feet (23 m) high.

[ 57 ] The design of the ship's bow allowed her to break through waves instead of riding on top of them. That came with a cost, as the wave rolled over the bow and hit the bridge.

[ 58 ] The forecastle deck was damaged, the bridge windows were smashed, the bridge was shifted a couple of inches aft, and deck and bridge were given a permanent depression of a few inches.

[ 59 ] No one was injured, and Lusitania continued on as normal, arriving a few hours late in New York.

[ citation needed ] Outbreak of the First World War [ edit ] Lusitania' s construction and operating expenses were subsidised by the British government, with the provision that she could be converted to an armed merchant cruiser (AMC) if needed. This included pillars and supports to enable the emplacement of 12 6-inch naval guns, and on the official Navy List the ship was listed as a "Royal Naval Reserve Merchant Vessel".

[ 3 ] In the 1914 edition of Jane's All the World's Fighting Ships , its silhouette was listed for identification reasons as a civilian liner, together with Mauretania and all liners of all nations capable of over 18 knots.

[ 60 ] Brassley's 1914 The Naval Annual categorised her as a "Royal Naval Reserved Merchant Cruiser".

[ 61 ] When war was declared the Admiralty issued orders for nine liners, including Mauretania and Lusitania to be taken up as armed merchant cruisers. However, the large Cunard liners were soon released, due to their large fuel costs relative to their usefulness and a shortage of guns. They were thus never armed or commissioned.

[ 62 ] [ 12 ] [ 63 ] The treatment of civilian vessels in war is governed by the Cruiser Rules according to international customary law . These required the lives of the crew and passengers to be safeguarded when the ship is confiscated or sunk, unless out of urgent, unforeseen reasons of strict military necessity.

[ 64 ] Nevertheless, fears ran high for the safety of Lusitania and other great liners despite these rules.

Lusitania was painted in a grey colour scheme during her first east-bound crossing after the war started, in an attempt to mask her identity and make her more difficult to detect visually.

Germany's declared exclusion zone of February 1915. Ships within this area were liable to search and attack.

Many of the large liners were laid up from 1914 to 1915, due in part to falling demand for passenger travel across the Atlantic, and in part to protect them from damage due to mines or other dangers. Some of these liners were eventually used as troop transports, while others became hospital ships, but Lusitania remained in commercial service. Bookings were not strong during that autumn and winter, but demand was high enough to keep her in civilian service.

[ 65 ] Cunard took measures to economise, such as shutting down her Number 4 boiler room to conserve coal and crew costs. This reduced her maximum speed from over 25 knots (46 km/h; 29 mph) to 21 knots (39 km/h; 24 mph). The ship's disguised paint scheme was also dropped, and she was returned to civilian colours. Her name was picked out in gilt, her funnels were repainted in their normal Cunard livery, and her superstructure was painted white again. One alteration was the addition of a gold-coloured band around the base of the superstructure just above the black paint.

[ 66 ] 1915 [ edit ] Captain Daniel Dow, Lusitania ' s penultimate master The warning issued by the Imperial German Embassy about travel to the UK, co-incidentally juxtaposed with an advert for the Lusitania.

[ 67 ] Captain William Thomas Turner, photographed on 11 March 1915.

By early 1915, the new threat of submarines began to grow. On 4 February 1915, Germany declared the seas around Great Britain and Ireland to be a war zone, warning that Allied ships in the area would be sunk without warning beginning by 18 February. This was not wholly unrestricted submarine warfare , as the Germans would take efforts to avoid sinking neutral ships, but "enemy" passenger craft were included as targets, despite the US demand for "strict accountability". U-boat success rates proved to be lower than expected, so the Germans loosened the rules of engagement in April.

[ 68 ] Lusitania arrived in Liverpool on 6 February flying the neutral US ensign, which had been raised off southern Ireland causing controversy.

[ 69 ] She was next scheduled to arrive in Liverpool on 6 March 1915. The Admiralty issued specific instructions on how to avoid submarines, adding to earlier advice that ships should try to evade submarines if possible or steer towards them to force them to dive. Bailey and Ryan have argued that such instructions could compromise the ship's rights under cruiser rules.

[ 70 ] Admiral Henry Oliver ordered HMS Louis and HMS Laverock to escort Lusitania , and took the further precaution of sending the Q-ship HMS Lyons to patrol Liverpool Bay .

[ b ] Due to a communications issue, Captain Daniel Dow did not make contact with the destroyers but proceeded to Liverpool unescorted.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Some alterations were made to the ship's protocols. She was ordered not to fly any flags in the war zone. There was no hope of disguising her identity, however, as her profile was so well known, and the British made no attempt to paint out the ship's name at the bow.

[ c ] Captain Dow was replaced by Captain William Thomas Turner , who had commanded Lusitania , Mauretania , and Aquitania in the years before the war.

[ 74 ] On 17 April 1915, Lusitania left Liverpool on her 201st transatlantic voyage, arriving in New York on 24 April. On 22 April, the German Embassy under Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff submitted a general warning about travel to 50 American newspapers, including those in New York, which coincidentally [ 67 ] appeared in newspapers just before the ship sailed.

[ 75 ] : 2 Lusitania departing New York on her final voyage, 1 May 1915 The ship departed Pier 54 in New York on 1 May 1915 at 12:20 pm on her final voyage.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] The Saturday evening edition of The Washington Times published two articles on its front page referring to the previous day's warnings.

[ 78 ] Sinking [ edit ] Main article: Sinking of the RMS Lusitania Sinking site class=notpageimage| Sinking of RMS Lusitania on a map of Ireland (present-day boundaries shown) On 7 May 1915, Lusitania was nearing the end of her 202nd crossing, bound for Liverpool from New York, and was scheduled to dock at the Prince's Landing Stage later that afternoon. Aboard her were 1,264 passengers, three stowaways, and a crew of 693, totalling 1,960 people. She was running parallel to the south coast of Ireland and was roughly 11 miles (18 km) off the Old Head of Kinsale when she crossed in front of U-20 at 2:10 pm. The U-boat's commanding officer Walther Schwieger later claimed not to have identified the ship, and he gave the order to fire one torpedo. He reported that it struck Lusitania on the starboard bow, just behind the bridge. Moments later, a second explosion erupted from within Lusitania ' s hull where the torpedo had struck, and the ship began to founder rapidly, with a prominent list to starboard.

[ 79 ] [ d ] The crew scrambled to launch the lifeboats almost immediately, but the conditions of the sinking made their usage extremely difficult or even impossible because of the ship's severe list. Only six out of 48 lifeboats were launched successfully, with several more overturning and breaking apart. The ship's trim levelled out 18 minutes later, and she sank at position 51°24′45″N 08°32′52″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.41250°N 8.54778°W ﻿ / 51.41250; -8.54778 , with the funnels and masts the last to disappear.

[ 80 ] Map showing the movements of RMS Lusitania and SM U-20 prior to the sinking of the former. Marked are ships sunk by U-20 on 6 and 7 May and key geographic points.

A total of 1,197 lost their lives out of the 1,960 passengers and crew aboard at the time of the sinking. In the hours after the sinking, both the survivors and the Irish rescuers who had heard word of Lusitania ' s distress signals performed many acts of heroism, and this brought the survivor count to 767, four of whom later died from injuries.

[ 7 ] HMS Juno sortied briefly in contravention of Royal Navy policy, but turned back believing that there was no "urgent necessity".

[ 75 ] By the following morning, the true scope of the disaster had spread around the world. Most of those lost in the sinking were British or Canadian, but 128 Americans were also lost, including writer and publisher Elbert Hubbard , builder Albert Clay Bilicke , theatrical producer Charles Frohman , businessman Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt , and Newport News Shipbuilding president Albert L. Hopkins.

[ 81 ] Aftermath [ edit ] The New York Times article expressed the immediate recognition of the serious implications of the sinking, this lead story on 8 May having a section (below what is pictured here) titled "Nation's Course in Doubt".

[ 82 ] The sinking caused an international outcry, especially in Britain and across the British Empire, as well as in the United States.

[ 7 ] [ 83 ] On 8 May, unofficial German spokesman Bernhard Dernburg [ 84 ] said that Lusitania "carried contraband of war" and that "she was classed as an auxiliary cruiser," so Germany had a right to destroy her regardless of any passengers aboard. Dernburg claimed that Germany was relieved of any responsibility for the deaths of American citizens aboard because the German Embassy had issued warnings before the sailing, and the 18 February note had declared the existence of "war zones". He referred to the ammunition and military goods declared on Lusitania ' s manifest and said that "vessels of that kind" could be seized and destroyed under the Hague Rules .

[ e ] [ 85 ] Germany adopted a similar official line to "incite public opinion at home" on the advice of Admiral Tirpitz.

[ 86 ] In 1913, Churchill had announced that Lusitania would be converted into a warship, "indistinguishable in status and control from men-of-war", if war was declared. However, this was not done.

[ 87 ] Her cargo had included an estimated 4,200,000 rounds of rifle cartridges, 1,250 empty shell cases, and 18 cases of non-explosive fuses, which were openly listed in her cargo manifest.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] The day after the sinking, The New York Times published full details of the ship's military cargo.

[ 90 ] Cunard's assistant manager Herman Winter denied the charge that she carried munitions, but admitted that she was carrying small-arms ammunition, and that she had been carrying such ammunition for years.

[ 88 ] The fact that Lusitania had been carrying shells and cartridges could not be openly discussed in the British press at the time.

[ 91 ] Cunard delivered a 27-page additional manifest to U.S. customs four or five days after Lusitania sailed from New York stating that the "empty shells" were in fact 1,248 boxes of filled three-inch shells, four shells to the box, totalling 103,000 pounds or 50 tonnes.

[ 75 ] Public opinion was outraged in the United States. The key issue was the savagery in the alleged "German failure to allow passengers to escape on life boats" as required by international law, and Germany's attempts to defend the attack only increased anger.

[ 92 ] In Germany, many newspapers celebrated the event as a triumph, [ 93 ] though allied propaganda at times exaggerated the level of popular support.

[ 94 ] The issue was hotly debated within the U.S. government in the weeks following the sinking, and the U.S. and German governments exchanged correspondence. German officials continued to argue that Lusitania was a legitimate military target. German Foreign Minister Von Jagow cited the claims that she was listed as an armed merchant cruiser, she was using neutral flags, and she had been ordered to ram submarines—in contravention of the Cruiser Rules.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Von Jagow further alleged that Lusitania had carried munitions and Allied troops on previous voyages.

[ 98 ] Grand Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz stated that it was sad that many Americans "in wanton recklessness, and in spite of the warnings of our Ambassador, had embarked in this armed cruiser, heavily laden with munitions", but he insisted that Germany had been within her rights to sink the ship.

[ 11 ] : 255 President Woodrow Wilson saw his main goal as to negotiate an end to the war.

[ 99 ] He was given contradictory advice. Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan privately advised him that "ships carrying contraband should be prohibited from carrying passengers." [ 100 ] However, Counselor Robert Lansing advised Wilson to adhere to the US's prior position of "strict accountability". All that mattered, according to Lansing, was the German responsibility for the safety of the unresisting crew and passengers of the ship. It was confirmed that the ship was not armed and was attacked by surprise, and no justification can allow the violation of "the principles of law and humanity".

[ 101 ] Wilson adopted Lansing's view, insisting that the German government apologise for the sinking, compensate U.S. victims, and promise to avoid any similar occurrence in the future.

[ 102 ] Bryan resigned, believing that Wilson's approach compromised American neutrality; he was replaced by Lansing as Secretary of State.

[ 103 ] Germany had already declared in February that all allied ships in the area would be sunk, regardless of whether they carried munitions. The strategic aim of Admiral Hugo von Pohl 's U-boat campaign was economic warfare against Britain, not the interception of weapons or destruction of war vessels. Germany's concept of "contraband of war" had expanded to include essentially all cargo.

Gustav Bachmann had directed on 12 February that enemy passenger vessels should be deliberately targeted, so as to create a "shock effect".

[ 104 ] There was a fierce debate within Germany, as officials were keenly aware that further sinkings were likely, including ones where Germany's excuses did not apply. Hence secret orders were issued in June that rescinded Bachmann's orders and stated that unrestricted submarine warfare on ocean liners would cease. Tirpitz and Bachmann offered their resignations, but they were rejected by the Kaiser.

[ 105 ] Yet Germany continued to attack and sink other passenger ships, such as the SS Orduna and RMS Hesperian .

[ 106 ] The Germans decided on 9 September 1915 that attacks were only allowed on ships that were definitely British, while neutral ships were to be treated under the Prize Law rules, and no attacks on passenger liners were to be permitted at all.

[ 103 ] [ 107 ] But in January 1917, the German government announced that it would again conduct full unrestricted submarine warfare . This pushed American public opinion over the tipping point, and the United States Congress followed President Wilson to declare war on Germany on 6 April 1917.

[ 108 ] After the war, American interests sued the German government for compensation. In 1923, 278 claimants were initially awarded $23 million (equivalent to $320 million in 2023).

[ 109 ] On 23 February 1924, the Seattle Star reported that Judge Edwin B. Parker denied 40 claims and settled on a final payout of $841,000 ($11.7 million in 2023).

[ 109 ] 100th commemoration [ edit ] To commemorate the centenary of the sinking, on 3 May 2015 a small fleet of ships sailed from the Isle of Man . Seven fishermen from Man, in their boat The Wanderer , had rescued 150 people from the Lusitania and were awarded medals for their participation. Two of these medals can be seen at the Leece Museum in Peel .

[ 110 ] The 100th commemoration of the sinking of the Lusitania was on 7 May 2015. To commemorate the occasion, Cunard's MS Queen Victoria undertook a voyage to Cork , Ireland.

[ 111 ] Wreck [ edit ] One of the propellers salvaged from the RMS Lusitania , located at Merseyside Maritime Museum in Liverpool Another one of RMS Lusitania's salvaged propellers located at the Hilton Anatole in Dallas, Texas The wreck of Lusitania was located on 6 October 1935, 11 miles (18 km) south of the lighthouse at Kinsale . She lies on her starboard side at about a 30-degree angle, in roughly 305 feet (93 m) of water. The wreck is badly collapsed onto its starboard side, due to the force with which it struck the bottom coupled with the forces of winter tides and corrosion in the decades since the sinking. The keel has an "unusual curvature" which may be related to a lack of strength from the loss of its superstructure . The beam is reduced with the funnels missing—presumably due to deterioration.

[ 112 ] The bow is the most prominent portion of the wreck with the stern damaged by depth charges. Three of the four propellers were removed by Oceaneering International in 1982 for display, though one was melted down. Expeditions to Lusitania have shown that the ship has deteriorated much faster than Titanic has, being in a depth of 305 feet (93 m) of water. When contrasted with her contemporary, Titanic (resting at a depth of 12,500 feet (3,800 m)), Lusitania appears in a much more deteriorated state due to the presence of fishing nets lying on the wreckage, the blasting of the wreck with depth charges and multiple salvage operations. As a result, the wreck is unstable and may at some point completely collapse.

[ 112 ] There has been recent academic commentary exploring the possibility of listing the wreck site as a World Heritage Site under the World Heritage Convention , although challenges remain in terms of ownership and preventing further deterioration of the wreck.

[ 113 ] Simon Lake's attempt to salvage in the 1930s [ edit ] Between 1931 and 1935, an American syndicate comprising Simon Lake , an important submarine inventor, and a US Navy officer, Captain H.H. Railey, negotiated a contract with the Admiralty and other British authorities to partially salvage Lusitania .

[ 114 ] The means of salvage was unique in that a 200-foot (61 m) steel tube, five feet in diameter, which enclosed stairs, and a dive chamber at the bottom would be floated out over the Lusitania wreck and then sunk upright, with the dive chamber resting on the main deck of Lusitania . Divers would then take the stairs down to the dive chamber and then go out of the chamber to the deck of Lusitania . Lake's primary business goals were to salvage the purser's safe and any items of historical value.

[ 115 ] It was not to be though, and in Simon Lake's own words, "... but my hands were too full"—i.e. Lake's company was having financial difficulties at the time—and the contract with British authorities expired 31 December 1935 without any salvage work being done, even though his unique salvage tunnel had been built and tested.

[ 116 ] Argonaut expedition, 1935 [ edit ] Jim Jarrett wearing the Tritonia diving suit, preparing to explore the wreck of RMS Lusitania , 1935.

In 1935 a Glasgow-based expedition was launched to try to find the wreck of Lusitania . The Argonaut Corporation Ltd was founded and the salvage ship Orphir used to search for the ship.

[ 117 ] After three months of searching the wreck was discovered on 6 October 1935. Diver Jim Jarrett wore a Tritonia diving suit to explore the wreck at a depth of 93 metres.

[ 118 ] Gregg Bemis's salvage efforts [ edit ] In 1967, the wreck of Lusitania was sold by the Liverpool & London War Risks Insurance Association to former US Navy diver John Light (1932–1992) for £1,000. American venture capitalist Gregg Bemis (1928–2020) became a co-owner of the wreck in 1968, and by 1982 had bought out his partners to become sole owner. Complex litigation ensued when employees of Bemis brought various artifacts ashore into the UK, with all parties settling their differences apart from the salvors and the British government, which asserted " droits of admiralty " over the recovered items. The judge eventually ruled in The Lusitania , [1986] QB 384, [1986] 1 All ER 1011, that the Crown has no rights over wrecks outside British territorial waters , even if the recovered items are subsequently brought into the United Kingdom.

[ f ] As of 1998 [update] , the case remained the leading authority on this point of law.

[ 119 ] [ needs update ] However, a subsequent US court case where Bemis attempted to stop others from diving the wreck found that Bemis had no ownership over the personal effects and cargo on board the ship.

[ 120 ] In 1993, Bemis granted permission to Titanic wreck explorer Robert Ballard to explore the wreck. Ballard attempted to prove that the ship was sunk by the explosion of illegal explosives. The exploration was difficult, hampered by snagged fishing nets and the presence of unexploded depth charges. While the ship was lying on her starboard side and so he was not able to access the area of the torpedo strike, he was able to use ROVs to examine under the bow. He found that the entire exposed area of the cargo hold was "clearly undamaged", concluding that no secondary explosion took place there and that a coal dust explosion was likely responsible instead.

[ 121 ] Bemis rejected his findings and continued to research the wreck.

Bemis then faced more serious litigation on the issue of artifact recovery occurred versus Ireland.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] This was because in 1995 the Irish Government declared the Lusitania a heritage site under the National Monuments Act , which prohibited him from in any way interfering with her or her contents. After a protracted legal wrangle, the Supreme Court in Dublin overturned the Arts and Heritage Ministry's previous refusal to issue Bemis with a five-year exploration licence in 2007, ruling that the then minister for Arts and Heritage had misconstrued the law when he refused Bemis's 2001 application. Bemis planned to dive and recover and analyse whatever artefacts and evidence could help piece together the story of what happened to the ship. He said that any items found would be given to museums following analysis. Any fine art recovered—such as the paintings by Rubens , Rembrandt and Monet , among other artists, believed to have been in lead tubes in the possession of Sir Hugh Lane —would remain in the ownership of the Irish Government.

[ 124 ] In late July 2008, Bemis was granted an "imaging" licence by the Department of the Environment, which allowed him to photograph and film the entire wreck, and was to allow him to produce the first high-resolution pictures of her. Bemis planned to use the data gathered to assess how fast the wreck was deteriorating and to plan a strategy for a forensic examination of the ship, which he estimated would cost $5m. Florida-based Odyssey Marine Exploration (OME) was contracted by Bemis to conduct the survey. The Department of the Environment's Underwater Archaeology Unit was to join the survey team to ensure that research would be carried out in a non-invasive manner, and a film crew from the Discovery Channel was also to be on hand.

[ 125 ] A dive team from Cork Sub Aqua Club, diving under licence, discovered 15,000 rounds of the .303 (7.7×56mmR) calibre rifle ammunition transported on Lusitania in boxes in the bow section of the ship. The find was photographed but left in situ under the terms of the licence.

[ 126 ] Results from the dives were provided to researchers at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , who in 2012 concluded that this showed that the ship was sunk mainly by the effect of the torpedo, with a secondary explosion due to the boilers that did not significantly affect subsequent events. Bemis rejected the findings.

[ 127 ] Continuing to attempt to prove British involvement, in July 2016, Bemis's diving partner Eoin McGarry attempted to recover but lost a telegraph machine from the ship. This caused controversy as the dive was unsupervised by anyone with archaeological expertise.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] In November 2018, Bemis was interviewed for one hour on live radio about the Lusitania about some of the logistical complications in conducting a maritime archaeological expedition to penetrate the hull. He claimed that some of the original art presumed to be lost in wreckage may not have been, and discussed his continuing belief that Churchill caused the sinking.

[ 130 ] In 2020, Bemis died. Despite millions of dollars spent, he was never able to find proof of his conspiracy theory. The wreck is currently owned by a museum in Kinsale , Ireland.

[ 131 ] Diving accidents [ edit ] A number of technical divers attempting to dive at the Lusitania wreckage site have been seriously injured.

[ 132 ] Regardless of the unconfirmed presence of secret WWI explosives, mixed gases must be used to reach the wreckage, which purportedly is littered with British depth charges and hedgehog mines [ clarification needed ] , covered in fishing nets, and where sediment limits visibility.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] Cultural significance [ edit ] Main article: Sinking of the RMS Lusitania § Cultural legacy See also [ edit ] SS Arabic , another liner sunk soon after RMS Hesperian , another liner sunk in 1915 by U-20 Avis Dolphin , a survivor Ian Holbourn , a survivor Rita Jolivet , a survivor Charles T. Jeffery , a survivor Theodate Pope Riddle , a survivor List of ships sunk by submarines by death toll The Carpet from Bagdad , a mostly lost 1915 film; one reel was recovered from the wreck in 1982 Notes [ edit ] ^ The ship's overall length is often misquoted at either 785 or 790 feet.

[ 1 ] ^ Referred to in Lusitania , by Preston (2002a) , and Lusitania: An Illustrated Biography by Layton (2010) .

^ New photographic evidence presented in Lusitania: An Illustrated Biography .

Layton (2010) ^ From Beesly (1982 , pp. 84–85): U-20 log entry transcript. Log first published in L'illustration in 1920 ^ From NY Times & 9 May 1915 , p. 4); "Justification of the sinking of the liner Lusitania by German submarines as a man of war was advanced today by Dr Bernhard Dernburg, former German Colonial Secretary and regarded as the Kaiser's official mouthpiece in the United States. Dernburg gave out a statement at the Hollenden Hotel following his arrival in Cleveland to address the City Club at noon on Germany's attitude in the present war." (Note that Dernburg in fact had no official role with the German Embassy.) ^ Section 518 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1894 ( 57 & 58 Vict.

c. 60) had originally applied to wrecks found or taken possession of within UK territorial limits, but section 72 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1906 ( 6 Edw. 7 . c. 48) extended that provision to wrecks later brought into those limits; the court held that as there was no duty on the salvors to bring the wreck into UK waters, the Crown had no rights to wreck, or under the ancient royal prerogative relating to "wreck of the sea throughout the realm, whales and great sturgeons taken in the sea or elsewhere within the realm" ( Prerogativa Regis ( temp. incert.

)).

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Atlantic Liners .

^ "Deck plans" .

The Lusitania Resource . 24 March 2011.

^ a b The Navy List For January 1915 . p. 422.

^ Bailey & Ryan 1975 , p. 6.

^ Layton, J Kent (2016). "Secret Cargoes & Armament".

Conspiracies at Sea: Titanic and Lusitania .

^ https://www.rmslusitania.info/lifeboats/ [ bare URL ] ^ a b c The official figures give 1,195 lost out of 1,959, excluding three stowaways who also were lost. The figures here eliminate some repetitions from the list and people subsequently known not to be on board.

"Passenger and Crew Statistics" .

The Lusitania Resource . 12 December 2010 . Retrieved 27 April 2024 .

^ a b "How the Sinking of Lusitania Changed World War I" .

History . 21 November 2022 . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ a b "Sinking of the Lusitania | For or Against War | Arguing Over War | Explore | Echoes of the Great War: American Experiences of World War I | Exhibitions at the Library of Congress | Library of Congress" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ a b c Ballard, Robert D.; Archbold, Rick; Marshall, Ken (2005).

The Lost Ships of Robert Ballard . Toronto: Ontario: Madison Press Books.

ISBN 978-1-59223-424-0 .

^ a b c d King, Greg; Wilson, Penny (2015).

Lusitania: Triumph, Tragedy and the End of the Edwardian Age} . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-250-05254-4 .

^ a b Davidson 1997 , p. 89.

^ Butler 2003 , p. 215.

^ Carlisle 2009 , p. 73.

^ Tucker & Roberts 2005 , p. 1146.

^ The Guardian & 1 May 2014 .

^ "Second U.S. Protest over the Sinking of the Lusitania" . 28 November 2010.

^ Ramsay 2001 , pp. 6–10.

^ J.P. Morgan and the Transportation Kings: The Titanic and Other Disasters . p. 200.

ISBN 978-6-613-65675-9 .

^ Ramsay 2001 , pp. 12–17.

^ British Admiralty (July 1908).

The Navy List for July 1908 . H.M. Stationery Office. p. 417.

^ Venzon & Miles 1995 , p. 357.

^ "Daily Event for June 26, 2005 Lusitania" .

Maritime Quest .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2015 .

^ "Lusitania Wrecked Off Newfoundland Coast – Passengers Numbering More than 350 Escape in Lifeboats – Crew Stand By The Ship – Fear-Maddened Men, Armed With Knives, Refuse to Give Women and Children First Chance to Get Away" .

The New York Times . 27 June 1901.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 27 October 2021 – via wrecksite.eu.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , p. 5.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 5–8.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 22–24.

^ Ramsay 2001 , p. 25.

^ Ballard & Dunmore 1995 , p. 45.

^ Maxtone-Graham 1978 , p. 33.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 18–20.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 20–21.

^ Keeling 2013 .

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 21–22.

^ Watt .

^ Fox 2004 , p. 403.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 10–11, 14.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 12–13.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , p. 13.

^ Ramsay 2001 , pp. 22–23.

^ Layton, J.Kent (2015).

Lusitania An Illustrated Biography .

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 .

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 25–27.

^ Ramsay 2001 , pp. 23–24.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 27–28.

^ Titanic Inquiry .

^ Layton 2010 , p. 55.

^ Hackett & Bedford 1996 , p. 171.

^ Simpson 1972 , p. 159.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 29–31.

^ Peeke, Jones & Walsh-Johnson 2002 , pp. 32–34.

^ New York Passenger Lists, 1820–1957 ^ UK, Incoming Passenger Lists, 1878–1960 ^ Full text of "The Hudson-Fulton celebration, 1909, the fourth annual report of the Hudson-Fulton celebration commission to the Legislature of the state of New York. Transmitted to the Legislature, May twentieth, nineteen ten" . 1910.

^ Sanford, John (28 September 2001).

The First Aerial Canoe: Wilbur Wright and the Hudson-Fulton Flights . Following the Footsteps of the Wright Brothers: Their Sites and Stories.

Wright State University .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2017.

^ "The Half Moon passing the great steamship Lusitania, Hudson-Fulton Celebration, New York, U.S.A." The J. Paul Getty Museum .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2017.

^ "Lusitania Battered By 80-Foot Wave – Wheel House of Giant Cunarder Wrecked and Officers and Seamen Hurt" .

The New York Times . 16 January 1910.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ Ljungström, Henrik (May 2018).

"Lusitania" .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 September 2020 – via thegreatoceanliners.com.

^ Scientific American . January 2010, quoting a 1910 issue of Scientific American , at "the Encounter of RMS Lusitania ", Freaque Waves, 17 December 2009 Accessed 10 November 2021 ^ Fred T. Jane (1914).

Jane's Fighting Ships 1914 (second edition) . pp.

31– 32.

^ Bailey & Ryan 1975 , p. 5-6.

^ Bailey & Ryan 1975 , p. 14-21.

^ Preston 2002b , p. 439.

^ F. Cyril James (1927).

"Modern Developments of the Law of Prize" .

University of Pennsylvania Law Review and American Law Register .

75 (6): 505– 526.

doi : 10.2307/3307534 .

JSTOR 3307534 .

^ "LUSITANIA SAILS: ALL BRITISH FLAGS. UNPERTURBED PASSENGERS' VIEWS" .

Liverpool Daily Post . Liverpool, Merseyside, England. 15 February 1915. p. 5 . Retrieved 12 November 2023 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Layton 2010 .

^ a b von Bernstorff, Johann Heinrich (1920).

My Three Years in America . pp.

136– 140.

^ Arthur Link (1960).

Wilson: The Struggle for Neutrality 1914-1915 . pp.

355– 357.

^ "American Flag on a British Liner" .

The Times . No. 40772. London. 8 February 1915. p. 10 . Retrieved 9 April 2024 – via Gale.

^ Bailey & Ryan 1975 , p. 53.

^ Beesly 1982 , p. 95.

^ Preston 2002a , pp. 76–77.

^ Preston 2002b , pp. 91–92.

^ "Mr. William Thomas Turner, Captain, Royal Naval Reserve" .

The Lusitania Resource . 12 December 2010 . Retrieved 16 February 2024 .

^ a b c Larson, Erik (2015).

Dead Wake . New York: Crown Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-307-40886-0 .

^ Simpson & 13 October 1972 , p. 69.

^ Butler 2003 , p. 213.

^ "Articles referring to the German embassy warnings" .

The Washington Times . 1 May 1915. p. Front page.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2015 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .

^ Preston 2002b , pp. 216–217.

^ "Testimony of Charles Lauriat Jr" .

Military History Now . 14 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ Kemp, Bill (3 May 2015).

"PFOP: Lusitania sinking claimed life of famed local Elbert Hubbard" .

The Pantagraph .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2018 . Retrieved 18 April 2016 .

^ "Lusitania Sunk by a Submarine, Probably 1,260 Dead" .

The New York Times . 8 May 1915. p. 1.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2019 . Retrieved 9 June 2019 .

^ Jones 2001 , p. 78.

^ von Bernstorff 1920 , pp. 36–57.

^ Halsey 1919 , p. 255.

^ Link, Arthur S. (1960).

Wilson: The Struggle for Neutrality 1914-1915 . pp.

398– 399.

^ Bailey & Ryan 1975 , p. 10.

^ a b NY Times & 10 May 1915 .

^ Doswald-Beck & 31 December 1995 , p. 124.

^ Ciment & Russell 2007 , p. 379.

^ Rea & Wright 1997 , p. 196.

^ Trommler, Frank (May 2009). "The Lusitania Effect: America's Mobilization against Germany in World War I".

German Studies Review .

32 (2): 241– 266.

JSTOR 40574799 .

^ Ernest K. May.

The World War and American isolationism . pp.

205– 6.

^ Quinn 2001 , pp. 54–55.

^ Tucker & Roberts 2005 , p. 1413.

^ Brune 2003 , p. 265.

^ Sondhaus 2011 , p. 276.

^ Brune 2003 , p. 365.

^ Jones 2001 , p. 73.

^ Paterson et al 2009 , p. 73.

^ Janet Marilyn Manson (1977).

International law, German submarines and American policy (Thesis). p. 110-124.

^ Zieger 1972 , pp. 24–25.

^ a b Brune 2003 , p. 366.

^ von Tirpitz, Alfred (1926).

Politische Dokumente vol 2 . p. 308.

^ Ritter, Gerhard (1972).

The Sword and the Scepter vol III: The tragedy of statesmanship . University of Miami Press. pp.

132– 133.

^ CurrHist , pp. 996–1004.

^ Gardiner, Gray & Budzbon 1985 , p. 137.

^ Protasio 2011 , pp. 200–201.

^ a b The Seattle Star , 23 February, 1924 , p. 2.

^ "RMS Lusitania: Manx flotilla marks centenary of sinking" .

BBC News . 3 May 2015.

Archived from the original on 6 May 2015 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .

^ Cunard Line .

^ a b Bishop 2003 .

^ Martin, J.B., (2018), "Protecting Outstanding Underwater Cultural Heritage through the World Heritage Convention: The Titanic and Lusitania as World Heritage Sites", 33(1) International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 161.

^ Evening Post & 15 January 1932 .

^ Popular Mechanics & February 1932 .

^ Corey 1938 , p. 295.

^ Craig, Capt. John D. (December 1936).

"Finding the Lusitania" .

Esquire .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 .

^ Robinson, Ann (6 October 2020).

"Man of Steel – The first brave diver to the RMS Lusitania" .

Coast Monkey .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 .

^ Palmer & McKendrick 1998 , p. 379.

^ Pamela J. Tibbetts (1999). "The long voyage of the Lusitania".

NYLS Journal of International and Comparative Law .

19 (2).

^ Ballard, Robert D. (2007).

Robert Ballard's Lusitania : probing the mysteries of the sinking that changed history .

^ Rogers & March–April 2005 .

^ Sharrock 2007 .

^ Sides & Goodwin Sides 2009 .

^ Shortall & 20 July 2008 .

^ Goodwin Sides & 22 November 2008 .

^ "British 'Not to Blame' for Rapid Sinking and Loss of Life on Liner RMS Lusitania, Find Underwater Researchers" .

The Daily Telegraph . 1 July 2012.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 December 2020 .

^ "Lusitania telegraph machine 'lost during unsupervised dive' " .

Independent.ie . March 2017.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2019 .

^ "Lusitania telegraph machine 'lost during unsupervised dive' " .

Belfasttelegraph .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2019 – via www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk.

^ "Sinking of RMS Lusitania – 2018 Radio Interview with Gregg Bemis on Lusitania" . 10 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2018 – via www.youtube.com.

^ "Gregg Bemis, flamboyant millionaire who bought the wreck of the Lusitania – obituary" .

Daily Telegraph . 2020.

^ Roche, Barry.

"Man airlifted to hospital after diving on Lusitania wreck" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2019 . Retrieved 29 August 2019 .

^ "Lusitania's last resting place" .

www.lusitania.net . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ "Diving on the Lusitania – Irish Maritime History" . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Bailey, Thomas A; Ryan, Paul B (1975).

The Lusitania Disaster: An Episode in Modern Warfare and Diplomacy . Free Press.

ISBN 978-0-02-901240-6 .

Ballard, Robert D; Dunmore, Spencer (1995).

Exploring the Lusitania: Probing the Mysteries of the Sinking that Changed History . New York: Warner Books. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-4465-1851-2 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Beesly, Patrick (1982).

Room 40: British Naval Intelligence, 1914–1918 . London: Hamish Hamilton.

ISBN 0-19281468-0 .

Bishop, Leigh (2003).

"Return to Lusitania " .

Advanced Diver Magazine (13).

Archived from the original on 10 May 2015 . Retrieved 1 May 2011 .

Brune, Lester H (2003).

Chronological History of U.S. Foreign Relations: 1607–1932 (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. p. 365.

ISBN 978-0-4159-3915-7 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Butler, Daniel Allen (2003).

The Age of Cunard: A Transatlantic History; 1839–2003 . ProStar Publications.

ISBN 978-1-57785-348-0 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Ciment, James D; Russell, Thadeus, eds. (2007).

The Home Front Encyclopedia: United States, Britain, and Canada in World Wars I and II . Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. p. 379.

ISBN 978-1-5760-7849-5 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Carlisle, Rodney P (2009).

World War I . Infobase Publishing. p. 73.

ISBN 978-1-4381-0889-6 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Corey, Herbert (1938).

Submarine – The Autobiography of Simon Lake (PDF) . London: D. Appleton-Century Company. p. 295.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

Craughwell, Thomas J; Kiester, Edwin Jr (2010).

The Buck Stops Here: The 28 Toughest Presidential Decisions and How They Changed History . Fair Winds. p. 133.

ISBN 978-1-61673-848-8 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Davidson, Eugene (1997).

The Making of Adolf Hitler: The Birth and Rise of Nazism . University of Missouri Press. p. 89.

ISBN 978-0-8262-1117-0 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Denson, John V (2006).

A Century of War: Lincoln, Wilson, and Roosevelt . Ludwig von Mises Institute. p. 135.

ISBN 978-1-61016-508-2 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Fox, Stephen (2004).

The Ocean Railway: Isambard Kingdom Brunel, Samuel Cunard and the Revolutionary World of the Great Atlantic Steamships . London: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-0073-7386-4 .

Gardiner, Robert; Gray, Randal; Budzbon, Przemysław (1985).

Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships 1906–1921 . Conway. p. 137.

ISBN 978-0-85177-245-5 .

Gittelman, Steven H; Gittelman, Emily (2013).

Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt: The Unlikely Hero of the Lusitania . Hamilton Books. p. 199.

ISBN 978-0-7618-5507-1 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Hackett, C; Bedford, JG (1996).

The sinking of S.S. Titanic: Investigated by Modern Techniques . Royal Institution of Naval Architects. p. 171.

Halsey, Francis Whiting (1919).

The Literary Digest History of the World War . Funk & Wagnalls. p.

255 .

Hoehling, AA (1996).

Last Voyage of the Lusitania . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-56833-078-5 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Jones, Howard (2001).

Crucible of Power: A History of U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1897 . Rowman & Littlefield. p.

73 .

ISBN 978-0-8420-2918-6 .

Layton, J. Kent (2010).

Lusitania: An Illustrated Biography . Stroud, Gloucestershire: Amberley.

ISBN 978-1-84868-834-6 .

Larson, Erik (2015).

Dead Wake: The Last Crossing of the Lusitania .

Lloyd's Register of British & Foreign Shipping . Vol. I.–Steamers. London: Lloyd's Register of Shipping. 1908 – via Internet Archive .

The Marconi Press Agency Ltd (1913).

The Year Book of Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony . London: The St Katherine Press.

Maxtone-Graham, John (1978).

The Only Way to Cross . New York: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-0258-2350-1 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Bigham, John (1915).

Report of a formal investigation into the circumstances attending the foundering on 7th May, 1915, of the British S.S. 'Lusitania', of Liverpool, being torpedoed off the Old Head of Kinsale, Ireland .

Command papers . Vol. Cd.8022 (Session 1914–16, Vol. XXVII, p. 451). London: HMSO.

Bigham, John (1915).

Proceedings in camera on 15th and 18th June, 1915, at the formal investigation into the circumstances attending the foundering, on 7 May, 1915, of the 'Lusitania', after being torpedoed off the Old Head of Kinsale, Ireland . Command papers. Vol. Cd.381 (Session 1919, Vol. XXV, p. 469). London, UK: HMSO.

Osborne, Richard; Spong, Harry & Grover, Tom (2007).

Armed Merchant Cruisers 1878–1945 . Windsor, UK: World Warship Society.

ISBN 978-0-9543310-8-5 .

Palmer, NE; McKendrick, Ewan (1998).

Interests in goods . LLP. p. 379.

ISBN 978-1-85978-177-7 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Paterson, Thomas; Clifford, J Garry; Maddock, Shane J.; Kisatsky, Deborah; Hagan, Kenneth J (2009).

American Foreign Relations: A History, Volume 2: Since 1895 . Cengage Learning. p. 73.

ISBN 978-0-547-22569-2 .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2016 . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

Peeke, Mitch; Jones, Steven & Walsh-Johnson, Kevin (2002).

The Lusitania story . Barnsley, Yorkshire: Leo Cooper.

ISBN 978-0-85052-902-9 .

Preston, Diana (2002a).

Lusitania: An Epic Tragedy . Waterville: Thorndike Press.

ISBN 0-80271375-0 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

Preston, Diana (2002b).

Wilful Murder: the Sinking of the Lusitania . London: Transworld Publishers Limited.

ISBN 0-55299886-9 .

Protasio, John (2011).

The Day the World Was Shocked: The Lusitania Disaster and Its Influence on the Course of World War I . Havertown, PA: Casemate. pp.

200 –201.

ISBN 978-1-9351-4945-3 .

Quinn, Patrick J (2001).

The Conning of America: The Great War and American Popular Literature . Rodopi. pp.

54– 55.

ISBN 978-90-420-1475-6 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Ramsay, David (2001).

Lusitania: Saga and Myth . London: Chatham Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-86176-170-5 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

Rea, Tony; Wright, John (1997).

International Relations 1914–1995 . Oxford University Press. p. 196.

ISBN 978-0-19-917167-5 .

Schmidt, Donald E (2005).

The Folly of War: American Foreign Policy, 1898–2005 . Algora Publishing. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-87586-383-2 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Sides, Hampton; Goodwin Sides, Anne (January 2009).

"Lusitania Rising" .

Men's Vogue . Archived from the original on 31 May 2009.

Simpson, Colin (1972).

Lusitania . Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-14-00-3793-4 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

Sondhaus, Lawrence (2011).

World War One: The Global Revolution . Cambridge University Press. p. 276.

ISBN 978-0-521-51648-8 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Tucker, Spencer; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2005).

World War One . ABC-CLIO. p. 1146.

ISBN 978-1-85109-879-8 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Venzon, Anne Cipriano; Miles, Paul L. (1995).

The United States in the First World War: An Encyclopedia . Garland Pub. p. 357.

ISBN 978-0-8153-3353-1 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Watt, Quintin (ed.).

An Illustrated History .

[ dead link ] Zieger, Robert H (1972).

America's Great War . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

24– 25.

ISBN 978-0-8476-9645-1 .

Newspapers, journals and other media [ edit ] Goodwin Sides, Anne (22 November 2008).

New Clues in Lusitania's Sinking .

National Public Radio .

Mullally, Erin (January–February 2009).

" Lusitania ' s Secret Cargo" .

Archaeology .

62 (1). Archaeological Institute of America.

Archived from the original on 20 February 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 .

Rogers, Paul (March–April 2005).

"How Deep Is His Love" .

Stanford Magazine . Stanford Alumni Association. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 28 May 2007 .

Sharrock, David (2 April 2007).

"Millionaire diver wins right to explore wreck of the Lusitania" .

The Times . Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 18 September 2008 .

Simpson, Colin (13 October 1972).

"Lusitania" .

Life Magazine . p. 68 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

Shortall, Eithne (20 July 2008).

"Riddle of Lusitania sinking may finally be solved" .

The Times . Archived from the original on 3 June 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2008 .

[ needs update ] "The Lusitania – A Salvage Project" .

Evening Post . Wellington, New Zealand. 15 January 1932.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 May 2013 .

"Lusitania divers warned of danger from war munitions in 1982, papers reveal" .

The Guardian . 1 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 14 August 2016 .

"Lusitania Treasure to be Raised" .

Popular Mechanics .

57 (2). Hearst Magazines: 177. February 1932 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

"Sinking justified, says Dr. Dernburg" (PDF) .

The New York Times . 9 May 1915.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

"Lusitania was unarmed" (PDF) .

New York Times . 10 May 1915.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 .

"The German Submarine Record: Details of Chief Vessels Sunk, With Diplomatic Developments" .

Current History .

5 (6). University of California Press: 996– 1004. March 1917.

doi : 10.1525/curh.1917.5.6.996 .

JSTOR 45323616 . Retrieved 13 March 2024 .

"Germany Asked to Pay for Lusitania" .

The Seattle Star . Seattle, King, Washington: E.H. Wells & Co. 23 February 1924. p. 16.

ISSN 2159-5577 .

OCLC 17285351 . Retrieved 25 February 2024 .

Online [ edit ] "A Deadly Cargo and the Falsifed Manifests" .

Lusitania Online: The Home Port of RMS Lusitania .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

"Terror at Sea – Sinking of the Lusitania" . Discovery Channel. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009 . Retrieved 7 May 2009 .

"175 Anniversary cruise - Lusitania Remembered with Martin Bell - 7 nights, May 2015" .

Cunard Line . Archived from the original on 12 March 2015 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Doswald-Beck, Louise (31 December 1995).

"San Remo Manual on International Law Applicable to Armed Conflict at Sea" . International Committee of the Red Cross.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

"Treaty for the Limitation and Reduction of Naval Armaments, (Part IV, Art. 22)" (PDF) . International Committee of the Red Cross. 22 April 1930. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2015 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Keeling, Drew (2013).

"Mass Migration as a Travel Business" .

business-of-migration.com .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

Layton, J Kent (17 March 2015).

"Lusitania Home" .

Atlantic Liners . Ngaio, Wellington, New Zealand.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

"Testimony of Edward Wilding, Recalled" .

British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry . 7 June 1912. Archived from the original on 5 February 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2017 .

"Treasure Quest – Lusitania Revealed" . Tv.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2009 . Retrieved 19 May 2009 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bailey, Thomas A (October 1935). "The Sinking of the Lusitania".

The American Historical Review .

41 (1). Oxford University Press: 54– 73.

doi : 10.2307/1839355 .

JSTOR 1839355 .

S2CID 227384759 .

Bailey, Thomas A (September 1936). "German Documents Relating to the Lusitania".

The Journal of Modern History .

8 (3). The University of Chicago Press: 320– 337.

doi : 10.1086/468453 .

JSTOR 1881539 .

S2CID 144918061 .

Bernier, Michelle (2010).

Did these Stories Really Happen?

. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1-4505-8536-1 .

Burns, Greg (2012).

Commemoration of Death: The Medals of the Lusitania Murders . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1-4791-1573-0 .

Burns, Greg.

"www.lusitaniamedal.com" .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

Doubleday, FN (January 1908).

"A Trip on the Two Largest Ships" .

The World's Work: A History of Our Time .

XV : 9803 –9810 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

Droste, CL; Tantum, W.H., eds. (1972).

The Lusitania Case . Riverside, Connecticut: Patrick Stephens Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-85059-097-5 .

Larson, Erik (2015).

Dead Wake: The Last Crossing of the Lusitania . New York: Crown Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-307-40886-0 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Layton, J Kent (June 2013).

The Edwardian Superliners: a Trio of Trios . Amberley publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4456-1438-0 .

Ljungström, Henrik.

"The Great Ocean Liners: Lusitania" . Archived from the original on 18 September 2012 . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

Molony, Senan (2004).

Lusitania, an Irish Tragedy . Mercier.

ISBN 978-1-8563-5452-3 .

O'Sullivan, Patrick (2000).

The Lusitania: Unravelling the Mysteries . New York: Sheridan House.

ISBN 978-1-57409-094-9 .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Sauder, Eric (1 October 2009).

RMS Lusitania: The Ship and Her Record . London: The History Press.

ISBN 978-0-7524-5203-6 .

Sauder, Eric; Marschall, Ken (1991).

RMS Lusitania: Triumph of the Edwardian Age . Redondo Beach, CA: Trans-Atlantic Designs.

ISBN 978-0-9633946-0-6 .

Trommler, Frank. "The Lusitania Effect: America's Mobilization against Germany in World War I" German Studies Review 32#2 (2009), pp. 241–266 online Archived 20 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine "Lusitania Timeline" .

The Lusitania Resource . 26 March 2011.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2015 . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

"Lusitania Specification" .

The Lusitania Resource . 29 April 2011.

Archived from the original on 30 March 2015 . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

"Lusitania Cargo" .

The Lusitania Resource . 29 April 2011.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 1 May 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lusitania (ship, 1907, Clydebank) .

Wikisource has the text of the 1921 Collier's Encyclopedia article Lusitania .

RMS Lusitania , Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) Sinking of the Lusitania (1918) Records Preceded by Deutschland Holder of the Blue Riband (Westbound record) 1907–1909 Succeeded by Mauretania Preceded by Kaiser Wilhelm II Blue Riband (Eastbound record) 1907 v t e Four-funneled ocean liners Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse (1897) Deutschland (1900) Kronprinz Wilhelm (1901) Kaiser Wilhelm II (1902) Lusitania (1906) Mauretania (1906) Kronprinzessin Cecilie (1906) France (1910) Olympic (1910) Titanic (1912) Aquitania (1913) Britannic (1914) Arundel Castle (1921) Windsor Castle (1922) v t e Timeline of largest passenger ships Briefly held the title before the preceding ship reclaimed it† Shared record‡ SS Royal William (1831) SS Great Western (1837) SS British Queen (1839) SS President (1840)† SS Great Britain (1843) RMS Atrato (1853) SS Adriatic (1857) SS Great Eastern (1858) SS City of New York (1888) RMS Campania (1893)‡ SS Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse (1897) RMS Oceanic (1899) RMS Celtic (1901) RMS Cedric (1903) RMS Baltic (1904) RMS Empress of Scotland (1906) RMS Lusitania (1907) RMS Mauretania (1907) RMS Olympic (1911) RMS Titanic (1912)† SS Imperator (1913) SS Vaterland (1913) RMS Majestic (1922) SS Normandie (1935) RMS Queen Mary (1936)† RMS Queen Elizabeth (1942) SS France (1972) MS Sovereign of the Seas (1987)† Sun Princess (1995) MS Carnival Destiny (1996) MS Grand Princess (1998) MS Voyager of the Seas (1999) MS Explorer of the Seas (2000) MS Navigator of the Seas (2002) RMS Queen Mary 2 (2003) MS Freedom of the Seas (2006) Liberty of the Seas (2007) Oasis of the Seas (2009)‡ Harmony of the Seas (2016) Symphony of the Seas (2018) Wonder of the Seas (2022) Icon of the Seas (2023)‡ Oceans portal v t e Ships of the Cunard Line Current fleet 2004 RMS Queen Mary 2 2007 MS Queen Victoria 2010 MS Queen Elizabeth 2024 MS Queen Anne Former ships 1840–1994 1840 RMS Unicorn 1840 RMS Britannia 1848 SS Satellite 1853 SS Arabia 1856 RMS Persia 1862 RMS Scotia 1863 RMS Hecla 1865 SS Java 1867 SS Russia 1870 SS Abyssinia 1870 SS Parthia 1874 SS Bothnia 1878 SS Aleppo 1879 SS Gallia 1881 SS Servia 1881 SS Catalonia 1882 RMS Aurania 1884 SS Oregon 1884 RMS Umbria 1885 RMS Etruria 1892 RMS Campania 1893 RMS Lucania 1898 SS Ultonia 1899 SS Ivernia 1899 RMS Saxonia 1903 RMS Carpathia 1903 RMS Pannonia 1904 RMS Slavonia 1905 RMS Carmania 1905 RMS Caronia 1907 RMS Lusitania 1907 RMS Mauretania 1909 SS Thracia 1910 RMS Franconia 1911 RMS Albania 1911 SS Ausonia 1912 RMS Laconia 1913 RMS Andania 1913 RMS Alaunia 1914 RMS Aquitania 1914 SS Orduña 1916 SS Royal George 1917 RMS Aurania 1920 SS Albania 1921 RMS Berengaria 1921 RMS Scythia 1922 RMS Samaria 1922 RMS Laconia 1922 RMS Andania 1922 RMS Antonia 1922 RMS Lancastria 1921 RMS Ausonia 1922 RMS Franconia 1924 RMS Aurania 1925 SS Letitia 1925 RMS Ascania 1925 RMS Alaunia 1925 RMS Carinthia 1934 RMS Majestic 1934 RMS Olympic 1934 MV Georgic 1934 MV Britannic 1934 SS Laurentic 1936 RMS Queen Mary 1939 RMS Mauretania 1940 RMS Queen Elizabeth 1946 SS Valacia ( Empire Camp ) 1947 SS Vardulia 1947 RMS Media 1948 RMS Parthia 1949 RMS Caronia 1954 RMS Saxonia 1955 RMS Ivernia 1956 RMS Carinthia 1957 RMS Sylvania 1969 MS Queen Elizabeth 2 1970 SS Atlantic Causeway 1970 SS Atlantic Conveyor 1971 MV Cunard Adventurer 1972 MV Cunard Ambassador 1975 MS Cunard Countess 1976 MS Cunard Princess 1983 MS Sagafjord 1983 MS Caronia 1986 MS Sea Goddess I 1986 MS Sea Goddess II 1993 MS Cunard Crown Jewel 1993 MS Cunard Crown Dynasty 1994 MS Royal Viking Sun For MoWT 1940 SS Pasteur 1941 SS Empire Barracuda 1940 MV Empire Audacity 1943 SS Empire Battleaxe 1943 SS Empire Broadsword 1945 MV Empire Ettrick Classes Britannia America Years indicate year of entry into Cunard service.

v t e Shipwrecks and maritime incidents in May 1915 Shipwrecks 1 May: Joule , HMS Recruit 2 May: America 3 May: Gul Djemal 7 May: Lusitania ( sinking ), HMS Maori 8 May: Don 12 May: HMS Goliath 23 May: SM UB-3 , Peleng-i Derya 24 May: Turbine 25 May: HMS Triumph 27 May: HMS Majestic , HMS Princess Irene 29 May: T47 , T51 31 May: Merion Other incidents 1 May: Gulflight 14 May: Vasco da Gama 25 May: Rijndam 27 May: Merion 1914 1915 1916 April 1915 June 1915 v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐lxrgm
Cached time: 20250818132433
Cache expiry: 38146
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.040 seconds
Real time usage: 3.636 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 29990/1000000
Revision size: 124249/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 925181/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 28992/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 462367/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.837/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14733273/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2976.393      1 -total
 27.71%  824.734     39 Template:Navbox
 15.37%  457.468      2 Template:Reflist
 14.94%  444.742     67 Template:Cite_book
 14.83%  441.275      1 Template:Cunard_ships
  9.72%  289.266     86 Template:Sfn
  8.45%  251.494     32 Template:Cite_web
  7.65%  227.560     77 Template:RMS
  6.28%  187.023     55 Template:SS
  4.74%  141.083      1 Template:Largest_passenger_ships Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:436113:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132433 and revision id 1306204395. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=RMS_Lusitania&oldid=1306204395 " Categories : RMS Lusitania 1906 ships Blue Riband holders Conflicts in 1915 Four funnel liners Maritime incidents in 1915 Maritime incidents in Ireland Passenger ships of the United Kingdom Ships built on the River Clyde Ships of Scotland Ships of the Cunard Line Ships sunk by German submarines in World War I Shipwrecks of Ireland World War I shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean World War I passenger ships of the United Kingdom Rogue wave incidents Woodrow Wilson administration controversies Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2022 Use dmy dates from June 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 1998 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2014 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2017 Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 13:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents RMS Lusitania 51 languages Add topic

