Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General information 2 Image gallery 3 See also 4 Further reading 5 References Toggle the table of contents Emission nebula 49 languages العربية Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Corsu Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nebula formed of ionized gases that emit light of various wavelengths Planetary nebulae, represented here by the Ring Nebula , are examples of emission nebulae.

An emission nebula is a nebula formed of ionized gases that emit light of various wavelengths. The most common source of ionization is high-energy ultraviolet photons emitted from a nearby hot star . Among the several different types of emission nebulae are H II regions , in which star formation is taking place and young, massive stars are the source of the ionizing photons; and planetary nebulae , in which a dying star has thrown off its outer layers, with the exposed hot core then ionizing them.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] General information [ edit ] Usually, a young star will ionize part of the same cloud from which it was born, although only massive, hot stars can release sufficient energy to ionize a significant part of a cloud. In many emission nebulae, an entire cluster of young stars is contributing energy.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Stars that are hotter than 25,000 K generally emit enough ionizing ultraviolet radiation (wavelength shorter than 91.2 nm) to cause the emission nebulae around them to be brighter than the reflection nebulae.

[ 3 ] The radiation emitted by cooler stars is generally not energetic enough to ionize hydrogen, which results in the reflection nebulae around these stars giving off less light than the emission nebulae.

The four visible hydrogen emission spectrum lines in the Balmer series. H-alpha is the red line at the right.

The nebula's color depends on its chemical composition and degree of ionization. Due to the prevalence of hydrogen in interstellar gas, and its relatively low energy of ionization, many emission nebulae appear red due to strong emissions of the Balmer series . If more energy is available, other elements will be ionized, and green and blue nebulae become possible. By examining the spectra of nebulae, astronomers infer their chemical content. Most emission nebulae are about 90% hydrogen, with the remaining helium , oxygen , nitrogen , and other elements.

Some of the most prominent emission nebulae visible from the northern celestial hemisphere are the North America Nebula (NGC 7000) and Veil Nebula NGC 6960/6992 in Cygnus , while in the south celestial hemisphere, the Lagoon Nebula M8 / NGC 6523 in Sagittarius and the Orion Nebula M42.

[ 4 ] Further in the southern hemisphere is the bright Carina Nebula NGC 3372.

Emission nebulae often have dark areas in them which result from clouds of dust which block the light.

Many nebulae are made up of both reflection and emission components such as the Trifid Nebula .

Image gallery [ edit ] Emission nebula LHA 120-N 55 in the Large Magellanic Cloud .

[ 5 ] Hubble image of emission nebula NGC 2174 .

[ 6 ] Hubble image of emission nebula NGC 2313 .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Herbig–Haro object N41 (nebula) Further reading [ edit ] O'Meara, Stephen James (August 14, 2019), "Discover 10 weird emission nebulae" , Astronomy magazine , retrieved May 27, 2023 "Meet the nebula" . Astronomy magazine. 2023 . Retrieved May 27, 2023 .

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Emission nebulae .

^ a b " Nebulae ." (October 2014) World of Physics , Gale In Context: Science, Doc no. CV2434500333, Retrieved May 27, 2023.

^ a b Belleville, Michelle (Jan 13, 2023).

"Emission Nebulae" .

Hubble's Nebulae . NASA . Retrieved May 27, 2023 .

^ "20.3 Cosmic Dust - Astronomy | OpenStax" .

openstax.org . 13 October 2016 . Retrieved 2022-02-15 .

^ McArthur, Frommert; Kronberg, Christine (12 April 2006).

"Messier 42" .

Messier Object Index . Retrieved 17 July 2007 .

^ "A Beautiful Instance of Stellar Ornamentation" . 18 May 2016 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "Hubble revisits the Monkey Head Nebula for 24th birthday snap" .

ESA/Hubble Press Release . 17 March 2014 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "Cosmic Silver Lining" . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

v t e Nebulae Visible nebula Dark nebula Diffuse nebula Emission nebula Planetary nebula Supernova remnant Nova remnant H II region Reflection nebula Variable nebula Protoplanetary nebula Pre-stellar nebulae Giant molecular cloud Bok globule Evaporating gaseous globule Solar nebula Stellar nebula Nova remnant Protoplanetary nebula Wolf–Rayet nebula Post-stellar nebulae Planetary nebula Supernova remnant Pulsar wind nebula Supershell Clouds Interstellar cloud Molecular cloud Infrared cirrus Integrated Flux Nebula High-velocity cloud H I region Morphology Bipolar nebula Pinwheel nebula Intergalactic blobs Lyman-alpha blob Lists Diffuse Largest Nebulae Planetary (PNe) Protoplanetary (PPNe) Supernova remnants (SNRs) Related Cometary knot Category Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emission_nebula&oldid=1276877076 " Categories : Emission nebulae Nebulae Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 February 2025, at 08:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emission nebula 49 languages Add topic

