Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Precursors 2 Institution and development Toggle Institution and development subsection 2.1 1948 election 2.2 Legislation 2.3 Disenfranchisement of Coloured voters 2.4 Division among whites 3 Homeland system Toggle Homeland system subsection 3.1 International recognition of the Bantustans 3.2 Forced removals 4 Society during apartheid Toggle Society during apartheid subsection 4.1 Coloured classification 4.2 Education 4.3 Women under apartheid 4.4 Sport under apartheid 4.5 Asians during apartheid 4.6 Conservatism and social policies 5 Internal resistance 6 International relations during apartheid Toggle International relations during apartheid subsection 6.1 Commonwealth 6.2 United Nations and other sanctions 6.3 Organisation for African Unity 6.4 Outward-looking policy 6.5 Sports and culture 6.5.1 Beginning 6.5.2 Isolation 6.5.3 Verwoerd years 6.5.4 Vorster years 6.5.5 Cultural boycott 6.6 Western influence 6.7 Effect of the Cold War 6.7.1 "Total Onslaught" 6.7.2 Militarization of society 6.7.3 Foreign military operations 7 State security Toggle State security subsection 7.1 State of emergency 8 Final years of apartheid Toggle Final years of apartheid subsection 8.1 Causes 8.2 Tricameral parliament 8.3 Reforms and contact with the ANC under Botha 8.4 Presidency of F. W. de Klerk 8.5 Negotiations 8.6 1994 election 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Inequality 9.2 Contrition 9.3 Other applications of the term 10 See also 11 Notes and references Toggle Notes and references subsection 11.1 Annotations 11.2 References 12 Bibliography 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Apartheid 139 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sardu Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 29 July 2025 .

South African system of racial segregation This article is about apartheid in South Africa. For apartheid as defined in international law, see Crime of apartheid . For other uses, see Apartheid (disambiguation) .

This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .  When this tag was added, its readable prose size was 17,500 words.

Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page .

( October 2024 ) Part of a series on Apartheid Events 1948 general election Coloured vote constitutional crisis 1956 Treason Trial Sharpeville massacre Rivonia Trial 1971–72 Namibian contract workers strike Soweto uprising Church Street, Pretoria bombing Vaal uprising Trojan Horse Incident Khotso House bombing Cape Town peace march CODESA Assassination of Chris Hani Saint James Church massacre 1994 Bophuthatswana crisis Shell House massacre Organisations ANC APLA IFP AWB BBB Black Sash CCB Conservative Party DP ECC FOSATU PP RP PFP HNP MK PAC UDF Broederbond National Party COSATU Security Branch SACC SADF SAIC SAMA SAP SACP State Security Council People Vernon Berrangé P. W. Botha Steve Biko Mangosuthu Buthelezi F. W. de Klerk Ruth First Bram Fischer Arthur Goldreich Chris Hani Bantu Holomisa Joel Joffe Ahmed Kathrada Albert Luthuli Winnie Madikizela-Mandela Mac Maharaj D. F. Malan Nelson Mandela Govan Mbeki Thabo Mbeki Raymond Mhlaba Benjamin Moloise Albertina Sisulu Walter Sisulu J. G. Strijdom Joe Slovo Robert Sobukwe Helen Suzman Adelaide Tambo Oliver Tambo Eugène Terre'Blanche Desmond Tutu H. F. Verwoerd B. J. Vorster Jacob Zuma Places Bantustan District Six Robben Island Sophiatown South-West Africa Soweto Sun City Vlakplaas Related topics Afrikaner nationalism Apartheid in popular culture Apartheid legislation Cape Qualified Franchise Disinvestment campaign Freedom Charter Internal resistance to apartheid Kairos Document Music in the movement against apartheid Nostalgia for apartheid Project Coast Sullivan Principles Category v t e Part of a series on Racial segregation Jim Crow sign, anti-Hispanic Overview Anti-miscegenation laws Crime of apartheid Allegations Caste Xenophobia Environmental / Institutional racism Ethnic nationalism Forced displacement Housing discrimination Exclusionary zoning Redlining Historical examples Australia Canada Pass system Separate schools Indian hospitals Fascist Italy French colonial empire Code Noir Indigénat Greek–Turkish population exchange Jewish ghettos in Europe Pale of Settlement Partition of India Portugal & Spain Nazi Germany Nuremberg Laws Rhodesia South Africa Bantustans Pass laws United Kingdom United States Black Codes Jim Crow laws Separate but equal Contemporary examples Anti-Romanyism Italy Romania Slovenia Roma walls Bosnia–Herzegovina Schools Cyprus Gulf states Saudi Arabia UAE South Asian labourers India Uthapuram Muslims Israel Palestinian enclaves Hafrada West Bank settlement law / barriers Malaysia Mauritania Morocco Myanmar Northern Ireland Sudan United States Academies Housing Schools Residential Xinjiang Yemen Related Citizenship Statelessness Forced assimilation Gender apartheid Income inequality One-drop rule Race Ethnicity Racial discrimination Category Commons v t e Part of a series on the History of South Africa Pre-colonial Middle Stone Age Late Stone Age Bantu expansion Kingdom of Mapungubwe Kingdom of Mutapa Kaditshwene Dutch colonisation Dutch Cape Colony Zulu Kingdom Shaka kaSenzangakhona Dingane kaSenzangakhona Mpande kaSenzangakhona Cetshwayo kaMpande Dinuzulu kaCetshwayo 1887 Annexation (British) British colonisation Cape Colony Colony of Natal Transvaal Colony Orange River Colony Boer Republics South African Republic Orange Free State Natalia Republic Boer Wars First Boer War Jameson Raid Second Boer War Union of South Africa World War I World War II Apartheid Legislation South African Border War Angolan Civil War Bantustans Internal resistance Apartheid referendum Post-apartheid Mandela presidency Mbeki presidency Motlanthe presidency Zuma presidency Ramaphosa presidency Topic Economic history Inventions and discoveries LGBT history Military history Political history Religious history Slavery Timeline List of years in South Africa South Africa portal v t e Part of a series on the History of Namibia Khoisan people Bantu expansion Orlam migration Dorsland Trek Traditional kingdom ( Uukwambi , Uukwaluudhi , Uukwangali ) German colonisation Herero and Nama genocide South West Africa campaign South African Mandate South African Border War SWAPO v t e Apartheid ( / ə ˈ p ɑːr t ( h ) aɪ t / ə- PART -(h)yte , especially South African English : / ə ˈ p ɑːr t ( h ) eɪ t / ə- PART -(h)ayt , Afrikaans : [aˈpart(ɦ)əit] ⓘ ; transl.

"separateness" , lit.

' aparthood ' ) was a system of institutionalised racial segregation that existed in South Africa and South West Africa [ a ] (now Namibia ) from 1948 to the early 1990s.

[ note 1 ] It was characterised by an authoritarian political culture based on baasskap ( lit.

'boss-ship' or 'boss-hood'), which ensured that South Africa was dominated politically, socially, and economically by the nation's minority white population .

[ 4 ] Under this minoritarian system, white citizens held the highest status, followed by Indians , Coloureds and black Africans , in that order.

[ 4 ] The economic legacy and social effects of apartheid continue to the present day, particularly inequality .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Broadly speaking, apartheid was delineated into petty apartheid , which entailed the segregation of public facilities and social events, and grand apartheid , which strictly separated housing and employment opportunities by race.

[ 9 ] The first apartheid law was the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act, 1949 , followed closely by the Immorality Amendment Act of 1950, which made it illegal for most South African citizens to marry or pursue sexual relationships across racial lines .

[ 10 ] The Population Registration Act, 1950 classified all South Africans into one of four racial groups based on appearance, known ancestry, socioeconomic status, and cultural lifestyle: "Black", "White", "Coloured", and "Indian", the last two of which included several sub-classifications.

[ 11 ] Places of residence were determined by racial classification.

[ 10 ] Between 1960 and 1983, 3.5 million black Africans were removed from their homes and forced into segregated neighbourhoods as a result of apartheid legislation, in some of the largest mass evictions in modern history.

[ 12 ] Most of these targeted removals were intended to restrict the black population to ten designated "tribal homelands", also known as bantustans , four of which became nominally independent states.

[ 10 ] The government announced that relocated persons would lose their South African citizenship as they were absorbed into the bantustans.

[ 9 ] Apartheid sparked significant international and domestic opposition, resulting in some of the most influential global social movements of the 20th century.

[ 13 ] It was the target of frequent condemnation in the United Nations and brought about extensive international sanctions , including arms embargoes and economic sanctions on South Africa.

[ 14 ] During the 1970s and 1980s, internal resistance to apartheid became increasingly militant, prompting brutal crackdowns by the National Party ruling government and protracted sectarian violence that left thousands dead or in detention.

[ 15 ] The Truth and Reconciliation Commission found that there were 21,000 deaths from political violence, with 7,000 deaths between 1948 and 1989, and 14,000 deaths and 22,000 injuries in the transition period between 1990 and 1994.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Some reforms of the apartheid system were undertaken, including allowing for Indian and Coloured political representation in parliament , but these measures failed to appease most activist groups.

[ 18 ] Between 1987 and 1993, the National Party entered into bilateral negotiations with the African National Congress (ANC), the leading anti-apartheid political movement, for ending segregation and introducing majority rule.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In 1990, prominent ANC figures, such as Nelson Mandela , were released from prison.

[ 20 ] Apartheid legislation was repealed on 17 June 1991, [ 2 ] leading to non-racial elections in April 1994 .

[ 21 ] Since the end of apartheid, elections have been open and competitive.

[ 22 ] Precursors [ edit ] Main articles: History of South Africa (1815–1910) and History of South Africa (1910–1948) Apartheid is an Afrikaans [ 23 ] word meaning "separateness", or "the state of being apart", literally "apart-ness" or apart - hood " (from the Afrikaans suffix -heid ).

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Its first recorded use was in 1929.

[ 10 ] Racial discrimination against Black people in South Africa dates to the beginning of large-scale European colonisation of South Africa with the Dutch East India Company 's establishment of a trading post in the Cape of Good Hope in 1652, which eventually expanded into the Dutch Cape Colony . The company began the Khoikhoi–Dutch Wars in which it displaced the local Khoikhoi people , replaced them with farms worked by White settlers , and imported Black slaves from across the Dutch Empire .

[ 26 ] In the days of slavery , slaves required passes to travel away from their owners.

In 1797, the Landdrost and Heemraden , local officials, of Swellendam and Graaff-Reinet extended pass laws beyond slaves and decreed that all Khoikhoi (designated as Hottentots ) moving about the country for any purpose should carry passes.

[ 27 ] This was confirmed by the British Colonial government in 1809 by the Hottentot Proclamation , which decreed that if a Khoikhoi were to move they would need a pass from their owner or a local official.

[ 27 ] Ordinance No. 49 of 1828 decreed that prospective Black immigrants were to be granted passes for the sole purpose of seeking work.

[ 27 ] These passes were to be issued for Coloureds and Khoikhoi but not for other Africans, who were nonetheless forced to carry passes.

During the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , the British Empire captured and annexed the Dutch Cape Colony.

[ 28 ] Under the 1806 Cape Articles of Capitulation the new British colonial rulers were required to respect previous legislation enacted under Roman-Dutch law , [ 29 ] and this led to a separation of the law in South Africa from English Common Law and a high degree of legislative autonomy. The governors and assemblies that governed the legal process in the various colonies of South Africa launched on an independent legislative path different from the rest of the British Empire.

The United Kingdom's Slavery Abolition Act 1833 provided for the gradual abolition of slavery in most parts of the British Empire. The trade of slaves was made illegal throughout the British Empire by 1837, with Nigeria and Bahrain being the last British territories to abolish slavery.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] The act overrode the Cape Articles of Capitulation. To comply with the act, the South African legislation was expanded to include Ordinance 1 in 1835, which effectively changed the status of slaves to indentured labourers . This was followed by Ordinance 3 in 1848, which introduced an indenture system for Xhosa that was little different from slavery.

The various South African colonies passed legislation throughout the rest of the 19th century to limit the freedom of unskilled workers, to increase the restrictions on indentured workers and to regulate the relations between the races. The discoveries of diamonds and gold in South Africa also raised racial inequality between White people and Black people.

[ 34 ] Some scholars have argued that Apartheid's ideology can be reflected in Afrikaner Calvinism , with its parallel traditions of racialism; [ 35 ] for example, as early as 1933; the executive council of the Broederbond formulated a recommendation for mass segregation.

[ 35 ] In the Cape Colony , which previously had a liberal and multi-racial constitution and a system of Cape Qualified Franchise open to men of all races, the Franchise and Ballot Act of 1892 raised the property franchise qualification and added an educational element, disenfranchising a disproportionate number of the Cape's non-White voters, [ 36 ] and the Glen Grey Act of 1894 instigated by the government of Prime Minister Cecil Rhodes limited the amount of land Africans could hold. Similarly, in Natal , the Natal Legislative Assembly Bill of 1894 deprived Indians of the right to vote.

[ 37 ] In 1896 the South African Republic brought in two pass laws requiring Africans to carry a badge. Only those employed by a master were permitted to remain on the Rand , and those entering a "labour district" needed a special pass.

[ 38 ] During the Second Boer War , the British Empire cited racial exploitation of Blacks as a cause for its war against the Boer republics . However, the peace negotiations for the Treaty of Vereeniging demanded "the just predominance of the white race" in South Africa as a precondition for the Boer republics unifying with the British Empire.

[ 39 ] In 1905 the General Pass Regulations Act denied Black people the vote and limited them to fixed areas, [ 40 ] and in 1906 the Asiatic Registration Act of the Transvaal Colony required all Indians to register and carry passes.

[ 41 ] Beginning in 1906 the South African Native Affairs Commission under Godfrey Lagden began implementing a more openly segregationist policy towards non-Whites.

[ 42 ] The latter was repealed by the British government but re-enacted in 1908. In 1910, the Union of South Africa was created as a self-governing dominion , which continued the legislative program: the South Africa Act (1910) enfranchised White people, giving them complete political control over all other racial groups while removing the right of Black people to sit in parliament; [ 43 ] the Native Land Act (1913) prevented Black people, except those in the Cape, from buying land outside "reserves"; [ 43 ] the Natives in Urban Areas Bill (1918) was designed to force Black people into "locations"; [ 44 ] the Urban Areas Act (1923) introduced residential segregation and provided cheap labour for industry led by White people; the Colour Bar Act (1926) prevented Black mine workers from practising skilled trades; the Native Administration Act (1927) made the British Crown rather than paramount chiefs the supreme head over all African affairs; [ 45 ] [ better source needed ] the Native Land and Trust Act (1936) complemented the 1913 Native Land Act and, in the same year, the Representation of Natives Act removed previous Black voters from the Cape voters' roll and allowed them to elect three Whites to Parliament.

[ 46 ] [ better source needed ] The United Party government of Jan Smuts began to move away from the rigid enforcement of segregationist laws during World War II, but faced growing opposition from Afrikaner nationalists who wanted stricter segregation.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Post-war, one of the first pieces of segregating legislation enacted by Smuts' government was the Asiatic Land Tenure Bill (1946) , which banned land sales to Indians and Indian descendent South Africans.

[ 49 ] The same year, the government established the Fagan Commission . Amid fears that integration would eventually lead to racial assimilation, the Opposition Herenigde Nasionale Party (HNP) established the Sauer Commission to investigate the effects of the United Party's policies. The commission concluded that integration would bring about a "loss of personality" for all racial groups. The HNP incorporated the commission's findings into its campaign platform for the 1948 South African general election , which it won.

[ citation needed ] Institution and development [ edit ] Apartheid developed from the racism of colonial factions and due to South Africa's "unique industrialisation".

[ 50 ] The policies of industrialisation led to the segregation and classing of people, which was "specifically developed to nurture early industry such as mining ".

[ 50 ] Cheap labour was the basis of the economy and this was taken from what the state classed as peasant groups and the migrants.

[ 51 ] To a large extent, the political ideology of apartheid had emerged from the colonisation of Africa by European powers which institutionalised racial discrimination and exercised a paternal philosophy of " civilising inferior natives ".

[ 52 ] 1948 election [ edit ] Main article: South African general election, 1948 D. F. Malan , the first apartheid-era prime minister (1948–1954) South Africa had allowed social custom and law to govern the consideration of multiracial affairs and of the allocation, in racial terms, of access to economic, social, and political status.

[ 53 ] Nevertheless, by 1948 it remained apparent that there were gaps in the social structure, whether legislated or otherwise, concerning the rights and opportunities of non-whites. The rapid economic development of World War II attracted black migrant workers in large numbers to chief industrial centres, where they compensated for the wartime shortage of white labour. However, this escalated rate of black urbanisation went unrecognised by the South African government, which failed to accommodate the influx with parallel expansion in housing or social services.

[ 53 ] Overcrowding, increasing crime rates, and disillusionment resulted; urban blacks came to support a new generation of leaders influenced by the principles of self-determination and popular freedoms enshrined in such statements as the Atlantic Charter . Black political organisations and leaders such as Alfred Xuma , James Mpanza , the African National Congress , and the Council of Non-European Trade Unions began demanding political rights, land reform, and the right to unionise.

[ 54 ] Whites reacted negatively to the changes, allowing the Herenigde Nasionale Party (or simply the National Party) to convince a large segment of the voting bloc that the impotence of the United Party in curtailing the evolving position of nonwhites indicated that the organisation had fallen under the influence of Western liberals.

[ 53 ] Many Afrikaners resented what they perceived as disempowerment by an underpaid black workforce and the superior economic power and prosperity of white English speakers.

[ 55 ] Smuts, as a strong advocate of the United Nations , lost domestic support when South Africa was criticised for its colour bar and the continued mandate of South West Africa by other UN member states.

[ 56 ] Afrikaner nationalists proclaimed that they offered the voters a new policy to ensure continued white domination.

[ 57 ] This policy was initially expounded from a theory drafted by Hendrik Verwoerd and was presented to the National Party by the Sauer Commission .

[ 53 ] It called for a systematic effort to organise the relations, rights, and privileges of the races as officially defined through a series of parliamentary acts and administrative decrees. Segregation had thus far been pursued only in major matters, such as separate schools, and local society rather than law had been depended upon to enforce most separation; it should now be extended to everything.

[ 53 ] The commission's goal was to completely remove blacks from areas designated for whites, including cities, with the exception of temporary migrant labour. Blacks would then be encouraged to create their own political units in land reserved for them.

[ 58 ] The party gave this policy a name – apartheid . Apartheid was to be the basic ideological and practical foundation of Afrikaner politics for the next quarter of a century.

[ 57 ] The National Party's election platform stressed that apartheid would preserve a market for white employment in which non-whites could not compete. On the issues of black urbanisation, the regulation of non-white labour, "influx control," social security, farm tariffs and non-white taxation, the United Party's policy remained contradictory and confused.

[ 56 ] Its traditional bases of support not only took mutually exclusive positions, but found themselves increasingly at odds with each other. Smuts' reluctance to consider South African foreign policy against the mounting tensions of the Cold War also stirred up discontent, while the nationalists promised to purge the state and public service of communist sympathisers.

[ 56 ] First to desert the United Party were Afrikaner farmers, who wished to see a change in influx control due to problems with squatters, as well as higher prices for their maize and other produce in the face of the mineowners' demand for cheap food policies. Always identified with the affluent and capitalist, the party also failed to appeal to its working class constituents.

[ 56 ] Populist rhetoric allowed the National Party to sweep eight constituencies in the mining and industrial centres of the Witwatersrand and five more in Pretoria . Barring the predominantly English-speaking landowner electorate of the Natal , the United Party was defeated in almost every rural district. Its urban losses in the nation's most populous province, the Transvaal , proved equally devastating.

[ 56 ] As the voting system was disproportionately weighted in favour of rural constituencies and the Transvaal in particular, the 1948 election catapulted the Herenigde Nasionale Party from a small minority party to a commanding position with an eight-vote parliamentary lead.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Daniel François Malan became the first nationalist prime minister, with the aim of implementing the apartheid philosophy and silencing liberal opposition.

[ 53 ] When the National Party came to power in 1948, there were factional differences in the party about the implementation of systemic racial segregation. The " baasskap " (white domination or supremacist) faction, which was the dominant faction in the NP and state institutions, favoured systematic segregation, but also favoured the participation of black Africans in the economy, with black labour controlled to advance the economic gains of Afrikaners. A second faction were the "purists", who believed in "vertical segregation", in which blacks and whites would be entirely separated, with blacks living in native reserves, with separate political and economic structures, which, they believed, would entail severe short-term pain, but would also lead to independence of white South Africa from black labour in the long term. A third faction, which included Hendrik Verwoerd , sympathised with the purists, but allowed for the use of black labour, while implementing the purist goal of vertical separation.

[ 61 ] Verwoerd would refer to this policy as a policy of "good neighbourliness" as a means of justifying such segregation.

[ 62 ] Legislation [ edit ] Apartheid legislation in South Africa Precursors (before 1948) Franchise and Ballot Act (1892) Glen Grey Act (1894) Natal Legislative Assembly Bill (1894) Transvaal Asiatic Registration Act (1906) South Africa Act (1909) Mines and Works Act (1911) Natives Land Act (1913) Natives (Urban Areas) Act (1923) Immorality Act (1927) Native Administration Act (1927) Women's Enfranchisement Act (1930) Franchise Laws Amendment Act (1931) Representation of Natives Act (1936) Native Trust and Land Act (1936) Native (Urban Areas) Consolidation Act (1945) Asiatic Land Tenure Act (1946) Malan to Verwoerd (1948–66) Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act (1949) Immorality Amendment Act † (1950) Population Registration Act (1950) Group Areas Act (1950) Suppression of Communism Act (1950) Native Building Workers Act (1951) Separate Representation of Voters Act (1951) Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act (1951) Bantu Authorities Act (1951) Native Laws Amendment Act † (1952) Pass Laws Act (1952) Public Safety Act (1953) Native Labour (Settlement of Disputes) Act (1953) Bantu Education Act (1953) Reservation of Separate Amenities Act (1953) Natives Resettlement Act (1954) Group Areas Development Act (1955) Riotous Assemblies Act (1956) Industrial Conciliation Act (1956) Natives (Prohibition of Interdicts) Act (1956) Immorality Act (1957) Bantu Investment Corporation Act (1959) Extension of University Education Act (1959) Promotion of Bantu Self-government Act (1959) Unlawful Organizations Act (1960) Indemnity Act (1961) Coloured Persons Communal Reserves Act (1961) Republic of South Africa Constitution Act (1961) Urban Bantu Councils Act (1961) General Law Amendment Act (1963) Coloured Persons Representative Council Act (1964) Vorster to Botha (1966–90) Terrorism Act (1967) Separate Representation of Voters Amendment Act (1968) Prohibition of Political Interference Act (1968) Bantu Homelands Citizenship Act (1970) Bantu Homelands Constitution Act (1971) Aliens Control Act (1973) Indemnity Act (1977) National Key Points Act (1980) List of National Key Points Internal Security Act (1982) Black Local Authorities Act (1982) Republic of South Africa Constitution Act (1983) Abolishment (1990–96) Negotiations to end Apartheid (1990–93) Interim Constitution (1993) Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act (1995) Constitution (1996) † No new legislation introduced, rather the existing legislation named was amended.

v t e Main article: Apartheid legislation Hendrik Verwoerd , minister of native affairs (1950–1958) and prime minister (1958–1966), earned the nickname 'Architect of Apartheid' from his large role in creating legislation.

NP leaders argued that South Africa did not comprise a single nation, but was made up of four distinct racial groups: white, black, Coloured and Indian. Such groups were split into 13 nations or racial federations. White people encompassed the English and Afrikaans language groups; the black populace was divided into ten such groups.

The state passed laws that paved the way for "grand apartheid", which was centred on separating races on a large scale, by compelling people to live in separate places defined by race. This strategy was in part adopted from "left-over" British rule that separated different racial groups after they took control of the Boer republics in the Anglo-Boer war . This created the black-only " townships " or "locations", where blacks were relocated to their own towns. As the NP government's minister of native affairs from 1950, Hendrik Verwoerd had a significant role in crafting such laws, which led to him being regarded as the 'Architect of Apartheid'.

[ 63 ] [ 62 ] [ 64 ] In addition, "petty apartheid" laws were passed.

The first grand apartheid law was the Population Registration Act of 1950, which formalised racial classification and introduced an identity card for all persons over the age of 18, specifying their racial group.

[ 65 ] Official teams or boards were established to come to a conclusion on those people whose race was unclear.

[ 66 ] This caused difficulty, especially for Coloured people , separating families when members were assigned to different races.

[ 67 ] The second pillar of grand apartheid was the Group Areas Act of 1950.

[ 68 ] Until then, most settlements had people of different races living side by side. This Act put an end to diverse areas and determined where one lived according to race. Each race was allotted its own area, which was used in later years as a basis of forced removal.

[ 69 ] The Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act of 1951 allowed the government to demolish black shanty town slums and forced white employers to pay for the construction of housing for those black workers who were permitted to reside in cities otherwise reserved for whites.

[ 70 ] The Native Laws Amendment Act, 1952 centralised and tightened pass laws so that blacks could not stay in urban areas for longer than 72 hours without a permit.

[ 71 ] The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act of 1949 prohibited marriage between persons of different races, and the Immorality Act of 1950 made sexual relations between whites and other races a criminal offence .

Under the Reservation of Separate Amenities Act of 1953, municipal grounds could be reserved for a particular race, creating, among other things, separate beaches, buses, hospitals, schools and universities. Signboards such as "whites only" applied to public areas, even including park benches.

[ 72 ] Black South Africans were provided with services greatly inferior to those of whites, and, to a lesser extent, to those of Indian and Coloured people.

[ 73 ] Further laws had the aim of suppressing resistance, especially armed resistance, to apartheid. The Suppression of Communism Act of 1950 banned the Communist Party of South Africa and any party subscribing to Communism . The act defined Communism and its aims so sweepingly that anyone who opposed government policy risked being labelled as a Communist. Since the law specifically stated that Communism aimed to disrupt racial harmony, it was frequently used to gag opposition to apartheid. Disorderly gatherings were banned, as were certain organisations that were deemed threatening to the government. It also empowered the Ministry of Justice to impose banning orders .

[ 74 ] After the Defiance Campaign , the government used the act for the mass arrests and banning of leaders of dissident groups such as the African National Congress (ANC), the South African Indian Congress (SAIC), and the South African Congress of Trade Unions (SACTU). After the release of the Freedom Charter, 156 leaders of these groups were charged in the 1956 Treason Trial . It established censorship of film, literature, and the media under the Customs and Excise Act 1955 and the Official Secrets Act 1956. The same year, the Native Administration Act 1956 allowed the government to banish blacks.

[ 74 ] The Bantu Authorities Act of 1951 created separate government structures for blacks and whites and was the first piece of legislation to support the government's plan of separate development in the bantustans . The Bantu Education Act, 1953 established a separate education system for blacks emphasizing African culture and vocational training under the Ministry of Native Affairs and defunded most mission schools .

[ 75 ] The Promotion of Black Self-Government Act of 1959 entrenched the NP policy of nominally independent "homelands" for blacks. So-called "self–governing Bantu units" were proposed, which would have devolved administrative powers, with the promise later of autonomy and self-government. It also abolished the seats of white representatives of black South Africans and removed from the rolls the few blacks still qualified to vote. The Bantu Investment Corporation Act of 1959 set up a mechanism to transfer capital to the homelands to create employment there. Legislation of 1967 allowed the government to stop industrial development in "white" cities and redirect such development to the "homelands". The Black Homeland Citizenship Act of 1970 marked a new phase in the Bantustan strategy. It changed the status of blacks to citizens of one of the ten autonomous territories. The aim was to ensure a demographic majority of white people within South Africa by having all ten Bantustans achieve full independence.

Inter-racial contact in sport was frowned upon, but there were no segregatory sports laws.

The government tightened pass laws compelling blacks to carry identity documents, to prevent the immigration of blacks from other countries. To reside in a city, blacks had to be in employment there. Until 1956 women were for the most part excluded from these pass requirements, as attempts to introduce pass laws for women were met with fierce resistance.

[ 76 ] Disenfranchisement of Coloured voters [ edit ] Main article: Coloured vote constitutional crisis Cape Coloured children in Bonteheuwel Annual per capita personal income by race group in South Africa relative to white levels In 1950, D. F. Malan announced the NP's intention to create a Coloured Affairs Department.

[ 77 ] J.G. Strijdom , Malan's successor as prime minister, moved to strip voting rights from black and Coloured residents of the Cape Province. The previous government had introduced the Separate Representation of Voters Bill into Parliament in 1951, turning it into an Act on 18 June 1951; however, four voters, G Harris, W D Franklin, W D Collins and Edgar Deane, challenged its validity in court with support from the United Party.

[ 78 ] The Cape Supreme Court upheld the act, but was reversed by the Appeal Court, finding the act invalid because a two-thirds majority in a joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament was needed to change the entrenched clauses of the Constitution .

[ 79 ] The government then introduced the High Court of Parliament Bill (1952), which gave Parliament the power to overrule decisions of the court.

[ 80 ] The Cape Supreme Court and the Appeal Court declared this invalid too.

[ 81 ] In 1955 the Strijdom government increased the number of judges in the Appeal Court from five to 11, and appointed pro-Nationalist judges to fill the new places.

[ 82 ] In the same year they introduced the Senate Act, which increased the Senate from 49 seats to 89.

[ 83 ] Adjustments were made such that the NP controlled 77 of these seats.

[ 84 ] The parliament met in a joint sitting and passed the Separate Representation of Voters Act in 1956, which transferred Coloured voters from the common voters' roll in the Cape to a new Coloured voters' roll.

[ 85 ] Immediately after the vote, the Senate was restored to its original size. The Senate Act was contested in the Supreme Court, but the recently enlarged Appeal Court, packed with government-supporting judges, upheld the act, and also the Act to remove Coloured voters.

[ 86 ] The 1956 law allowed Coloureds to elect four people to Parliament, but a 1969 law abolished those seats and stripped Coloureds of their right to vote. Since Indians had never been allowed to vote, this resulted in whites being the sole enfranchised group.

[ citation needed ] Separate representatives for coloured voters were first elected in the general election of 1958 . Even this limited representation did not last, being ended from 1970 by the Separate Representation of Voters Amendment Act, 1968 . Instead, all coloured adults were given the right to vote for the Coloured Persons Representative Council , which had limited legislative powers. The council was in turn dissolved in 1980. In 1984 a new constitution introduced the Tricameral Parliament in which coloured voters elected the House of Representatives .

A 2016 study in The Journal of Politics suggests that disenfranchisement in South Africa had a significant negative effect on basic service delivery to the disenfranchised.

[ 87 ] Division among whites [ edit ] Before South Africa became a republic in 1961, politics among white South Africans was typified by the division between the mainly Afrikaner pro-republic conservative and the largely English anti-republican liberal sentiments, [ 88 ] with the legacy of the Boer War still a factor for some people. Once South Africa became a republic, Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd called for improved relations and greater accord between people of British descent and the Afrikaners.

[ 89 ] He claimed that the only difference was between those in favour of apartheid and those against it. The ethnic division would no longer be between Afrikaans and English speakers, but between blacks and whites.

[ citation needed ] Most Afrikaners supported the notion of unanimity of white people to ensure their safety. White voters of British descent were divided. Many had opposed a republic, leading to a majority "no" vote in Natal .

[ 90 ] Later, some of them recognised the perceived need for white unity, convinced by the growing trend of decolonisation elsewhere in Africa, which concerned them. British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan 's " Wind of Change " speech left the British faction feeling that the United Kingdom had abandoned them.

[ 91 ] The more conservative English speakers supported Verwoerd; [ 92 ] others were troubled by the severing of ties with the UK and remained loyal to the Crown .

[ 93 ] They were displeased by having to choose between British and South African nationalities. Although Verwoerd tried to bond these different blocs, the subsequent voting illustrated only a minor swell of support, [ 94 ] indicating that a great many English speakers remained apathetic and that Verwoerd had not succeeded in uniting the white population.

Homeland system [ edit ] Main article: Bantustan Map of the 20 bantustans in South Africa and South West Africa Under the homeland system, the government attempted to divide South Africa and South West Africa into a number of separate states, each of which was supposed to develop into a separate nation-state for a different ethnic group.

[ 95 ] Territorial separation was hardly a new institution. There were, for example, the "reserves" created under the British government in the nineteenth century. Under apartheid, 13 percent of the land was reserved for black homelands, a small amount relative to its total population, and generally in economically unproductive areas of the country. The Tomlinson Commission of 1954 justified apartheid and the homeland system, but stated that additional land ought to be given to the homelands, a recommendation that was not carried out.

[ 96 ] When Verwoerd became prime minister in 1958, the policy of "separate development" came into being, with the homeland structure as one of its cornerstones. Verwoerd came to believe in the granting of independence to these homelands. The government justified its plans on the ostensible basis that the "government's policy is, therefore, not a policy of discrimination on the grounds of race or colour, but a policy of differentiation on the ground of nationhood, of different nations, granting to each self-determination within the borders of their homelands – hence this policy of separate development".

[ 97 ] Under the homelands system, blacks would no longer be citizens of South Africa, becoming citizens of the independent homelands who worked in South Africa as foreign migrant labourers on temporary work permits. In 1958 the Promotion of Black Self-Government Act was passed, and border industries and the Bantu Investment Corporation were established to promote economic development and the provision of employment in or near the homelands. Many black South Africans who had never resided in their identified homeland were forcibly removed from the cities to the homelands.

The vision of a South Africa divided into multiple ethnostates appealed to the reform-minded Afrikaner intelligentsia, and it provided a more coherent philosophical and moral framework for the National Party's policies, while also providing a veneer of intellectual respectability to the controversial policy of so-called baasskap .

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] Rural area in Ciskei , one of the four nominally independent homelands In total, 20 homelands were allocated to ethnic groups, ten in South Africa proper and ten in South West Africa. Of these 20 homelands, 19 were classified as black, while one, Basterland , was set aside for a sub-group of Coloureds known as Basters , who are closely related to Afrikaners. Four of the homelands were declared independent by the South African government: Transkei in 1976, Bophuthatswana in 1977, Venda in 1979, and Ciskei in 1981 (known as the TBVC states). Once a homeland was granted its nominal independence, its designated citizens had their South African citizenship revoked and replaced with citizenship in their homeland. These people were then issued passports instead of passbooks. Citizens of the nominally autonomous homelands also had their South African citizenship circumscribed, meaning they were no longer legally considered South African.

[ 101 ] The South African government attempted to draw an equivalence between their view of black citizens of the homelands and the problems which other countries faced through entry of illegal immigrants.

International recognition of the Bantustans [ edit ] Bantustans within the borders of South Africa and South West Africa were classified by degree of nominal self-rule: 6 were "non-self-governing", 10 were "self-governing", and 4 were "independent". In theory, self-governing Bantustans had control over many aspects of their internal functioning but were not yet sovereign nations. Independent Bantustans (Transkei, Bophutatswana, Venda and Ciskei; also known as the TBVC states) were intended to be fully sovereign. In reality, they had no significant economic infrastructure and with few exceptions encompassed swaths of disconnected territory. This meant all the Bantustans were little more than puppet states controlled by South Africa.

Throughout the existence of the independent Bantustans, South Africa remained the only country to recognise their independence. Nevertheless, internal organisations of many countries, as well as the South African government, lobbied for their recognition. For example, upon the foundation of Transkei, the Swiss-South African Association encouraged the Swiss government to recognise the new state. In 1976, leading up to a United States House of Representatives resolution urging the President to not recognise Transkei, the South African government intensely lobbied lawmakers to oppose the bill.

[ 102 ] Each TBVC state extended recognition to the other independent Bantustans while South Africa showed its commitment to the notion of TBVC sovereignty by building embassies in the TBVC capitals.

Forced removals [ edit ] Man subject to forced removal in Mogopa, Western Transvaal, February 1984 See also: Group Areas Act and Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act, 1991 During the 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s, the government implemented a policy of "resettlement", to force people to move to their designated "group areas". Millions of people were forced to relocate. These removals included people relocated due to slum clearance programmes, labour tenants on white-owned farms, the inhabitants of the so-called "black spots" (black-owned land surrounded by white farms), the families of workers living in townships close to the homelands, and "surplus people" from urban areas, including thousands of people from the Western Cape (which was declared a "Coloured Labour Preference Area") [ 103 ] who were moved to the Transkei and Ciskei homelands. The best-publicised forced removals of the 1950s occurred in Johannesburg , when 60,000 people were moved to the new township of Soweto (an abbreviation for South Western Townships).

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Until 1955, Sophiatown had been one of the few urban areas where black people were allowed to own land, and was slowly developing into a multiracial slum. As industry in Johannesburg grew, Sophiatown became the home of a rapidly expanding black workforce, as it was convenient and close to town. It had the only swimming pool for black children in Johannesburg.

[ 106 ] As one of the oldest black settlements in Johannesburg, it held an almost symbolic importance for the 50,000 black people it contained. Despite a vigorous ANC protest campaign and worldwide publicity, the removal of Sophiatown began on 9 February 1955 under the Western Areas Removal Scheme. In the early hours, heavily armed police forced residents out of their homes and loaded their belongings onto government trucks. The residents were taken to a large tract of land 19 kilometres (12 mi) from the city centre, known as Meadowlands , which the government had purchased in 1953. Meadowlands became part of a new planned black city called Soweto . Sophiatown was destroyed by bulldozers, and a new white suburb named Triomf (Triumph) was built in its place. This pattern of forced removal and destruction was to repeat itself over the next few years, and was not limited to black South Africans alone. Forced removals from areas like Cato Manor (Mkhumbane) in Durban , and District Six in Cape Town , where 55,000 Coloured and Indian people were forced to move to new townships on the Cape Flats , were carried out under the Group Areas Act of 1950. Nearly 600,000 Coloured, Indian and Chinese people were moved under the Group Areas Act. Some 40,000 whites were also forced to move when land was transferred from "white South Africa" into the black homelands.

[ 107 ] In South-West Africa, the apartheid plan that instituted Bantustans was as a result of the so-called Odendaal Plan, a set of proposals from the Odendaal Commission of 1962–1964.

[ 108 ] Society during apartheid [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Apartheid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Workers at a pineapple stall between Port Elizabeth and Grahamstown , December 1962 The NP passed a string of legislation that became known as petty apartheid . The first of these was the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act 55 of 1949 , prohibiting marriage between whites and people of other races. The Immorality Amendment Act 21 of 1950 (as amended in 1957 by Act 23) forbade "unlawful racial intercourse" and "any immoral or indecent act" between a white and a black, Indian or Coloured person.

Black people were not allowed to run businesses or professional practices in areas designated as "white South Africa" unless they had a permit – such being granted only exceptionally. Without a permit, they were required to move to the black "homelands" and set up businesses and practices there. Trains, hospitals and ambulances were segregated.

[ 109 ] Because of the smaller numbers of white patients and the fact that white doctors preferred to work in white hospitals, conditions in white hospitals were much better than those in often overcrowded and understaffed, significantly underfunded black hospitals.

[ 110 ] Residential areas were segregated and blacks were allowed to live in white areas only if employed as a servant and even then only in servants' quarters. Black people were excluded from working in white areas, unless they had a pass, nicknamed the dompas , also spelt dompass or dom pass . The most likely origin of this name is from the Afrikaans "verdomde pas" (meaning accursed pass).

[ 111 ] Only black people with "Section 10" rights (those who had migrated to the cities before World War II) were excluded from this provision. A pass was issued only to a black person with approved work. Spouses and children had to be left behind in black homelands. A pass was issued for one magisterial district (usually one town) confining the holder to that area only. Being without a valid pass made a person subject to arrest and trial for being an illegal migrant. This was often followed by deportation to the person's homeland and prosecution of the employer for employing an illegal migrant. Police vans patrolled white areas to round up blacks without passes. Black people were not allowed to employ whites in white South Africa.

[ 112 ] This legally enforced segregation was reinforced through deliberate town planning measures, such as introducing natural, industrial and infrastructural buffer zones.

[ 113 ] The legacy of this town planning element still hinders economic integration of urban economies in the twenty-first century, physically separating semi-formal township economies from industrial and corporate clusters in cities.

[ 114 ] Although trade unions for black and Coloured workers had existed since the early 20th century, it was not until the 1980s reforms that a mass black trade union movement developed.

Trade unions under apartheid were racially segregated, with 54 unions being white only, 38 for Indian and Coloured and 19 for black people. The Industrial Conciliation Act (1956) legislated against the creation of multi-racial trade unions and attempted to split existing multi-racial unions into separate branches or organisations along racial lines.

[ 115 ] Each black homeland controlled its own education, health and police systems. Blacks were not allowed to buy hard liquor . They were able to buy only state-produced poor quality beer (although this law was relaxed later). Public beaches, swimming pools, some pedestrian bridges, drive-in cinema parking spaces, graveyards, parks, and public toilets were segregated. Cinemas and theatres in white areas were not allowed to admit blacks. There were practically no cinemas in black areas. Most restaurants and hotels in white areas were not allowed to admit blacks except as staff. Blacks were prohibited from attending white churches under the Churches Native Laws Amendment Act of 1957, but this was never rigidly enforced, and churches were one of the few places where races could mix without the interference of the law. Blacks earning 360 rand a year or more had to pay taxes while the white threshold was more than twice as high, at 750 rand a year. On the other hand, the taxation rate for whites was considerably higher than that for blacks.

[ citation needed ] Blacks could not acquire land in white areas. In the homelands, much of the land belonged to a "tribe", where the local chieftain would decide how the land had to be used. This resulted in whites owning almost all the industrial and agricultural lands and much of the prized residential land. Most blacks were stripped of their South African citizenship when the "homelands" became "independent", and they were no longer able to apply for South African passports . Eligibility requirements for a passport had been difficult for blacks to meet, the government contending that a passport was a privilege, not a right, and the government did not grant many passports to blacks. Apartheid pervaded culture as well as the law, and was entrenched by most of the mainstream media .

Coloured classification [ edit ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Main article: Coloureds The population was classified into four groups: African, White, Indian, and Coloured (capitalised to denote their legal definitions in South African law ). The Coloured group included people regarded as being of mixed descent, including of Bantu , Khoisan , European and Malay ancestry. Many were descended from slaves, or indentured workers, who had been brought to South Africa from India , Sri Lanka , Madagascar , and China .

[ 116 ] The Population Registration Act, (Act 30 of 1950), defined South Africans as belonging to one of three races: White, Black or Coloured. People of Indian ancestry were considered Coloured under this act. Appearance, social acceptance and descent were used to determine the qualification of an individual into one of the three categories. A white person was described by the act as one whose parents were both white and possessed the "habits, speech, education, deportment and demeanour" of a white person. Blacks were defined by the act as belonging to an African race or tribe. Lastly, Coloureds were those who could not be classified as black or white.

[ 117 ] The apartheid bureaucracy devised complex (and often arbitrary) criteria at the time that the Population Registration Act was implemented to determine who was Coloured. Minor officials would administer tests to determine if someone should be categorised either Coloured or White, or if another person should be categorised either Coloured or Black. The tests included the pencil test , in which a pencil was shoved into the subjects' curly hair and the subjects made to shake their head. If the pencil stuck they were deemed to be Black; if dislodged they were pronounced Coloured. Other tests involved examining the shapes of jaw lines and buttocks and pinching people to see what language they would say "Ouch" in.

[ 118 ] As a result of these tests, different members of the same family found themselves in different race groups. Further tests determined membership of the various sub-racial groups of the Coloureds.

Discriminated against by apartheid, Coloureds were as a matter of state policy forced to live in separate townships , as defined in the Group Areas Act (1950), [ 119 ] in some cases leaving homes their families had occupied for generations, and received an inferior education, though better than that provided to Africans. They played an important role in the anti-apartheid movement : for example the African Political Organization established in 1902 had an exclusively Coloured membership.

Voting rights were denied to Coloureds in the same way that they were denied to Blacks from 1950 to 1983. However, in 1977 the NP caucus approved proposals to bring Coloureds and Indians into central government. In 1982, final constitutional proposals produced a referendum among Whites, and the Tricameral Parliament was approved. The Constitution was reformed the following year to allow the Coloured and Indian minorities participation in separate Houses in a Tricameral Parliament, and Botha became the first Executive State President. The idea was that the Coloured minority could be granted voting rights , but the Black majority were to become citizens of independent homelands.

[ 117 ] [ 119 ] These separate arrangements continued until the abolition of apartheid. The Tricameral reforms led to the formation of the (anti-apartheid) United Democratic Front as a vehicle to try to prevent the co-option of Coloureds and Indians into an alliance with Whites. The battles between the UDF and the NP government from 1983 to 1989 were to become the most intense period of struggle between left-wing and right-wing South Africans.

Education [ edit ] Education was segregated by the 1953 Bantu Education Act , which crafted a separate system of education for black South African students and was designed to prepare black people for lives as a labouring class.

[ 120 ] In 1959 separate universities were created for black, Coloured and Indian people. Existing universities were not permitted to enroll new black students. The Afrikaans Medium Decree of 1974 required the use of Afrikaans and English on an equal basis in high schools outside the homelands.

[ 121 ] In the 1970s, the state spent ten times more per child on the education of white children than on black children within the Bantu Education system (the education system in black schools within white South Africa). Higher education was provided in separate universities and colleges after 1959. Eight black universities were created in the homelands.

Fort Hare University in the Ciskei (now Eastern Cape ) was to register only Xhosa -speaking students.

Sotho , Tswana , Pedi and Venda speakers were placed at the newly founded University College of the North at Turfloop, while the University College of Zululand was launched to serve Zulu students. Coloureds and Indians were to have their own establishments in the Cape and Natal respectively.

[ 122 ] Each black homeland controlled its own education, health and police systems.

By 1948, before formal Apartheid, 10 universities existed in South Africa: four were Afrikaans, four for English, one for Blacks and a Correspondence University open to all ethnic groups. By 1981, under apartheid government, 11 new universities were built: seven for Blacks, one for Coloureds, one for Indians, one for Afrikaans and one dual-language medium Afrikaans and English.

Women under apartheid [ edit ] Black women demonstrate against pass laws, 1956.

Apartheid had a major effect on Black and Coloured women, who suffered due to both racial and gender discrimination while being politically pushed to the margins.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Scholar Judith Nolde has argued that, in general, the discriminatory system set up a "triple yoke of oppression: gender, race, and class" such that South African women became "deprive[d]" of their fundamental "human rights as individuals." [ 125 ] Jobs were often hard to find. Many Black and Coloured women worked as agricultural employees or as domestic workers , but wages were extremely low, if existent at all.

[ 126 ] In terms of mothers and their families, many South African children developed diseases caused by malnutrition and sanitation problems given the oppressive public policies, and mortality rates were therefore high. The controlled movement of black and Coloured workers within the country caused by the Natives Urban Areas Act of 1923 and restrictive 'pass laws' separated family members from one another. This occurred because the apartheid system perceived that men could prove their employment in urban centres while most women were merely dependents ; consequently, they risked being deported to rural areas.

[ 127 ] Even in rural areas, there were legal hurdles for women to own land, and jobs outside cities were even more scarce.

[ 128 ] Sport under apartheid [ edit ] See also: Rugby union and apartheid By the 1930s, association football was divided into numerous institutions based on race: the (White) South African Football Association , the South African Indian Football Association (SAIFA), the South African African Football Association (SAAFA) and its rival the South African Bantu Football Association, and the South African Coloured Football Association (SACFA). Lack of funds to provide proper equipment would be noticeable in regards to black amateur football matches, reflecting economic inequality in society at large.

[ 129 ] Apartheid's social engineering made it more difficult to compete across racial lines. Thus, in an effort to centralise finances, the federations merged in 1951, creating the South African Soccer Federation (SASF), which brought Black, Indian, and Coloured national associations into one body that opposed apartheid. This was generally opposed more and more by the growing apartheid government, and – with urban segregation being reinforced with ongoing racist policies – it was harder to play football along these racial lines. In 1956, the Pretoria regime – the administrative capital of South Africa – passed the first apartheid sports policy; by doing so, it emphasised the White-led government's opposition to inter-racialism.

While football was plagued by racism, it also played a role in protesting apartheid and its policies. With the international bans from FIFA and other major sporting events, South Africa would be in the spotlight internationally. In a 1977 survey, white South Africans ranked the lack of international sport as one of the three most damaging consequences of apartheid.

[ 130 ] By the mid-1950s, Black South Africans would also use media to challenge the "racialisation" of sports in South Africa; anti-apartheid forces had begun to pinpoint sport as the "weakness" of white national morale. Black journalists for the Johannesburg Drum magazine were the first to give the issue public exposure, with an intrepid special issue in 1955 that asked, "Why shouldn't our blacks be allowed in the SA team?" [ 130 ] As time progressed, South Africa's international standing would continue to be strained. In the 1980s, as the oppressive system was slowly collapsing and the ANC and National Party started negotiations on the end of apartheid, football associations also discussed the formation of a single, non-racial controlling body. This unity process accelerated in the late 1980s and led to the creation, in December 1991, of an incorporated South African Football Association. On 3 July 1992, FIFA finally welcomed South Africa back into international football.

Sport has long been an important part of life in South Africa, and the boycotting of games by international teams had a profound effect on the white population, perhaps more than the trade embargoes did. After the re-acceptance of South Africa's sports teams by the international community, sport played a major unifying role between the country's diverse ethnic groups. Mandela's support of the predominantly white rugby fraternity during the 1995 Rugby World Cup was considered instrumental in bringing together South African sports fans of all races.

[ 131 ] Activities in the sport of professional boxing were also affected, as there were 44 recorded professional boxing fights for national titles deemed "for Whites only" between 1955 and 1979, [ 132 ] and 397 fights as deemed "for non-Whites" between 1901 and 1978.

[ 133 ] Asians during apartheid [ edit ] Further information: Indian South Africans , Chinese South Africans , and Honorary whites Indian South Africans in Durban, 1963 Defining its Asian population, a minority that did not appear to belong to any of the initial three designated non-white groups, was a constant dilemma for the apartheid government.

The classification of " honorary white " (a term which would be ambiguously used throughout apartheid) was granted to immigrants from Japan , South Korea and Taiwan – countries with which South Africa maintained diplomatic and economic relations [ 134 ] – and to their descendants.

Indian South Africans during apartheid were assigned to many ranges of categories from "Asian" to "black" [ clarification needed ] to "Coloured" [ clarification needed ] and even the mono-ethnic category of "Indian", but never as white, having been considered "nonwhite" throughout South Africa's history. The group faced severe discrimination during the apartheid regime and were subject to numerous racialist policies.

In 2005, a retrospective study was done by Josephine C. Naidoo and Devi Moodley Rajab, where they interviewed a series of Indian South Africans about their experience living through apartheid; their study highlighted education, the workplace, and general day to day living. One participant who was a doctor said that it was considered the norm for Non-White and White doctors to mingle while working at the hospital but when there was any down time or breaks, they were to go back to their segregated quarters. Indians were paid three to four times less than their white counterparts. Another finding of this study was the psychological harm suffered by Indians living in South Africa during apartheid. There was a strong degree of alienation that left a strong feeling of inferiority.

[ 135 ] Chinese South Africans –  descendend from migrant workers who came to work in the gold mines around Johannesburg in the late 19th century – were initially either classified as "Coloured" or "Other Asian" and were subject to numerous forms of discrimination and restriction.

[ 136 ] It was not until 1984 that South African Chinese, then numbering about 10,000, were given the same official rights as the Japanese , to be treated as whites in terms of the Group Areas Act, although they still faced discrimination and did not receive all the benefits of their newly obtained honorary white status, such as voting.

[ citation needed ] [ 137 ] Indonesians arrived at the Cape of Good Hope as slaves until the abolishment of slavery during the 19th century. They were predominantly Muslim , were allowed religious freedom and formed their own ethnic community known as Cape Malays . They were classified as part of the Coloured racial group.

[ 138 ] This was the same for South Africans of Malaysian descent.

[ 116 ] South Africans of Filipino descent were classified as "black" due to the historical outlook on Filipinos by White South Africans, and many of them lived in Bantustans.

[ 116 ] The Lebanese population were somewhat of an anomaly during the apartheid era. Lebanese immigration to South Africa was chiefly Christian, and the group was originally classified as non-white; however, a court case in 1913 ruled that because Lebanese and Syrians originated from the Canaan region (the birthplace of Christianity and Judaism ), they could not be discriminated against by race laws which targeted non-believers, and thus, were classified as white. The Lebanese community maintained their white status after the Population Registration Act came into effect; however, further immigration from the Middle East was restricted.

[ 139 ] Conservatism and social policies [ edit ] Alongside apartheid, the National Party implemented a programme of social conservatism . Pornography, [ 140 ] gambling [ 141 ] and works from Marx , Lenin and other socialist thinkers [ 142 ] were banned. Cinemas, shops selling alcohol and most other businesses were forbidden from opening on Sundays .

[ 143 ] Abortion , [ 144 ] homosexuality [ 145 ] and sex education were also restricted; abortion was legal only in cases of rape or if the mother's life was threatened.

[ 144 ] Television was not introduced until 1976 because the government viewed English programming as a threat to the Afrikaans language.

[ 146 ] Television was run on apartheid lines – TV1 broadcast in Afrikaans and English (geared to a White audience), TV2 in Zulu and Xhosa, TV3 in Sotho, Tswana and Pedi (both geared to a Black audience), and TV4 mostly showed programmes for an urban Black audience.

Internal resistance [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Apartheid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Internal resistance to apartheid Demonstrators at the funeral for victims of the 1985 Queenstown Massacre Apartheid sparked significant internal resistance.

[ 14 ] The government responded to a series of popular uprisings and protests with police brutality, which in turn increased local support for the armed resistance struggle.

[ 147 ] Internal resistance to the apartheid system in South Africa came from several sectors of society and saw the creation of organisations dedicated variously to peaceful protests, passive resistance and armed insurrection.

In 1949, the youth wing of the African National Congress (ANC) took control of the organisation and started advocating a radical African nationalist programme. The new young leaders proposed that white authority could only be overthrown through mass campaigns. In 1950 that philosophy saw the launch of the Programme of Action, a series of strikes, boycotts and civil disobedience actions that led to occasional violent clashes with the authorities.

In 1959, a group of disenchanted ANC members formed the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), which organised a demonstration against pass books on 21 March 1960. One of those protests was held in the township of Sharpeville , where 69 people were killed by police in the Sharpeville massacre .

In the wake of Sharpeville, the government declared a state of emergency. More than 18,000 people were arrested, including leaders of the ANC and PAC, and both organisations were banned. The resistance went underground, with some leaders in exile abroad and others engaged in campaigns of domestic sabotage and terrorism.

In May 1961, before the declaration of South Africa as a Republic, an assembly representing the banned ANC called for negotiations between the members of the different ethnic groupings, threatening demonstrations and strikes during the inauguration of the Republic if their calls were ignored.

When the government overlooked them, the strikers (among the main organisers was a 42-year-old, Thembu -origin Nelson Mandela ) carried out their threats. The government countered swiftly by giving police the authority to arrest people for up to twelve days and detaining many strike leaders amid numerous cases of police brutality.

[ 148 ] Defeated, the protesters called off their strike. The ANC then chose to launch an armed struggle through a newly formed military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), which would perform acts of sabotage on tactical state structures. Its first sabotage plans were carried out on 16 December 1961, the anniversary of the Battle of Blood River .

In the 1970s, the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) was created by tertiary students influenced by the Black Power movement in the US. BCM endorsed black pride and African customs and did much to alter the feelings of inadequacy instilled among black people by the apartheid system. The leader of the movement, Steve Biko , was taken into custody on 18 August 1977 and was beaten to death in detention.

In 1976, secondary students in Soweto took to the streets in the Soweto uprising to protest against the imposition of Afrikaans as the only language of instruction. On 16 June, police opened fire on students protesting peacefully. According to official reports 23 people were killed, but the number of people who died is usually given as 176, with estimates of up to 700.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] In the following years several student organisations were formed to protest against apartheid, and these organisations were central to urban school boycotts in 1980 and 1983 and rural boycotts in 1985 and 1986.

List of attacks attributed to MK and compiled by the Committee for South African War Resistance (COSAWR) between 1980 and 1983 In parallel with student protests, labour unions started protest action in 1973 and 1974. After 1976 unions and workers are considered to have played an important role in the struggle against apartheid, filling the gap left by the banning of political parties. In 1979 black trade unions were legalised and could engage in collective bargaining, although strikes were still illegal. Economist Thomas Sowell wrote that basic supply and demand led to violations of Apartheid "on a massive scale" throughout the nation, simply because there were not enough white South African business owners to meet the demand for various goods and services. Large portions of the garment industry and construction of new homes, for example, were effectively owned and operated by blacks, who either worked surreptitiously or who circumvented the law with a white person as a nominal, figurehead manager.

[ 152 ] In 1983, anti-apartheid leaders determined to resist the tricameral parliament assembled to form the United Democratic Front (UDF) in order to coordinate anti-apartheid activism inside South Africa. The first presidents of the UDF were Archie Gumede , Oscar Mpetha and Albertina Sisulu ; patrons were Archbishop Desmond Tutu , Dr Allan Boesak , Helen Joseph , and Nelson Mandela . Basing its platform on abolishing apartheid and creating a nonracial democratic South Africa, the UDF provided a legal way for domestic human rights groups and individuals of all races to organise demonstrations and campaign against apartheid inside the country. Churches and church groups also emerged as pivotal points of resistance. Church leaders were not immune to prosecution, and certain faith-based organisations were banned, but the clergy generally had more freedom to criticise the government than militant groups did. The UDF, coupled with the protection of the church, accordingly permitted a major role for Archbishop Desmond Tutu , who served both as a prominent domestic voice and international spokesperson denouncing apartheid and urging the creation of a shared nonracial state.

[ 153 ] Although the majority of whites supported apartheid, some 20 percent did not.

[ when?

] Parliamentary opposition was galvanised by Helen Suzman , Colin Eglin and Harry Schwarz , who formed the Progressive Federal Party . Extra-parliamentary resistance was largely centred in the South African Communist Party and women's organisation the Black Sash . Women were also notable in their involvement in trade union organisations and banned political parties.  Public intellectuals like the author Nadine Gordimer also played a role in the anti-apartheid movement.

International relations during apartheid [ edit ] International opposition to apartheid in South Africa Anti-apartheid protest in Amsterdam , 1988 Campaigns Academic boycott Sporting boycott Disinvestment Constructive engagement Free South Africa Movement International anti-apartheid music International sanctions Milton King boycotts Instruments and legislation 1962 UN Resolution 1761 1973 Crime of Apartheid Convention 1977 Gleneagles Agreement 1977 Sullivan principles 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act Organisations Anti-Apartheid Movement Artists United Against Apartheid Commonwealth of Nations Halt All Racist Tours Organisation of African Unity TransAfrica UN Special Committee against Apartheid Conferences 1964 Conference for Economic Sanctions 1978 World Conference against Racism UN Security Council Resolutions Resolution 134 (Sharpeville massacre) Resolution 181 (voluntary arms embargo) Resolution 191 (sanctions feasibility) Resolution 282 (arms embargo strengthening) Resolution 418 (mandatory arms embargo) Resolution 435 (South-West Africa ceasefire) Resolution 591 (arms embargo strengthening) Other aspects Elimination of Racism Day "Biko" (song) Activists Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute Equity television programming ban Rugby union and apartheid v t e Main article: Foreign relations of South Africa during apartheid Commonwealth [ edit ] South Africa's policies were subject to international scrutiny in 1960, when British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan criticised them during his Wind of Change speech in Cape Town . Weeks later, tensions came to a head in the Sharpeville massacre , resulting in more international condemnation. Soon afterwards, Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd announced a referendum on whether the country should become a republic. The referendum on 5 October that year asked Whites; "Are you in favour of a Republic for the Union?", and 52% voted "Yes".

[ 154 ] As a consequence of this change of status, South Africa needed to reapply for continued membership of the Commonwealth , with which it had privileged trade links.

India had become a republic within the Commonwealth in 1950, but it became clear that African and South and Southeast Asian member states would oppose South Africa due to its apartheid policies. As a result, South Africa withdrew from the Commonwealth on 31 May 1961, the day that the Republic came into existence.

During the 1980s, the Commonwealth advocated for economic sanctions to accelerate the dismantling of apartheid, and in 1986 during a mini-summit which involved seven different countries, including the United Kingdom, a tough programme of sanctions was agreed.

[ 155 ] United Nations and other sanctions [ edit ] The apartheid system as an issue was first formally brought to United Nations attention in order to advocate for the Indians residing in South Africa. On 22 June 1946, the Indian government requested that the discriminatory treatment of Indians living in South Africa be included on the agenda of the first General Assembly session.

[ 156 ] In 1952, apartheid was again discussed in the aftermath of the Defiance Campaign, and the UN set up a task team to keep watch on the progress of apartheid and the racial state of affairs in South Africa. Although South Africa's racial policies were a cause for concern, most countries in the UN agreed that this was a domestic affair, which fell outside the UN's jurisdiction.

[ 157 ] In April 1960, the UN's conservative stance on apartheid changed following the Sharpeville massacre , and the Security Council for the first time agreed on concerted action against the apartheid regime.

Resolution 134 called upon the nation of South Africa to abandon its policies implementing racial discrimination. The newly founded United Nations Special Committee Against Apartheid scripted and passed Resolution 181 on 7 August 1963, calling upon all states to cease the sale and shipment of all ammunition and military vehicles to South Africa. From 1964 onwards, the US and the UK discontinued their arms trade with South Africa. The Security Council also condemned the Soweto massacre in Resolution 392 . In 1977, the voluntary UN arms embargo became mandatory with the passing of Resolution 418 . In addition to isolating South Africa militarily, the United Nations General Assembly encouraged the boycotting of oil sales to South Africa.

[ 156 ] Other actions taken by the United Nations General Assembly included the request for all nations and organisations "to suspend cultural, educational, sporting and other exchanges with the racist regime and with organisations or institutions in South Africa which practise apartheid".

[ 156 ] After much debate, by the late-1980s, the United States, the United Kingdom, and 23 other nations had passed laws placing various trade sanctions on South Africa. A disinvestment from South Africa movement in many countries was similarly widespread, with individual cities and provinces around the world implementing various laws and local regulations forbidding registered corporations under their jurisdiction from doing business with South African firms, factories, or banks.

[ 158 ] Organisation for African Unity [ edit ] See also: Lusaka Manifesto The Organisation of African Unity (OAU) was created in 1963. Its primary objectives were to eradicate colonialism and improve social, political and economic conditions in Africa. It censured apartheid and demanded sanctions against South Africa. African states agreed to aid the liberation movements in their fight against apartheid.

[ 159 ] In 1969, 14 nations from Central and East Africa gathered in Lusaka , Zambia, and formulated the Lusaka Manifesto , which was signed on 13 April by all of the countries in attendance except Malawi .

[ 160 ] This manifesto was later taken on by both the OAU and the United Nations.

[ 159 ] The Lusaka Manifesto summarised the political situations of self-governing African countries, condemning racism and inequity, and calling for Black majority rule in all African nations.

[ 161 ] Regarding South Africa, the manifesto said that the countries supported peaceful change "if it were possible", and made clear that they would support guerrilla liberation movements if necessary.

[ 162 ] South Africa's negative response to the Lusaka Manifesto and rejection of a change to its policies brought about another OAU announcement in October 1971. The Mogadishu Declaration stated that South Africa's rebuffing of negotiations meant that its Black people could only be freed through military means, and that no African state should converse with the apartheid government.

[ 163 ] Outward-looking policy [ edit ] In 1966, B. J. Vorster became prime minister. He was not prepared to dismantle apartheid, but he did try to redress South Africa's isolation and to revitalise the country's global reputation, even with other African states. This he called his "Outward-Looking" policy.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] Vorster's willingness to talk to African leaders stood in contrast to Verwoerd's refusal to engage with them. In 1966, he met the heads of the neighbouring states of Lesotho , Swaziland and Botswana . In 1967, he offered technological and financial aid to any African state prepared to receive it, asserting that no political strings were attached, aware that many African states needed financial aid despite their opposition to South Africa's racial policies. Many were also tied to South Africa economically because of their migrant labour population working down the South African mines. Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland remained outspoken critics of apartheid, but were dependent on South African economic assistance.

Malawi was the first non-neighbouring country to accept South African aid. In 1967, the two states set out their political and economic relations. In 1969, Malawi was the only country at the assembly which did not sign the Lusaka Manifesto condemning South Africa's apartheid policy. In 1970, Malawian president Hastings Banda made his first official stopover in South Africa.

Associations with Mozambique followed suit and were sustained after that country won its sovereignty in 1975. Angola was also granted South African loans. Other countries which formed relationships with South Africa included Liberia , Ivory Coast , Madagascar , Mauritius , Gabon , Zaire (now DR Congo) and the Central African Republic . Although these states condemned apartheid (more than ever after South Africa's denunciation of the Lusaka Manifesto), South Africa's economic and military dominance meant that they remained dependent on South Africa to varying degrees.

[ clarification needed ] Sports and culture [ edit ] Main articles: Sporting boycott of South Africa and Rugby union and apartheid Beginning [ edit ] South Africa's isolation in sport began in the mid-1950s and increased throughout the 1960s. Apartheid forbade multiracial sport, which meant that overseas teams, by virtue of them having players of different races, could not play in South Africa. In 1956, the International Table Tennis Federation severed its ties with the all-White South African Table Tennis Union, preferring the non-racial South African Table Tennis Board. The apartheid government responded by confiscating the passports of the Board's players so that they were unable to attend international games.

Isolation [ edit ] Verwoerd years [ edit ] In 1959, the non-racial South African Sports Association (SASA) was formed to secure the rights of all players on the global field. After meeting with no success in its endeavours to attain credit by collaborating with White establishments, SASA approached the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 1962, calling for South Africa's expulsion from the Olympic Games. The IOC sent South Africa a caution to the effect that, if there were no changes, they would be barred from competing at the 1964 Olympic Games in Tokyo . The changes were initiated, and in January 1963, the South African Non-Racial Olympic Committee (SANROC) was set up. The Anti-Apartheid Movement persisted in its campaign for South Africa's exclusion, and the IOC acceded in barring the country from the 1964 Olympic Games. South Africa selected a multi-racial team for the next Olympic Games, and the IOC opted for incorporation in the 1968 Mexico City Olympic Games . Because of protests from AAMs and African nations, however, the IOC was forced to retract the invitation.

Protests against the 1981 Springbok tour of New Zealand Foreign complaints about South Africa's bigoted sports brought more isolation. Racially selected New Zealand sports teams toured South Africa until the 1970 All Blacks rugby tour, when Maori were allowed to enter the country under the status of "honorary Whites". Huge and widespread protests occurred in New Zealand in 1981 against the Springbok tour – the government spent $8,000,000 protecting games using the army and police force. A planned All Black tour to South Africa in 1985 remobilised the New Zealand protesters and it was cancelled. A "rebel tour" – not government sanctioned – went ahead in 1986, but after that sporting ties were cut, and New Zealand made a decision not to convey an authorised rugby team to South Africa until the end of apartheid.

[ 167 ] Vorster years [ edit ] On 6 September 1966, Verwoerd was fatally stabbed at Parliament House by parliamentary messenger Dimitri Tsafendas .

John Vorster took office shortly after, and announced that South Africa would no longer dictate to the international community what their teams should look like. Although this reopened the gate for international sporting meets, it did not signal the end of South Africa's racist sporting policies. In 1968, Vorster went against his policy by refusing to permit Basil D'Oliveira , a Coloured South African-born cricketer, to join the English cricket team on its tour to South Africa. Vorster said that the side had been chosen only to prove a point, and not on merit. D'Oliveira was eventually included in the team as the first substitute, but the tour was cancelled. Protests against certain tours brought about the cancellation of a number of other visits, including that of an England rugby team touring South Africa in 1969–70.

The first of the "White Bans" occurred in 1971 when the Chairman of the Australian Cricketing Association – Sir Don Bradman – flew to South Africa to meet Vorster. Vorster had expected Bradman to allow the tour of the Australian cricket team to go ahead, but things became heated after Bradman asked why Black sportsmen were not allowed to play cricket. Vorster stated that Blacks were intellectually inferior and had no finesse for the game. Bradman, thinking this ignorant and repugnant, asked Vorster if he had heard of a man named Garry Sobers . On his return to Australia , Bradman released a short statement: "We will not play them until they choose a team on a non-racist basis." [ b ] [ 170 ] In South Africa, Vorster vented his anger publicly against Bradman, while the African National Congress rejoiced. This was the first time a predominantly White nation had taken the side of multiracial sport, producing an unsettling resonance that more "White" boycotts were coming.

[ 171 ] In 1971, Vorster altered his policies even further by distinguishing multiracial from multinational sport. Multiracial sport, between teams with players of different races, remained outlawed; multinational sport, however, was now acceptable: international sides would not be subject to South Africa's racial stipulations.

In 1978, Nigeria boycotted the Commonwealth Games because New Zealand's sporting contacts with the South African government were not considered to be in accordance with the 1977 Gleneagles Agreement . Nigeria also led the 32-nation boycott of the 1986 Commonwealth Games because of UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 's ambivalent attitude towards sporting links with South Africa, significantly affecting the quality and profitability of the Games and thus thrusting apartheid into the international spotlight.

[ 172 ] Cultural boycott [ edit ] In the 1960s, the Anti-Apartheid Movements began to campaign for cultural boycotts of apartheid South Africa. Artists were requested not to present or let their works be hosted in South Africa. In 1963, 45 British writers put their signatures to an affirmation approving of the boycott, and, in 1964, American actor Marlon Brando called for a similar affirmation for films. In 1965, the Writers' Guild of Great Britain called for a proscription on the sending of films to South Africa. Over sixty American artists signed a statement against apartheid and against professional links with the state. The presentation of some South African plays in the United Kingdom and the United States was also vetoed.

[ by whom?

] [ citation needed ] After the arrival of television in South Africa in 1975, the British Actors Union, Equity , boycotted the service, and no British programme concerning its associates could be sold to South Africa. Similarly, when home video grew popular in the 1980s, the Australian arm of CBS/Fox Video (now 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment ) placed stickers on their VHS and Betamax cassettes which labelled exporting such cassettes to South Africa as "an infringement of copyright".

[ 173 ] Sporting and cultural boycotts did not have the same effect as economic sanctions, but they did much to lift consciousness amongst normal South Africans of the global condemnation of apartheid.

[ citation needed ] Western influence [ edit ] See also: International sanctions during apartheid London bus in 1989 carrying the "Boycott Apartheid" message While international opposition to apartheid grew, the Nordic countries – and Sweden in particular – provided both moral and financial support for the ANC .

[ 174 ] On 21 February 1986 – a week before he was assassinated – Sweden 's Prime Minister Olof Palme made the keynote address to the Swedish People's Parliament Against Apartheid held in Stockholm .

[ 175 ] In addressing the hundreds of anti-apartheid sympathisers as well as leaders and officials from the ANC and the Anti-Apartheid Movement such as Oliver Tambo , Palme declared: "Apartheid cannot be reformed; it has to be eliminated." [ 176 ] Other Western countries adopted a more ambivalent position. In Switzerland , the Swiss-South African Association lobbied on behalf of the South African government. The Nixon administration implemented a policy known as the Tar Baby Option , pursuant to which the US maintained close relations with the Apartheid South African government.

[ 177 ] The Reagan administration evaded international sanctions and provided diplomatic support in international forums for the South African government. The United States also increased trade with the Apartheid regime, while describing the ANC as "a terrorist organisation." [ 178 ] Like the Reagan administration, the government of Margaret Thatcher pursued a policy of " constructive engagement " with the apartheid government, vetoing the imposition of UN economic sanctions. Public U.S. government justifications for supporting the Apartheid regime included a belief in " free trade " and the perception of the anti-communist South African government as a bastion against Marxist forces in Southern Africa, for example, by the military intervention of South Africa in the Angolan Civil War in support of right-wing insurgents fighting to topple the government. The U.K. government also declared the ANC a terrorist organisation.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] By the late-1980s, with no sign of a political resolution in South Africa, Western patience began to run out. By 1989, a bipartisan Republican / Democratic initiative in the US favoured economic sanctions (realised as the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986), the release of Nelson Mandela, and a negotiated settlement involving the ANC. Thatcher too began to take a similar line, but insisted on the suspension of the ANC's armed struggle.

[ 181 ] The UK's significant economic involvement in South Africa may have provided some leverage with the South African government, with both the UK and the US applying pressure and pushing for negotiations. However, neither the UK nor the US was willing to apply economic pressure upon their multinational interests in South Africa, such as the mining company Anglo American . Although a high-profile compensation claim against these companies was thrown out of court in 2004, [ 182 ] the US Supreme Court in May 2008 upheld an appeals court ruling allowing another lawsuit that sought damages of more than US$400 billion from major international companies accused of aiding South Africa's apartheid system.

[ 183 ] [ needs update ] Effect of the Cold War [ edit ] "Total Onslaught" [ edit ] Apartheid-era propaganda leaflet issued to South African military personnel in the 1980s. The pamphlet decries "Russian colonialism and oppression" in English, Afrikaans and Portuguese.

During the 1950s, South African military strategy was decisively shaped by fears of communist espionage and a conventional Soviet threat to the strategic Cape trade route between the south Atlantic and Indian Oceans .

[ 184 ] The apartheid government supported the US-led North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), as well as its policy of regional containment against Soviet-backed regimes and insurgencies worldwide.

[ 185 ] By the late-1960s, the rise of Soviet client states on the African continent, as well as Soviet aid for militant anti-apartheid movements, was considered one of the primary external threats to the apartheid system.

[ 186 ] South African officials frequently accused domestic opposition groups of being communist proxies.

[ 187 ] For its part, the Soviet Union viewed South Africa as a bastion of neocolonialism and a regional Western ally, which helped fuel its support for various anti-apartheid causes.

[ 188 ] From 1973 onwards, much of South Africa's white population increasingly looked upon their country as a bastion of the free world besieged militarily, politically, and culturally by Communism and radical black nationalism .

[ 189 ] The apartheid government perceived itself as being locked in a proxy struggle with the Warsaw Pact and by implication, armed wings of black nationalist forces such as Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK) and the People's Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN), which often received arms and training in Warsaw Pact member states.

[ 188 ] This was described as "Total Onslaught".

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Militarization of society [ edit ] Soviet support for militant anti-apartheid movements worked in the government's favour, as its claim to be reacting in opposition to aggressive communist expansion gained greater plausibility, and helped it justify its own domestic militarisation methods, known as "Total Strategy".

[ 189 ] Total Strategy involved building up a formidable conventional military and counter-intelligence capability.

[ 189 ] It was formulated on counter-revolutionary tactics as espoused by noted French tactician André Beaufre .

[ 190 ] Considerable effort was devoted towards circumventing international arms sanctions , and the government even went so far as to develop nuclear weapons , [ 191 ] allegedly with covert assistance from Israel .

[ 192 ] As a result of "Total Strategy", South African society became increasingly militarised. Many domestic civil organisations were modelled upon military structures, and military virtues such as discipline, patriotism and loyalty were highly regarded.

[ 193 ] In 1968, national service for White South African men lasted nine months at minimum, and they could be called up for reserve duty into their late-middle age if necessary.

[ 194 ] The length of national service was gradually extended to 12 months in 1972 and 24 months in 1978.

[ 194 ] At state schools, white male students were organised into paramilitary formations and drilled as cadets or as participants in a civil defence or "Youth Preparedness" curriculum.

[ 193 ] Compulsory military education and in some cases, paramilitary training was introduced for all older white male students at state schools in three South African provinces.

[ 193 ] These programmes presided over the construction of bomb shelters at schools and drills aimed at simulating mock insurgent raids.

[ 193 ] From the late 1970s to the late 1980s, defence budgets in South Africa were raised exponentially.

[ 190 ] In 1975, Israeli defence minister Shimon Peres signed a security pact with South African defence minister P.W. Botha that led to $200 million in arms deals. In 1988, Israeli arm sales to South Africa totalled over $1.4 billion.

[ 195 ] Covert operations focused on espionage and domestic counter-subversion became common, the number of special forces units swelled, and the South African Defence Force (SADF) had amassed enough sophisticated conventional weaponry to pose a serious threat to the " front-line states ", a regional alliance of neighbouring countries opposed to apartheid.

[ 190 ] Foreign military operations [ edit ] See also: South African Border War , Raid on Gaborone , Operation Skerwe , and Operation Beanbag South African paratroops on a raid in Angola, 1980s Total Strategy was advanced in the context of MK, PLAN, and Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA) guerrilla raids into South Africa or against South African targets in South West Africa; frequent South African reprisal attacks on these movements' external bases in Angola , Zambia , Mozambique , Zimbabwe , and Botswana , often involving collateral damage to foreign infrastructure and civilian populations; and periodic complaints brought before the international community about South African violations of its neighbours' sovereignty.

[ 196 ] The apartheid government made judicious use of extraterritorial operations to eliminate its military and political opponents, arguing that neighbouring states, including their civilian populations, which hosted, tolerated on their soil, or otherwise sheltered anti-apartheid insurgent groups could not evade responsibility for provoking retaliatory strikes.

[ 196 ] While it did focus on militarising the borders and sealing up its domestic territory against insurgent raids, it also relied heavily on an aggressive preemptive and counter-strike strategy, which fulfilled a preventive and deterrent purpose.

[ 197 ] The reprisals which occurred beyond South Africa's borders involved not only hostile states, but neutral and sympathetic governments as well, often forcing them to react against their will and interests.

[ 198 ] External South African military operations were aimed at eliminating the training facilities, safehouses , infrastructure, equipment, and manpower of the insurgents.

[ 197 ] However, their secondary objective was to dissuade neighbouring states from offering sanctuary to MK, PLAN, APLA, and similar organisations.

[ 197 ] This was accomplished by deterring the supportive foreign population from cooperating with infiltration and thus undermining the insurgents' external sanctuary areas.

[ 199 ] It would also send a clear message to the host government that collaborating with insurgent forces involved potentially high costs.

[ 199 ] The scale and intensity of foreign operations varied, and ranged from small special forces units carrying out raids on locations across the border which served as bases for insurgent infiltration to major conventional offensives involving armour, artillery, and aircraft.

[ 197 ] Actions such as Operation Protea in 1981 and Operation Askari in 1983 involved both full scale conventional warfare and a counter-insurgency reprisal operation.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] The insurgent bases were usually situated near military installations of the host government, so that SADF retaliatory strikes hit those facilities as well and attracted international attention and condemnation of what was perceived as aggression against the armed forces of another sovereign state.

[ 202 ] This would inevitably result in major engagements, in which the SADF's expeditionary units would have to contend with the firepower of the host government's forces.

[ 202 ] Intensive conventional warfare of this nature carried the risk of severe casualties among white soldiers, which had to be kept to a minimum for political reasons.

[ 197 ] There were also high economic and diplomatic costs associated with openly deploying large numbers of South African troops into another country.

[ 197 ] Furthermore, military involvement on that scale had the potential to evolve into wider conflict situations, in which South Africa became entangled.

[ 197 ] For example, South Africa's activities in Angola, initially limited to containing PLAN, later escalated to direct involvement in the Angolan Civil War .

[ 197 ] As it became clearer that full-scale conventional operations could not effectively fulfil the requirements of a regional counter-insurgency effort, South Africa turned to a number of alternative methods. Retributive artillery bombardments were the least sophisticated means of reprisal against insurgent attacks. Between 1978 and 1979 the SADF directed artillery fire against locations in Angola and Zambia from which insurgent rockets were suspected to have been launched.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] This precipitated several artillery duels with the Zambian Army.

[ 204 ] Special forces raids were launched to harass PLAN and MK by killing prominent members of those movements, destroying their offices and safehouses, and seizing valuable records stored at these sites.

[ 205 ] One example was the Gaborone Raid , carried out in 1985, during which a South African special forces team crossed the border into Botswana and demolished four suspected MK safe houses, severely damaging another four.

[ 205 ] The SADF also sabotaged infrastructure being used for the insurgents' war effort; for example, port facilities in southern Angola's Moçâmedes District , where Soviet arms were frequently offloaded for PLAN, as well as the railway line which facilitated their transport to PLAN headquarters in Lubango , were common targets.

[ 206 ] Sabotage was also used as a pressure tactic when South Africa was negotiating with a host government to cease providing sanctuary to insurgent forces, as in the case of Operation Argon .

[ 207 ] Successful sabotage actions of high-profile economic targets undermined a country's ability to negotiate from a position of strength, and made it likelier to accede to South African demands rather than risk the expense of further destruction and war.

[ 207 ] Also noteworthy were South African transnational espionage efforts, which included covert assassinations, kidnappings, and attempts to disrupt the overseas influence of anti-apartheid organisations. South African military intelligence agents were known to have abducted and killed anti-apartheid activists and others suspected of having ties to MK in London and Brussels .

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] State security [ edit ] 8 South African Infantry Battalion operatives in northern KwaZulu-Natal, 1993 During the 1980s the government, led by P.W. Botha , became increasingly preoccupied with security. It set up a powerful state security apparatus to "protect" the state against an anticipated upsurge in political violence that the reforms were expected to trigger. The 1980s became a period of considerable political unrest, with the government becoming increasingly dominated by Botha's circle of generals and police chiefs (known as securocrats ), who managed the various States of Emergencies.

[ 210 ] Botha's years in power were marked also by numerous military interventions in the states bordering South Africa, as well as an extensive military and political campaign to eliminate SWAPO in Namibia. Within South Africa, meanwhile, vigorous police action and strict enforcement of security legislation resulted in hundreds of arrests and bans, and an effective end to the African National Congress' sabotage campaign.

The government punished political offenders brutally. 40,000 people annually were subjected to whipping as a form of punishment.

[ 211 ] The vast majority had committed political offences and were lashed ten times for their crime.

[ 212 ] If convicted of treason, a person could be hanged, and the government executed numerous political offenders in this way.

[ 213 ] As the 1980s progressed, more and more anti-apartheid organisations were formed and affiliated with the UDF. Led by the Reverend Allan Boesak and Albertina Sisulu , the UDF called for the government to abandon its reforms and instead abolish the apartheid system and eliminate the homelands completely.

State of emergency [ edit ] A little white girl in front of a parade of the South African Police in Pietermaritzburg ( Natal ), 1987 Serious political violence was a prominent feature from 1985 to 1989, as Black townships became the focus of the struggle between anti-apartheid organisations and the Botha government. Throughout the 1980s, township people resisted apartheid by acting against the local issues that faced their particular communities. The focus of much of this resistance was against the local authorities and their leaders, who were seen to be supporting the government. By 1985, it had become the ANC's aim to make Black townships "ungovernable" (a term later replaced by "people's power") by means of rent boycotts and other militant action. Numerous township councils were overthrown or collapsed, to be replaced by unofficial popular organisations, often led by militant youth. People's courts were set up, and residents accused of being government agents were dealt extreme and occasionally lethal punishments. Black town councillors and policemen, and sometimes their families, were attacked with petrol bombs, beaten, and murdered by necklacing , where a burning tyre was placed around the victim's neck, after they were restrained by wrapping their wrists with barbed wire.

On 20 July 1985, Botha declared a State of Emergency in 36 magisterial districts. Areas affected were the Eastern Cape , and the PWV region (" Pretoria , Witwatersrand , Vereeniging ").

[ 214 ] Three months later, the Western Cape was included. An increasing number of organisations were banned or listed (restricted in some way); many individuals had restrictions such as house arrest imposed on them. During this state of emergency, about 2,436 people were detained under the Internal Security Act .

[ 215 ] This act gave police and the military sweeping powers. The government could implement curfews controlling the movement of people. The president could rule by decree without referring to the constitution or to parliament. It became a criminal offence to threaten someone verbally or possess documents that the government perceived to be threatening, to advise anyone to stay away from work or to oppose the government, and to disclose the name of anyone arrested under the State of Emergency until the government released that name, with up to ten years' imprisonment for these offences.

Detention without trial became a common feature of the government's reaction to growing civil unrest and by 1988, 30,000 people had been detained.

[ 216 ] The media was censored , thousands were arrested and many were interrogated and tortured .

[ 217 ] On 12 June 1986, four days before the tenth anniversary of the Soweto uprising, the state of emergency was extended to cover the whole country. The government amended the Public Security Act, including the right to declare "unrest" areas, allowing extraordinary measures to crush protests in these areas. Severe censorship of the press became a dominant tactic in the government's strategy and television cameras were banned from entering such areas. The state broadcaster , the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC), provided propaganda in support of the government. Media opposition to the system increased, supported by the growth of a pro-ANC underground press within South Africa.

In 1987, the State of Emergency was extended for another two years. Meanwhile, about 200,000 members of the National Union of Mineworkers commenced the longest strike (three weeks) in South African history. The year 1988 saw the banning of the activities of the UDF and other anti-apartheid organisations.

Much of the violence in the late-1980s and early-1990s was directed at the government, but a substantial amount was between the residents themselves. Many died in violence between members of Inkatha and the UDF-ANC faction. It was later proven that the government manipulated the situation by supporting one side or the other whenever it suited them. Government agents assassinated opponents within South Africa and abroad; they undertook cross-border army and air-force attacks on suspected ANC and PAC bases. The ANC and the PAC in return detonated bombs at restaurants, shopping centres and government buildings such as magistrates courts . Between 1960 and 1994, according to statistics from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission , the Inkatha Freedom Party was responsible for 4,500 deaths, South African security forces were responsible for 2,700 deaths and the ANC was responsible for 1,300 deaths.

[ 218 ] The state of emergency continued until 1990 when it was lifted by State President F. W. de Klerk .

Final years of apartheid [ edit ] Main article: Negotiations to end apartheid in South Africa Causes [ edit ] Philip Bonner highlights the "contradictory economic effects" of South Africa's industrialisation as the economy did not have a manufacturing sector, therefore promoting short term profitability but limiting labour productivity and the size of local markets. This also led to its collapse, as Clarkes "emphasises the economy could not provide and compete with foreign rivals as they failed to master cheap labour and complex chemistry".

[ 219 ] The contradictions in the traditionally capitalist economy of the apartheid state led to considerable debate about racial policy, and division and conflicts in the central state.

[ 52 ] Anti-apartheid protest at South Africa House in London, 1989 In 1974, resistance to apartheid was encouraged by Portuguese withdrawal from Mozambique and Angola , after the 1974 Carnation Revolution . South African troops withdrew from Angola early in 1976, failing to prevent the MPLA from gaining power there, causing celebrations among Black students in South Africa.

The Mahlabatini Declaration of Faith , signed by Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Harry Schwarz in 1974, enshrined the principles of peaceful transition of power and equality for all. Its purpose was to provide a blueprint for South Africa by consent and racial peace in a multi-racial society, stressing opportunity for all, consultation, the federal concept, and a Bill of Rights . It caused a split in the United Party that ultimately realigned oppositional politics in South Africa with the formation of the Progressive Federal Party in 1977. The Declaration was the first of several such joint agreements by acknowledged Black and White political leaders in South Africa.

In 1978, the National Party Defence Minister, Pieter Willem Botha , became prime minister. His white minority regime worried about Soviet aid to revolutionaries in South Africa at the same time that South African economic growth had slowed. The South African Government noted that it was spending too much money to maintain segregated homelands created for Blacks, and the homelands were proving to be uneconomical.

[ 220 ] Nor was maintaining Blacks as third-class citizens working well. Black labour remained vital to the economy, and illegal Black labour unions were flourishing. Many Blacks remained too poor to contribute significantly to the economy through their purchasing power – although they composed more than 70% of the population. Botha's regime feared that an antidote was needed to prevent the Blacks being attracted to communism.

[ 221 ] Tricameral parliament [ edit ] Main article: Tricameral Parliament In the early-1980s, Botha's National Party government started to recognise the inevitability of the need to reform the apartheid system.

[ 222 ] Early reforms were driven by a combination of internal violence, international condemnation, changes within the National Party's constituency, and changing demographics – whites constituted only 16% of the total population, in comparison to 20% fifty years earlier.

[ 223 ] In 1983, a new constitution was passed implementing what was called the Tricameral Parliament, giving Coloureds and Indians voting rights and parliamentary representation in separate houses – the House of Assembly (178 members) for Whites, the House of Representatives (85 members) for Coloureds and the House of Delegates (45 members) for Indians.

[ 224 ] Each House handled laws pertaining to its racial group's "own affairs", including health, education and other community issues.

[ 225 ] All laws relating to "general affairs" (matters such as defence, industry, taxation and Black affairs) were handled by a Cabinet made up of representatives from all three houses. However, the White chamber had a large majority on this Cabinet, ensuring that effective control of the country remained in the hands of the White minority.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] Blacks, although making up the majority of the population, were excluded from representation; they remained nominal citizens of their homelands.

[ 228 ] The first Tricameral elections were largely boycotted by Coloured and Indian voters, amid widespread rioting.

[ 229 ] Reforms and contact with the ANC under Botha [ edit ] Concerned over the popularity of Mandela, Botha denounced him as an arch- Marxist committed to violent revolution, but to appease Black opinion and nurture Mandela as a benevolent leader of Blacks, [ 220 ] the government transferred him from the maximum security Robben Island to the lower security Pollsmoor Prison just outside Cape Town , where prison life was more comfortable for him. The government allowed Mandela more visitors, including visits and interviews by foreigners, to let the world know that he was being treated well.

[ 220 ] Black homelands were declared nation-states and pass laws were abolished. Black labour unions were legitimised, the government recognised the right of Blacks to live in urban areas permanently and gave Blacks property rights there. Interest was expressed in rescinding the law against interracial marriage and also rescinding the law against sexual relations between different races, which was under ridicule abroad. The spending for Black schools increased, to one-seventh of what was spent per white child, up from one-sixteenth in 1968. At the same time, attention was given to strengthening the effectiveness of the police apparatus.

In January 1985, Botha addressed the government's House of Assembly and stated that the government was willing to release Mandela on condition that he pledge opposition to acts of violence to further political objectives. Mandela's reply was read in public by his daughter Zinzi – his first words distributed publicly since his sentence to prison 21 years earlier. Mandela described violence as the responsibility of the apartheid regime and said that with democracy there would be no need for violence. The crowd listening to the reading of his speech erupted in cheers and chants. This response helped to further elevate Mandela's status in the eyes of those, both internationally and domestically, who opposed apartheid.

Between 1986 and 1988, some petty apartheid laws were repealed, along with the pass laws.

[ 230 ] Botha told White South Africans to "adapt or die" [ 231 ] and twice he wavered on the eve of what were billed as " rubicon " announcements of substantial reforms, although on both occasions he backed away from substantial changes. Ironically, these reforms served only to trigger intensified political violence through the remainder of the 1980s as more communities and political groups across the country joined the resistance movement. Botha's government stopped short of substantial reforms, such as lifting the ban on the ANC, PAC and SACP and other liberation organisations, releasing political prisoners, or repealing the foundation laws of grand apartheid. The government's stance was that they would not contemplate negotiating until those organisations "renounced violence".

By 1987, South Africa's economy was growing at one of the lowest rates in the world, and the ban on South African participation in international sporting events was frustrating many whites in South Africa. Examples of African states with Black leaders and White minorities existed in Kenya and Zimbabwe . Whispers of South Africa one day having a Black President sent more hardline whites into supporting right-wing political parties. Mandela was moved to a four-bedroom house of his own, with a swimming pool and shaded by fir trees, on a prison farm just outside of Cape Town. He had an unpublicised meeting with Botha. Botha impressed Mandela by walking forward, extending his hand and pouring Mandela's tea. The two had a friendly discussion, with Mandela comparing the African National Congress' rebellion with that of the Afrikaner rebellion and talking about everyone being brothers.

A number of clandestine meetings were held between the ANC-in-exile and various sectors of the internal struggle, such as women and educationalists. More overtly, a group of White intellectuals met the ANC in Senegal for talks known as the Dakar Conference .

[ 232 ] Presidency of F. W. de Klerk [ edit ] de Klerk and Mandela in Davos , 1992 Early in 1989, Botha had a stroke ; he was prevailed upon to resign in February 1989.

[ 233 ] He was succeeded as president later that year by F. W. de Klerk . Despite his initial reputation as a conservative, de Klerk moved decisively towards negotiations to end the political stalemate in the country. Prior to his term in office, F. W. de Klerk had already experienced political success as a result of the power base he had built in the Transvaal. During this time, F. W. de Klerk served as chairman to the provincial National Party, which was in favour of the Apartheid regime. The transition of de Klerk's ideology regarding apartheid is seen clearly in his opening address to parliament on 2 February 1990. F. W. de Klerk announced that he would repeal discriminatory laws and lift the 30-year ban on leading anti-apartheid groups such as the African National Congress, the Pan Africanist Congress, the South African Communist Party (SACP) and the United Democratic Front . The Land Act was brought to an end. F. W. de Klerk also made his first public commitment to release Nelson Mandela, to return to press freedom and to suspend the death penalty. Media restrictions were lifted and political prisoners not guilty of common law crimes were released.

On 11 February 1990, Nelson Mandela was released from Victor Verster Prison after more than 27 years behind bars.

[ 234 ] Having been instructed by the UN Security Council to end its long-standing involvement in South West Africa/ Namibia , and in the face of military stalemate in Southern Angola, and an escalation in the size and cost of the combat with the Cubans, the Angolans, and SWAPO forces and the growing cost of the border war, South Africa negotiated a change of control; Namibia became independent on 21 March 1990.

[ 235 ] Negotiations [ edit ] Main article: Negotiations to end apartheid in South Africa Apartheid was dismantled in a series of negotiations from 1990 to 1991, culminating in a transitional period which resulted in the country's 1994 general election, the first in South Africa held with universal suffrage .

In 1990, negotiations were earnestly begun, with two meetings between the government and the ANC. The purpose of the negotiations was to pave the way for talks towards a peaceful transition towards majority rule. These meetings were successful in laying down the preconditions for negotiations, despite the considerable tensions still abounding within the country. Apartheid legislation was abolished in 1991.

[ 2 ] At the first meeting, the NP and ANC discussed the conditions for negotiations to begin. The meeting was held at Groote Schuur , the President's official residence. They released the Groote Schuur Minute, which said that before negotiations commenced political prisoners would be freed and all exiles allowed to return.

There were fears that the change of power would be violent. To avoid this, it was essential that a peaceful resolution between all parties be reached. In December 1991, the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) began negotiations on the formation of a multiracial transitional government and a new constitution extending political rights to all groups. CODESA adopted a Declaration of Intent and committed itself to an "undivided South Africa".

Reforms and negotiations to end apartheid led to a backlash among the right-wing White opposition, leading to the Conservative Party winning a number of by-elections against NP candidates. De Klerk responded by calling a Whites-only referendum in March 1992 to decide whether negotiations should continue. 69% voted in favour, and the victory instilled in de Klerk and the government a lot more confidence, giving the NP a stronger position in negotiations.

When negotiations resumed in May 1992, under the tag of CODESA II, stronger demands were made. The ANC and the government could not reach a compromise on how power should be shared during the transition to democracy. The NP wanted to retain a strong position in a transitional government, and the power to change decisions made by parliament.

Persistent violence added to the tension during the negotiations. This was due mostly to the intense rivalry between the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) and the ANC and the eruption of some traditional tribal and local rivalries between the Zulu and Xhosa historical tribal affinities, especially in the Southern Natal provinces. Although Mandela and Buthelezi met to settle their differences, they could not stem the violence. One of the worst cases of ANC-IFP violence was the Boipatong massacre of 17 June 1992, when 200 IFP militants attacked the Gauteng township of Boipatong , killing 45. Witnesses said that the men had arrived in police vehicles, supporting claims that elements within the police and army contributed to the ongoing violence. Subsequent judicial inquiries found the evidence of the witnesses to be unreliable or discredited, and that there was no evidence of National Party or police involvement in the massacre. When de Klerk visited the scene of the incident he was initially warmly welcomed, but he was suddenly confronted by a crowd of protesters brandishing stones and placards. The motorcade sped from the scene as police tried to hold back the crowd. Shots were fired by the police, and the PAC stated that three of its supporters had been gunned down.

[ 236 ] Nonetheless, the Boipatong massacre offered the ANC a pretext to engage in brinkmanship. Mandela argued that de Klerk, as head of state, was responsible for bringing an end to the bloodshed. He also accused the South African police of inciting the ANC-IFP violence. This formed the basis for ANC's withdrawal from the negotiations, and the CODESA forum broke down completely at this stage.

The Bisho massacre on 7 September 1992 brought matters to a head. The Ciskei Defence Force killed 29 people and injured 200 when they opened fire on ANC marchers demanding the reincorporation of the Ciskei homeland into South Africa. In the aftermath, Mandela and de Klerk agreed to meet to find ways to end the spiralling violence. This led to a resumption of negotiations.

Right-wing violence also added to the hostilities of this period. The assassination of Chris Hani on 10 April 1993 threatened to plunge the country into chaos. Hani, the popular General Secretary of the South African Communist Party (SACP), was assassinated in 1993 in Dawn Park in Johannesburg by Janusz Waluś , an anti-Communist Polish refugee who had close links to the White nationalist Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB). Hani enjoyed widespread support beyond his constituency in the SACP and ANC and had been recognised as a potential successor to Mandela; his death brought forth protests throughout the country and across the international community , but ultimately proved a turning point, after which the main parties pushed for a settlement with increased determination.

[ 237 ] On 25 June 1993, the AWB used an armoured vehicle to crash through the doors of the Kempton Park World Trade Centre where talks were still going ahead under the Negotiating Council, though this did not derail the process.

In addition to the continuing "black-on-black" violence, there were a number of attacks on white civilians by the PAC's military wing, the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA). The PAC was hoping to strengthen their standing by attracting the support of the angry, impatient youth. In the St James Church massacre on 25 July 1993, members of the APLA opened fire in a church in Cape Town, killing 11 members of the congregation and wounding 58.

In 1993, de Klerk and Mandela were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their work for the peaceful termination of the apartheid regime, and for laying the foundations for a new democratic South Africa".

[ 238 ] Violence persisted right up to the 1994 general election.

Lucas Mangope , leader of the Bophuthatswana homeland, declared that it would not take part in the elections. It had been decided that, once the temporary constitution had come into effect, the homelands would be incorporated into South Africa, but Mangope did not want this to happen. There were strong protests against his decision, leading to a coup d'état in Bophuthatswana carried out by the SDF on 10 March that deposed Mangope. AWB militants attempted to intervene in hopes of maintaining Mangope in power. Fighting alongside black paramilitaries loyal to Mangope they were unsuccessful, with 3 AWB militants being killed during this intervention, and harrowing images of the bloodshed shown on national television and in newspapers across the world.

Two days before the election, a car bomb exploded in Johannesburg, killing nine people.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] The day before the elections, another one went off, injuring 13. At midnight on 26–27 April 1994 the previous "orange white blue" flag adopted in 1928 was lowered, and the old (now co-official) national anthem Die Stem ("The Call") was sung, followed by the raising of the new Y shaped flag and singing of the other co-official anthem, Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika ("God Bless Africa").

1994 election [ edit ] The new multicoloured flag of South Africa adopted in 1994 to mark the end of Apartheid Main article: 1994 South African general election The election was held on 27 April 1994 and went off peacefully throughout the country as 20 million South Africans cast their votes. There was some difficulty in organising the voting in rural areas, but people waited patiently for many hours to vote amidst a palpable feeling of goodwill. An extra day was added to give everyone the chance. International observers agreed that the elections were free and fair.

[ 241 ] The European Union 's report on the election compiled at the end of May 1994, published two years after the election, criticised the Independent Electoral Commission 's lack of preparedness for the polls, the shortages of voting materials at many voting stations, and the absence of effective safeguards against fraud in the counting process. In particular, it expressed disquiet that "no international observers had been allowed to be present at the crucial stage of the count when party representatives negotiated over disputed ballots." This meant that both the electorate and the world were "simply left to guess at the way the final result was achieved." [ 242 ] The ANC won 62.65% of the vote, [ 243 ] [ 244 ] less than the 66.7 percent that would have allowed it to rewrite the constitution. 252 of the 400 seats went to members of the African National Congress. The NP captured most of the White and Coloured votes and became the official opposition party . As well as deciding the national government, the election decided the provincial governments , and the ANC won in seven of the nine provinces, with the NP winning in the Western Cape and the IFP in KwaZulu-Natal . On 10 May 1994, Mandela was sworn in as the new President of South Africa. The Government of National Unity was established, its cabinet made up of 12 ANC representatives, six from the NP, and three from the IFP.

Thabo Mbeki and de Klerk were made deputy presidents .

The anniversary of the elections, 27 April, is celebrated as a public holiday known as Freedom Day .

Legacy [ edit ] Inequality [ edit ] Further information: Inequality in post-apartheid South Africa and Wealth inequality in South Africa Post-apartheid South Africa has struggled to correct the social inequalities created by decades of apartheid.

[ 245 ] White nepotism remains a considerable obstacle to economic gain and political influence for Black South Africans.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] Despite a growing gross domestic product , indices for poverty , unemployment , income inequality , life expectancy and land ownership , have declined.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] No industry in the economy has over 50% ownership by Black individuals in terms of their share even though 81.4% of the South African population is Black.

[ 246 ] [ 249 ] The end of the apartheid system in South Africa has largely not changed the socioeconomic stratification by race.

[ 247 ] While a small subset of the Black population have been able to create a Black middle class that did not exist during apartheid, the large majority of Black people in South Africa have yet to experience a difference in economic class since apartheid was abolished.

[ 248 ] [ 246 ] According to the World Bank , South Africa is the most economically unequal country in the world.

[ 250 ] Contrition [ edit ] Since 2019, publicly displaying the 1928–1994 flag in South Africa is banned and it is classified as hate speech.

[ 251 ] The following individuals, who had previously supported apartheid, have made public apologies: F. W. de Klerk in 1997 stated: "I apologise in my capacity as leader of the NP to the millions who suffered wrenching disruption of forced removals; who suffered the shame of being arrested for pass law offences; who over the decades suffered the indignities and humiliation of racial discrimination." [ 252 ] In a video released after his death in 2021, he apologised one last time for apartheid, both on a personal level and in his capacity as former president.

[ 253 ] Marthinus van Schalkwyk : "The National Party brought development to a section of South Africa, but also brought suffering through a system grounded on injustice", in a statement shortly after the National Party voted to disband in 2005.

[ 254 ] [ 255 ] In 2006 Adriaan Vlok washed the feet of apartheid victim Frank Chikane in an act of apology for the wrongs of the Apartheid regime.

[ 256 ] Leon Wessels : "I am now more convinced than ever that apartheid was a terrible mistake that blighted our land. South Africans did not listen to the laughing and the crying of each other. I am sorry that I had been so hard of hearing for so long".

[ 257 ] Other applications of the term [ edit ] See also: Allegations of apartheid by country The South African experience has given rise to the term "apartheid" being used in a number of contexts other than the South African system of racial segregation. For example: 
The " crime of apartheid " is defined in international law , including in the 2007 law that created the International Criminal Court (ICC), which names it as a crime against humanity . Even before the creation of the ICC, the UN International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid , which came into force in 1976, enshrined into law the "crime of apartheid." [ 258 ] The term apartheid has been adopted by Palestinian rights advocates and by leading Israeli and other human rights organizations , referring to the Israeli occupation in the West Bank , legal treatment of illegal settlements and the West Bank barrier .

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] [ 261 ] [ 262 ] Within the pre-1967 Israeli borders, Palestinian rights advocates have raised concern over discriminatory housing planning against Palestinian citizens of Israel, likening it to racial segregation.

[ 263 ] Others argue that the Israeli treatment of Palestinians does not fit the definition of apartheid as it is motivated by security considerations and has nothing to do with race.

[ 264 ] Social apartheid is segregation on the basis of class or economic status. For example, social apartheid in Brazil refers to the various aspects of economic inequality in Brazil. Social apartheid may fall into various categories. Economic and social discrimination because of gender is sometimes referred to as gender apartheid . Separation of people according to their religion, whether pursuant to official laws or pursuant to social expectations, is sometimes referred to as religious apartheid . Communities in northern Ireland for example, are often housed based on religion in a situation which has been described as "self-imposed apartheid".

[ 265 ] The concept in occupational therapy that individuals, groups and communities can be deprived of meaningful and purposeful activity through segregation due to social, political, economic factors and for social status reasons, such as race, disability, age, gender, sexuality, religious preference, political preference, or creed, or due to war conditions, is sometimes known as occupational apartheid .

The disproportionate management and control of the world's economy and resources by countries and companies of the Global North has been referred to as global apartheid . A related phenomenon is technological apartheid , a term used to describe the denial of modern technologies to Third World or developing nations. The last two examples use the term "apartheid" less literally since they are centred on relations between countries, not on disparate treatment of social populations within a country or political jurisdiction.

See also [ edit ] Economics portal Law portal Politics portal Allegations of apartheid by country Apartheid in international law Apartheid legislation in South Africa Apartheid in art and literature Discrimination based on skin color Foreign relations of South Africa during apartheid Index of racism-related articles Legacies of apartheid Music in the movement against apartheid Racial hierarchy Racial segregation Racism by country Notes and references [ edit ] Annotations [ edit ] ^ The Population Registration Act, 1950 , the basis for most apartheid legislation, was formally abolished in 1991, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] although the country's first non-racial government was not established until non-racial elections held under a universal franchise in 1994.

[ 3 ] ^ South West Africa existed as a colonial territory under the control of the South African administration.

^ In 1986, Nelson Mandela's first question to a visiting Australian statesman, Malcolm Fraser , was if Donald Bradman was still alive. On Mandela's release from prison in 1990, Fraser gave him an autographed bat inscribed with "To Nelson Mandela in recognition of a great unfinished innings—Don Bradman".

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Repeal of Population Registration Act" . C-Span. 17 June 1991.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ a b c Myre, Greg (18 June 1991).

"South Africa ends racial classifications" . Cape Girardeau: Southeast Missourian. Associated Press.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2020 . Retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ Bartusis, Mark (2012). Gomez, Edmund; Premdas, Ralph (eds.).

Affirmative Action, Ethnicity and Conflict . New York: Routledge Books. pp.

126– 132.

ISBN 978-0415627689 .

^ a b Mayne, Alan (1999).

From Politics Past to Politics Future: An Integrated Analysis of Current and Emergent Paradigms . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. p. 52.

ISBN 978-0-275-96151-0 .

^ Leander (15 June 2015).

"Despite the 1994 political victory against apartheid, its economic legacy persists by Haydn Cornish-Jenkins" .

South African History Online . Archived from the original on 2 May 2018 . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .

^ Moeti, Thato (27 April 2018).

"Apartheid legacy haunts SA economy" .

www.sabcnews.com . SABC News.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .

^ Hirsch, Alan (6 April 2018).

"Ramaphosa's tough job on fixing Apartheid legacy" .

The Conversation Africa . AllAfrica.

^ Msimang, Sisonke (12 December 2017).

"All Is Not Forgiven: South Africa and the Scars of Apartheid" .

Foreign Affairs . No. January/February 2018.

ISSN 0015-7120 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ a b Crompton, Samuel Willard (2007).

Desmond Tutu: Fighting Apartheid . New York: Chelsea House, Publishers. pp.

34– 35.

ISBN 978-0791092217 .

^ a b c d Walton, F. Carl; Udayakumar, S.P.; Muck, William; McIlwain, Charlton; Kramer, Eric; Jensen, Robert; Ibrahim, Vivian; Caliendo, Stephen Maynard; Asher, Nhia (2011).

The Routledge Companion to Race and Ethnicity . New York: Routledge Books. pp.

103– 105.

ISBN 978-0415777070 .

^ Baldwin-Ragaven, Laurel; London, Lesley; du Gruchy, Jeanelle (1999).

An ambulance of the wrong colour: health professionals, human rights and ethics in South Africa . Juta and Company Limited. p. 18.

^ "South Africa – Overcoming Apartheid" . African Studies Center of Michigan State University. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013 . Retrieved 26 December 2013 .

^ Lodge, Tim (2011).

Sharpeville: An Apartheid Massacre and Its Consequences . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

234– 235.

ISBN 978-0192801852 .

^ a b Lodge, Tom (1983).

Black Politics in South Africa Since 1945 . New York: Longman.

^ Pandey, Satish Chandra (2006).

International Terrorism and the Contemporary World . New Delhi: Sarup & Sons, Publishers. pp.

197– 199.

ISBN 978-8176256384 .

^ Ugorji, Basil (2012).

From Cultural Justice to Inter-Ethnic Mediation: A Reflection on the Possibility of Ethno-Religious Mediation in Africa . Denver: Outskirts Press. pp.

65– 66.

ISBN 978-1432788353 .

^ "SAPA – 27 May 97 – HRC SUBMITS APARTHEID REPRESSION BOOK TO TRUTH BODY" .

^ a b Thomas, Scott (1995).

The Diplomacy of Liberation: The Foreign Relations of the ANC Since 1960 . London: Tauris Academic Studies. pp.

202– 210.

ISBN 978-1850439936 .

^ "De Klerk dismantles apartheid in South Africa" .

BBC News . 2 February 1990.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2009 . Retrieved 21 February 2009 .

^ Alex Duval Smith (31 January 2010).

"Why FW de Klerk let Nelson Mandela out of prison" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Mitchell, Thomas (2008).

Native vs Settler: Ethnic Conflict in Israel/Palestine, Northern Ireland and South Africa . Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0313313578 .

^ Lieberman, Evan (2022).

Until We Have Won Our Liberty: South Africa after Apartheid . Princeton University Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv244ssrw .

ISBN 978-0-691-20300-3 .

JSTOR j.ctv244ssrw .

^ "Dictionary.com entry for 'apartheid' " .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 11 August 2012 .

^ Shore, Megan.

Religion and Conflict Resolution: Christianity and South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission . Ashgate Publishing, 2009. p. 36 ^ Nancy L. Clarkson & William H. Worger.

South Africa: The Rise and Fall of . Routledge, 2013. Chapter 3: The Basis of Apartheid.

^ Clark, Nancy; Worger, William (2016).

South Africa: The Rise and Fall of Apartheid (3 ed.). New York: Routledge. pp.

11– 12.

doi : 10.4324/9781315621562 .

ISBN 978-1-315-62156-2 .

^ a b c A. Du Toit, H.B. Giliomee (1983).

Afrikaner political thought: analysis and documents . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-04319-0 .

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 12.

^ R.W Lee.

"Introduction to Roman-Dutch Law" . Oxford, Clarendon Press . Retrieved 27 March 2011 .

^ Nwaubani, Adaobi Tricia (15 July 2018).

"My Great-Grandfather, the Nigerian Slave-Trader" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

^ The abolition of the slave trade in southeastern Nigeria, 1885-1950 | WorldCat.org .

OCLC 256735611 .

^ Northrup, David (September 2007).

"A. E. Afigbo. The Abolition of the Slave Trade in Southeastern Nigeria. 1885-1950. Rochester: University of Rochester Press, 2006. Rochester Studies in African History and the Diaspora. xv + 210 pp. Maps. Appendixes. Bibliography. Index. $75.00. Cloth" .

African Studies Review .

50 (2): 228– 229.

doi : 10.1353/arw.2007.0116 .

ISSN 0002-0206 .

^ Miers, Suzanne (2003).

Slavery in the Twentieth Century: The Evolution of a Global Problem . Rowman Altamira. pp.

265– 67.

ISBN 978-0-7591-0340-5 .

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 14.

^ a b Dubow, Saul , "Afrikaner Nationalism, Apartheid and the conceptualisation of 'Race ' ", The Journal of African History, 33 (1992) pp. 209–237 (pp. 209, 211) ^ Gish, Steven (2000).

Alfred B. Xuma: African, American, South African.

New York University Press. p. 8.

^ Hoiberg, Dale; Ramchandani, Indu (2000).

Students' Britannica India, Volumes 1–5.

Popular Prakashan. p. 142.

^ Kiloh, Margaret; Sibeko, Archie (2000).

A Fighting Union . Randburg: Ravan Press. p. 1.

ISBN 0869755277 .

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , pp. 16–17.

^ Apartheid South Africa : an insider's view of the origin and effects of separate development, John Allen (2005).

Apartheid South Africa : an insider's view of the origin and effects of separate development . New York: iUniverse, Inc. p. 267.

ISBN 978-0595355518 .

^ {better source needed} Nojeim, Michael J. (2004).

Gandhi and King: the power of nonviolent resistance.

Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 127.

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 17.

^ a b Leach, Graham (1986).

South Africa: no easy path to peace.

Routledge. p. 68.

^ Tankard, Keith (9 May 2004).

Chapter 9 The Natives (Urban Areas) Act Archived 20 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Rhodes University. knowledge4africa.com.

^ Baroness Young – Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (4 July 1986).

South Africa House of Lords Debate vol 477 cc 1159–250 Archived 26 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Hansard.

^ The Representation of Natives Act . sahistory.org Archived 13 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ambrosio, Thomas (2002).

Ethnic identity groups and U.S. foreign policy.

Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 56–57.

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 26.

^ Reddy, E.S (n.d.).

"Indian passive resistance in South Africa, 1946–1948" .

sahistory.org.za . SA History.

Archived from the original on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 23 February 2015 .

^ a b Nigel, Worden, The making of modern South Africa: Conquest, Segregation and Apartheid, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2000) p. 3.

^ Philip Boner, Peter, Delius, Deborah, Posel, "The Shaping of Apartheid, contradiction, continuity and popular struggle", The Worlds Knowledge, (1993) pp. 1–47 (p. 6.) ^ a b Paul, Maylam, "The Rise and Decline of Urban Apartheid in South Africa", African Affairs, 89.354(1990) pp. 57–84 (p. 54.) ^ a b c d e f Kaplan, Irving.

Area Handbook for the Republic of South Africa (PDF) . pp.

1– 86.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 April 2015 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 37–38.

^ P. Brits, Modern South Africa : Afrikaner power, the politics of race, and resistance, 1902 to the 1970s (Pretoria, University of South Africa Press, 2007), p37 ^ a b c d e O'Meara, Dan.

Forty Lost Years : The National Party and the Politics of the South African State , 1948–1994. Athens: Ohio University Press , 1996.

^ a b M. Meredith, In the Name of Apartheid , London: Hamish Hamilton, 1988, ISBN 978-0-06-430163-3 ^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 41–42.

^ "Apartheid FAQ" . about.com.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ "The 1948 election and the National Party Victory" . South African History Online.

Archived from the original on 16 August 2008 . Retrieved 13 July 2008 .

^ T. Kuperus (7 April 1999).

State, Civil Society and Apartheid in South Africa: An Examination of Dutch Reformed Church-State Relations . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 83–.

ISBN 978-0-230-37373-0 .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2020 . Retrieved 29 April 2018 .

^ a b Cole, Catherine M. (2010).

Performing South Africa's Truth Commission: Stages of Transition . Indiana University Press. p. 31.

ISBN 9780253353900 .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ Kenney, Henry (2016).

Verwoerd: Architect of Apartheid . Jonathan Ball Publishers.

ISBN 9781868427161 .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ Gross, D. (14 September 2016).

"How Should South Africa Remember the Architect of Apartheid?" . Smithsonian.

Archived from the original on 16 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ Boddy-Evans, Alistar.

Population Registration Act No 30 of 1950 Archived 7 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

About.com .

^ Ungar, Sanford (1989).

Africa: the people and politics of an emerging continent.

Simon & Schuster. p. 224.

^ Goldin, Ian (1987).

Making race: the politics and economics of Coloured identity in South Africa.

Longman. p. xxvi.

^ Boddy-Evans, Alistar.

Group Areas Act No 41 of 1950 Archived 29 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

About.com .

^ Besteman, Catherine Lowe (2008).

Transforming Cape Town . University of California Press. p. 6.

^ Boddy-Evans, Alistar.

Apartheid Legislation in South Africa Archived 6 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

About.com .

^ Clark & Worger 2016 , p. 49.

^ Beck, Roger B. (2000).

The history of South Africa.

Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 128.

ISBN 978-0-313-30730-0 .

^ "The economic legacy of apartheid" . Centre de recherches pour le développement international. Archived from the original on 26 April 2010.

^ a b Clark & Worger (2016) , pp. 59–64 ^ Clark & Worger (2016) , p. 53–54 ^ "Extracts from paper prepared by the Secretariat for the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women, Copenhagen, July 1980 (The anti-pass campaign)" .

African National Congress . Archived from the original on 22 June 2008 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 .

^ Van der Ross, R. E.; Marais, Johannes Stephanus (1986).

The rise and decline of apartheid: a study of political movements among the Coloured people of South Africa, 1880–1985.

Tafelberg. p. 255.

^ Davis, Dennis; Le Roux, Michelle (2009).

Precedent & Possibility: The (Ab)use of Law in South Africa.

Juta and Company Limited. p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-77013-022-7 .

^ Rielations.

Penguin Books. p. 332.

^ Hatch, John Charles (1965).

A history of post-war Africa.

Praeger. p. 213.

^ Witz, Leslie (2003).

Apartheid's festival: contesting South Africa's national pasts.

Indiana University Press. p. 134.

^ Wilson, Monica Hunter; Thompson, Leonard Monteath (1969).

The Oxford history of South Africa, Volume 2.

Oxford University Press. p. 405.

^ "South Africa official yearbook." (1991). South African State Department of Information. p. 18.

Current edition available here Archived 6 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Muller, C. F. J. (1975).

Five hundred years: a history of South Africa.

Academica. p. 430.

^ Mountain, Alan (2003).

The first people of the Cape: a look at their history and the impact of colonialism on the Cape's indigenous people.

New Africa Books. p. 72.

^ Du Pre, R H. (1994).

Separate but Unequal – The 'Coloured' People of South Africa – A Political History.

Jonathan Ball Publishers, Johannesburg. pp. 134–139.

^ Kroth, Verena; Larcinese, Valentino; Wehner, Joachim (19 May 2016).

"A Better Life for All? Democratization and Electrification in Post-Apartheid South Africa" (PDF) .

The Journal of Politics .

78 (3): 000.

doi : 10.1086/685451 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

S2CID 53381097 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 September 2017 . Retrieved 13 November 2018 .

^ Muller (1975), p. 508.

^ Booth, Douglas (1998).

The race game: sport and politics in South Africa.

Routledge. p. 89.

^ Thompson, Paul Singer (1990).

Natalians first: separatism in South Africa, 1909–1961.

Southern Book Publishers. p. 167.

^ Joyce, Peter (2007).

The making of a nation: South Africa's road to freedom.

Zebra. p. 118.

^ Suzman, Helen (1993).

In no uncertain terms: a South African memoir.

Knopf. p. 35 ^ Keppel-Jones, Arthur (1975).

South Africa: a short history.

Hutchinson. p. 132.

^ Lacour-Gayet, Robert (1977).

A history of South Africa.

Cassell. p. 311.

^ p. 15 ^ Evans, Ivan. Bureaucracy and Race: Native Administration in South Africa. Berkeley: U of California, 1997. N. pag. Print.

^ Amisi, Baruti, and Simphiwe Nojiyeza. Access to Decent Sanitation in South Africa: The Challenges of Eradicating the Bucket System Baruti Amisi n. pag. Feb. 2008. Web.

^ "Verwoerd and his policies appalled me" .

News24 . Archived from the original on 16 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ "Remembering Verwoerd – OPINION | Politicsweb" .

www.politicsweb.co.za .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ "Afrikaner domination died with Verwoerd 50 years ago" .

News24 . Archived from the original on 6 September 2016 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ Those who had the money to travel or emigrate were not given full passports; instead, travel documents were issued.

^ Pitterman, Shelly (January–February 1978).

"A Fine Face for Apartheid" (PDF) .

Southern Africa . New York: The Africa Fund .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 December 2019 – via kora.matrix.msu.edu.

^ Western, J. (June 2002). "A divided city: Cape Town".

Political Geography .

21 (5): 711– 716.

doi : 10.1016/S0962-6298(02)00016-1 .

ISSN 0962-6298 .

^ "From the Western Areas to Soweto: forced removals" . Archived from the original on 17 January 2008 . Retrieved 7 January 2008 .

^ "Toby Street Blues" .

Time . 21 February 1955. Archived from the original on 17 January 2008.

^ Meredith, Martin (1 April 2010).

Mandela: A Biography . Simon and Schuster. p. 95.

ISBN 978-1-84739-933-5 .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2020 . Retrieved 28 October 2015 .

^ Muller, Carol (2008).

Music of South Africa . Routledge.

^ D'Amato, A.A. (1966).

"The Bantustan Proposals for South-West Africa" .

The Journal of Modern African Studies .

4 (2): 177– 192.

doi : 10.1017/S0022278X00013239 .

JSTOR 158943 .

S2CID 154050355 .

Archived from the original on 4 June 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2021 .

^ On apartheid transport see Pirie, G.H. Travelling under apartheid. In D M Smith (ed.), The Apartheid City and Beyond: Urbanisation and Social Change in South Africa.

Routledge, London (1992), pp. 172–181.

^ Health Sector Strategic Framework 1999–2004 – Background Archived 23 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Department of Health, 2004. Retrieved 8 November 2006.

^ Dictionary of South African English on historical principles Archived 14 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 27 December 2015.

^ Saaty, Thomas.

The Conflict in South Africa . Springer Publishing. p. 119.

^ Greyling, Michelle (1 May 2013).

An Undivided Landscape: Dissolving Apartheid buffer zones in Johannesburg, South Africa (Master Thesis thesis). University of Waterloo.

^ Laufs, Johannes (2011).

"Document: Bridging the Economic Divide in Urban Areas of Namibia: Townships within the Local Economic Development Framework" .

ResearchGate .

doi : 10.13140/RG.2.1.1825.5600 .

^ Omond, Roger (1986).

The Apartheid Handbook (2nd ed.). Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin Books. pp.

102–109 .

ISBN 978-0-14-022749-9 .

^ a b c Patric Tariq Mellet "Intro" , Cape Slavery Heritage . Retrieved 24 May 2011.

^ a b "Apartheid Legislation 1850s – 1970s" .

SAHistory.org .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ Armstrong, Sue (20 April 1991).

"Forum: Watching the 'race' detectives – The results of South Africa's race classification laws" .

New Scientist .

1765 .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ a b "Group Areas Act of 1950" .

SAHistory.org.za .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ Byrnes, Rita M. (1996).

South Africa: A Country Study . Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ "The Afrikaans Medium Decree" . About.com.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2007 . Retrieved 14 March 2007 .

^ Lemon, Anthony (2009). "Overcoming the Apartheid Legacy in Cape Town Schools".

Review .

99 (4): 517.

Bibcode : 2009GeoRv..99..517L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2009.tb00445.x .

S2CID 144615165 .

^ "Women's Charter, 17 April 1954 Johannesburg" . ANC. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014 . Retrieved 15 January 2014 .

^ Cotula, Lorenzo (2006).

Gender and Law: Women's Rights in Agriculture . Rome: FAO. pp.

46– 52.

ISBN 9789251055632 .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Nolde, Judith (1991).

"South African women under apartheid: Employment rights with particular focus on domestic service and forms of resistance to promote change" .

Third World Legal Studies .

10 : 204.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 2 July 2020 – via scholar.valpo.edu.

^ Lapchick, Richard E.; Urdang, Stephanie (1982).

Oppression and Resistance: The Struggle of Women in Southern Africa . Greenwood Press. pp. 48, 52.

ISBN 9780313229602 .

^ Bernstein, Hilda (1985).

For their Triumphs and for their Tears: Women in Apartheid South Africa . International Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa. p. 48.

^ Landis, Elizabeth S (1975).

African Women Under Apartheid . New York: Africa Fund. pp.

2– 3.

^ Alegi, Peter (2004).

Laduma! Soccer, Politics and Society in South Africa . University of KwaZula-Natal Press. p. 59.

^ a b Nixon, Rob (1992).

Apartheid on the Run: The South African Sports Boycott . Indiana University Press. pp. 75, 77.

^ Nauright, John (2004). "Global Games: Culture, Political Economy and Sport in the Globalised World of the 21st Century".

Third World Quarterly .

25 (7): 1325– 36.

doi : 10.1080/014365904200281302 .

S2CID 154741874 .

^ "BoxRec: Titles" .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2021 .

^ "BoxRec: Titles" .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2021 .

^ "In South Africa, Chinese is the New Black" . China Realtime Report. 19 June 2008.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2009 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 .

^ Naidoo, Josephine C.; Rajab, Devi Moodley (2005). "The Dynamics of Oppression".

Psychology and Developing Societies .

17 (2): 139– 159.

doi : 10.1177/097133360501700204 .

S2CID 145782935 .

^ Sze, Szeming (2014).

World War II Memoirs, 1941–1945 (Digital ed.). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh. p. 42. Archived from the original on 8 November 2014 . Retrieved 7 November 2014 .

^ Morsy, Soheir.

"From second-class citizen to 'Honorary White': changing state views of Chinese in South Africa" .

Wiredspace .

Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 28 May 2020 .

^ An appalling "science" Archived 23 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Muglia, Caroline (21 June 2016).

"Albinos in the Laager – Being Lebanese in South Africa" .

Khayrallah Center for Lebanese Diaspora Studies News . North Carolina State University.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2020 . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

^ JCW Van Rooyen, Censorship in South Africa (Cape Town: Juta and Co., 1987), 5.

^ Bet and board in the new South Africa. (legalisation of gambling could lead to growth of casinos, lotteries)(Brief Article) The Economist (US) | 5 August 1995 ^ Fauvet, Paul; Mosse, Marcelo (2003).

Carlos Cardoso: Telling the Truth in Mozambique . Juta and Company Ltd. p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-919930-31-2 .

^ Apartheid mythology and symbolism.
desegregated and re-invented in the service of
nation building in the new South Africa: the covenant and the battle of Blood/Ncome River ^ a b "WINDS – South Africa Apartheid Defined by Amercian [ sic ] Apartheid" . Apfn.org.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2011 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ Kaplan, R. M (2004).

"Treatment of homosexuality during apartheid" .

BMJ .

329 (7480): 1415– 1416.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.329.7480.1415 .

PMC 535952 .

PMID 15604160 .

^ Cros, Bernard (1997).

"Why South Africa's Television is only Twenty Years Old: Debating Civilisation, 1958–1969" . Archived from the original on 25 August 2009.

^ African National Congress (1987).

"Armed Struggle and Umkhonto / Morogoro" . Archived from the original on 16 December 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2007 .

^ A War Won , Time , 9 June 1961 ^ 16 June 1976 Student Uprising in Soweto Archived 1 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine . africanhistory.about.com ^ Harrison, David (1987).

The White Tribe of Africa .

^ ( Les Payne of Newsday said at least 850 murders were documented) Elsabe Brink; Gandhi Malungane; Steve Lebelo; Dumisani Ntshangase; Sue Krige, Soweto 16 June 1976 , 2001, 9 ^ Sowell, Thomas (2004, 2009).

Applied Economics: Thinking Beyond Stage One . Second Edition, NY: Basic Books. Ch. 7: The Economics of Discrimination.

^ Nelson Mandela Foundation, United Democratic Front Archived 17 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Apartheid part 06" .

Prime okbuy.eu search gizmo . 19 September 2017.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ "From the Archive: Sanctions agreed against apartheid-era South Africa" .

Commonwealth . Retrieved 8 August 2024 .

^ a b c Remarks at memorial ceremony for Nelson Mandela, Johannesburg, 10 December 2013 , 16 December 2016, doi : 10.18356/c18bc974-en ^ Ampiah, Kweku (1997).

The dynamics of Japan's relations with Africa: South Africa, Tanzania and Nigeria.

CRC Press. p. 147.

^ "Summary of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act" .

United States Congress . Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 February 2009 .

^ a b Geldenhuys, Deon (1990).

Isolated states: a comparative analysis.

Cambridge University Press. p. 274.

^ Royal African Society (1970).

African affairs, Volumes 69–70.

Oxford University Press. p. 178.

^ Hall, Richard (1970). "The Lusaka Manifesto".

African Affairs .

69 (275): 178– 179.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.afraf.a095995 .

^ Rubin, Leslie; Weinstein, Brian (1977).

Introduction to African politics: a continental approach.

Praeger. p. 129.

^ Klotz, Audie (1999).

Norms in International Relations: The Struggle Against Apartheid.

Cornell University Press. p. 77.

^ Pfister, Roger (2005).

Apartheid South Africa and African States: From Pariah to Middle Power, 1962–1994 . I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 978-1-85043-625-6 .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Beck, Roger B. (2000).

The History of South Africa . Greenwood Publishing Group. p.

151 .

ISBN 978-0-313-30730-0 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Ndlovu, Sifiso Mxolisi (2004).

"The ANC's Diplomacy and International Relations" .

The Road to Democracy in South Africa: 1970–1980 . Vol. 2. Unisa Press.

ISBN 978-1-86888-406-3 .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2015 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 .

^ "The 1981 Springbok rugby tour – A country divided" .

NZ History . New Zealand: Ministry for Culture and Heritage .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2008.

^ "Nelson Mandela: From Don Bradman to the World Cups" .

Cricket Mash . 18 July 2020.

^ Fife-Yeomans, Janet; Toohey, Paul (7 December 2013).

"Freed man Nelson Mandela changed the world, not just South Africa" .

News.com.au .

^ The Day Apartheid Was Hit For Six Archived 25 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

^ "Bradman's Perfection" . DreamCricket. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011 . Retrieved 19 June 2011 .

^ "Commonwealth Games" . About.com.

Archived from the original on 27 May 2006 . Retrieved 7 February 2007 .

^ "Archived copy" .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ International Labour Office (1991).

Apartheid: Special Report of the Directed General on the Application of the Decoration Concerning the Policy of South Africa.

International Labour Organization . p. 46.

^ Bangura, Abdul Karim (2004).

Sweden vs apartheid: putting morality ahead of profit.

Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 104.

^ Grieg, Charlotte (2008).

Cold Blooded Killings: Hits, Assassinations, and Near Misses That Shook the World.

Booksales Inc Remainders. p. 43.

^ Dowdall, Aaron T. (December 2009).

The Birth and Death of a Tar Baby: Henry Kissinger and Southern Africa (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 August 2012 .

^ Joseba Zulaika and William Douglass, "Terror and Taboo" (Routledge, 1996), p. 12 ^ "Oliver Tambo interviewed by The Times" . ANC. 13 June 1988. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .

^ "Mandela's triumphant walk" .

News24 . 18 July 2003. Archived from the original on 24 September 2006.

^ Mark Phillips and Colin Coleman (1989).

"Another Kind of War" (PDF) . Transformation.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 October 2012 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ "Compensation case against South African miners thrown out" . Minesandcommunities.org. Archived from the original on 19 January 2008 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ "US court allows apartheid claims" .

BBC News . 12 May 2008.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2008 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ Berridge, G.R. (1992).

South Africa, the Colonial Powers and African Defence: The Rise and Fall of the White Entente, 1948–60 . Basingstoke: Palgrave Books. pp.

1– 16, 163– 164.

ISBN 978-0333563519 .

^ Lulat, Y.G.M. (1992).

United States Relations with South Africa: A Critical Overview from the Colonial Period to the Present . New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Incorporated. pp.

143– 146.

ISBN 978-0820479071 .

^ Campbell, Kurt (1986).

Soviet Policy Towards South Africa . Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. pp.

129– 131.

ISBN 978-1349081677 .

^ Herbstein, Denis; Evenson, John (1989).

The Devils Are Among Us: The War for Namibia . London: Zed Books Ltd. pp.

14– 23.

ISBN 978-0862328962 .

^ a b Shultz, Richard (1988).

Soviet Union and Revolutionary Warfare: Principles, Practices, and Regional Comparisons . Stanford, California: Hoover Institution Press. pp.

121–123, 140–145 .

ISBN 978-0817987114 .

^ a b c d Potgieter, De Wet (2007).

Total Onslaught: Apartheid's Dirty Tricks Exposed . Cape Town: Zebra Press. pp.

93– 95.

ISBN 978-1770073289 .

^ a b c d Minter, William (1994).

Apartheid's Contras: An Inquiry into the Roots of War in Angola and Mozambique . Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press. pp.

37– 49.

ISBN 978-1439216187 .

^ Von Wielligh, N. & von Wielligh-Steyn, L. (2015).

The Bomb: South Africa's Nuclear Weapons Programme . Pretoria: Litera.

^ McGreal, Chris (7 February 2006).

"Brothers in Arms – Israel's secret pact with Pretoria" .

The Guardian . UK.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 3 April 2010 .

^ a b c d Jacklyn Cock, Laurie Nathan (1989).

War and Society: The Militarisation of South Africa . New Africa Books. pp.

36– 37, 283– 289.

ISBN 978-0-86486-115-3 .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 .

^ a b Potgieter, Thean; Liebenberg, Ian (2012).

Reflections on War: Preparedness and Consequences . Stellenbosch: Sun Media Press. pp.

70– 81.

ISBN 978-1-920338-85-5 .

^ Blumenthal, Max (14 May 2010).

"The Banquo's Ghost of Israeli Foreign Policy" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2019 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ a b Brecher, Michael; Wilkenfeld, Jonathan (1997).

A Study of Crisis . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp.

79–82, 477 .

ISBN 978-0472087075 .

^ a b c d e f g h Sechaba, Tsepo; Ellis, Stephen (1992).

Comrades Against Apartheid: The ANC & the South African Communist Party in Exile . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. pp.

184– 187.

ISBN 978-0253210623 .

^ James III, W. Martin (2011) [1992].

A Political History of the Civil War in Angola: 1974–1990 . New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. pp.

207– 214, 239– 245.

ISBN 978-1-4128-1506-2 .

^ a b Larmer, Miles (2011).

Rethinking African Politics: A History of Opposition in Zambia . Surrey: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. pp.

209– 217.

ISBN 978-1409482499 .

^ Blank, Stephen (1991).

Responding to Low-Intensity Conflict Challenges . Montgomery: Air University Press. pp.

223– 239.

ISBN 978-0160293320 .

^ Radu, Michael (1990).

The New Insurgencies: Anti-Communist Guerrillas in the Third World . Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge Books. pp.

131– 141.

ISBN 978-0887383076 .

^ a b Dale, Richard (2014).

The Namibian War of Independence, 1966–1989: Diplomatic, Economic and Military Campaigns . Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Incorporated Publishers. pp.

74– 77, 93– 95.

ISBN 978-0786496594 .

^ Ndlovu, Sifiso Mxolisi (2006).

The Road to Democracy in South Africa: 1970–1980 . Pretoria: University of South Africa Press. pp.

659– 661.

ISBN 978-1868884063 .

^ a b Steenkamp, Willem (2006).

Borderstrike! South Africa Into Angola 1975–1980 (2006 ed.). Just Done Productions. pp.

132– 226.

ISBN 978-1-920169-00-8 .

^ a b Dale, Richard (1995).

Botswana's Search for Autonomy in Southern Africa . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. pp.

55– 59.

ISBN 978-0313295713 .

^ Steyn, Douw; Söderlund, Arné (2015).

Iron Fist From The Sea: South Africa's Seaborne Raiders 1978–1988 . Solihull: Helion & Company, Publishers. pp.

203– 205, 304– 305.

ISBN 978-1909982284 .

^ a b "Pretoria cools to US-backed talks" .

The New York Times . 1 June 1985.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2017 . Retrieved 7 August 2017 .

^ Purkitt, Helen E.; Burgess, Stephen Franklin (2005).

South Africa's weapons of mass destruction.

Indiana University Press. p. 152.

^ Watson, Wendy (2007).

Brick by brick: an informal guide to the history of South Africa.

New Africa Books.

^ Fox, William; Fourie, Marius; Van Wyk, Belinda (1998).

Police Management in South Africa.

Juta and Company Limited. p. 167.

^ Anzovin, Steven (1987).

South Africa: apartheid and divestiture.

H.W. Wilson Co. p. 80.

ISBN 978-0-8242-0749-6 .

^ Foster, Don; Davis, Dennis (1987).

Detention & torture in South Africa: psychological, legal & historical studies.

Currey. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-85255-317-6 .

^ Jonas (7 June 2012).

"Political executions in South Africa by the apartheid government 1961–1989" .

South African History Online .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2017 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ Pomeroy, William J. (1986).

Apartheid, imperialism, and African freedom.

International Publishers. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-7178-0640-9 .

^ Legum, Colin (1989).

Africa contemporary record: annual survey and documents, Volume 20.

Africana Pub. Co. p. 668.

^ McKendrick, Brian; Hoffmann, Wilman (1990).

People and violence in South Africa.

Oxford University Press. p. 62.

^ Blond, Rebecca; Fitzpatrick, Mary (2004).

South Africa, Lesotho & Swaziland.

Lonely Planet. p. 40.

^ "Volume Five – Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa Report" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2017 . Retrieved 15 December 2013 .

^ Philip Boner, Peter, Delius, Deborah, Posel, "The Shaping of Apartheid, contradiction, continuity and popular struggle", The Worlds Knowledge, (1993) pp. 1–47 (p. 7.) ^ a b c Akansake, Albin (18 April 2013).

Who Is the First-Class Ghanaian?: A Story of Tribalism, Religion, and Sectionalism in Ghana and the Way Forward . iUniverse.

ISBN 978-1-4759-8538-2 .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 .

^ Giliomee, Hermann (1995). "Democratization in South Africa".

Political Science Quarterly .

110 (1): 83– 104.

doi : 10.2307/2152052 .

JSTOR 2152052 .

^ Knox, Colin; Quirk, Pádraic (2000).

Peacebuilding in Northern Ireland, Israel and South Africa: transition, transformation and reconciliation.

Palgrave Macmillan. p. 151.

^ Beinart, William (2001).

Twentieth-century South Africa . Oxford University Press. p. 202.

ISBN 978-0-19-289318-5 .

^ Taylor & Francis Group (2004).

Europa World Year Book 2, Book 2.

Taylor & Francis. p. 3841.

^ Taylor, Paul (23 December 1993).

"S. Africa Approves Charter; White-Led Parliament Votes for Constitution Canceling Its Powers" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 9 February 2021 .

^ Wople, Harold (1990).

Race, class & the apartheid state.

Africa World Press. p. 93.

ISBN 978-0-86543-142-3 .

^ Marais, D. (1989).

South Africa: constitutional development, a multi-disciplinary approach.

Southern Book Publishers. p. 258.

ISBN 978-1-86812-159-5 .

^ Lötter, Hennie P. P. (1997).

Injustice, violence and peace: the case of South Africa.

Rodopi. p. 49.

ISBN 978-90-420-0264-7 .

^ "Cops fight crowds at S. Africa elections." Philadelphia Daily News .

28 August 1984.

^ sahoboss (21 March 2011).

"Pass laws in South Africa 1800–1994" .

South African History Online .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ South Africa: Adapt or Die .

Time .

^ Lieberfeld, Daniel (2002). "Evaluating the Contributions of Track-two Diplomacy to Conflict Termination in South Africa, 1984–90".

Journal of Peace Research .

39 (3): 355– 372.

doi : 10.1177/0022343302039003006 .

S2CID 22512618 .

^ Roherty, James Michael (1992).

State security in South Africa: civil-military relations under P.W. Botha.

M.E. Sharpe. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-87332-877-7 .

^ "1990: Freedom for Nelson Mandela" . BBC. 11 February 1990.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ "Chronology of Namibian Independence" .

Archived from the original on 23 May 2020 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ Macleod, Scott (7 July 1992).

"Enemies: Black vs. Black vs. White" .

Time . Archived from the original on 23 August 2009.

^ "Turning Points in History Book 6: Negotiation, Transition and Freedom" . Archived from the original on 9 March 2008 . Retrieved 3 December 2007 .

^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 1993" . Nobel Foundation.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2006 . Retrieved 27 April 2007 .

^ Century, Christian (11 May 1994).

"Dawn of liberation – 1994 South African election" . BNet, a CBS Company . Retrieved 13 July 2008 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Truth and reconciliation commission .

"New cut-off date opens amnesty doors for pre-election bombers" . South African Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.

Archived from the original on 27 August 2009 . Retrieved 13 July 2008 .

^ Deegan, Heather (2001).

The politics of the new South Africa: apartheid and after.

Pearson Education. p. 194.

ISBN 978-0-582-38227-5 .

^ Jeffery, A.

People's War: New Light on the Struggle for South Africa . Jonathan Ball.

^ "Elections '94" . Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). Archived from the original on 28 June 2008 . Retrieved 13 July 2008 .

^ Lijphart, Arend.

"Spotlight Three: South Africa's 1994 Elections" . FairVote.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2008 . Retrieved 13 July 2008 .

^ Nesbitt, Francis Njubi (2004).

Race for sanctions: African Americans against apartheid, 1946-1994 . Blacks in the diaspora. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-34232-4 .

^ a b c Joseph, Juliet Eileen (30 November 2021).

"Post-apartheid South Africa's exacerbated inequality and the Covid-19 pandemic: intersectionality and the politics of power: The Politics of Power" .

EUREKA: Social and Humanities (6): 68– 78.

doi : 10.21303/2504-5571.2021.002099 .

ISSN 2504-5571 .

^ a b McKeever, Matthew (4 December 2024).

"Social stratification and inequality in South Africa" .

Sociology Compass .

18 (2).

doi : 10.1111/soc4.13173 .

ISSN 1751-9020 .

^ a b Oqubay, Arkebe; Tregenna, Fiona; Valodia, Imraan, eds. (2021).

The Oxford handbook of the South African economy (1st ed.). Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-289419-9 .

^ a b "Statistics South Africa | Census Dissemination" .

census.statssa.gov.za . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .

^ "New World Bank Report Assesses Sources of Inequality in Five Countries in Southern Africa" .

World Bank . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "Breaking: It's now 'illegal' to display the apartheid flag in South Africa" . 21 August 2019.

^ De Klerk apologises again for apartheid .

South African Press Association . 14 May 1997.

^ "FW de Klerk's final message" .

FW de Klerk Foundation . 12 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 November 2021 – via YouTube .

^ Meldrum, Andrew (11 April 2005).

Apartheid party bows out with apology Archived 6 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine .

The Guardian .

^ Macharia, James (11 April 2005).

South Africa apartheid party votes to dissolve Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

The Boston Globe .

^ "Mr Adrian Vlok extends gesture of penance to Rev Frank Chikane, Director-General in the Presidency" . South African Government Information. 28 August 2006. Archived from the original on 28 August 2009 . Retrieved 22 February 2009 .

^ Volume Five Chapter Six – Findings and Conclusions Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

^ "International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid " (PDF) .

un.org . 14 July 2021.

G.A.

res. 3068 (XXVIII).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .

^ "A regime of Jewish supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea: This is apartheid" .

B'Tselem . 12 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021.

^ Smith, Saphora (12 January 2021).

"B'Tselem labels Israel an 'apartheid regime' for first time" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021.

^ "A Threshold Crossed – Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid and Persecution" .

Human Rights Watch . 27 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021.

^ "Israel committing crimes of apartheid and persecution – HRW" .

BBC News . 27 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021.

^ "Israel: Discriminatory Land Policies Hem in Palestinians" .

Human Rights Watch . 12 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 18 June 2021.

^ Sekulow, Jay A.; Ash, Robert W. (January 2023). "Why Allegations that Israel Is An 'Apartheid' State Are False under International Law".

Social Science Research Network .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.4343950 .

SSRN 4343950 .

^ O'Hara, Mary (14 April 2004).

"Self-imposed apartheid" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Naidoo, Josephine C.; Rajab, Devi Moodley (1 September 2005). "The Dynamics of Oppression".

Psychology and Developing Societies .

17 (2): 139– 159.

doi : 10.1177/097133360501700204 .

S2CID 145782935 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bernstein, Hilda.

For their Triumphs and for their Tears: Women in Apartheid South Africa. International Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa . London, 1985.

Boswell, Barbara (2017). "Overcoming the 'daily bludgeoning by apartheid': Black South African women writers, agency, and space".

African Identities .

15 (4): 414– 427.

doi : 10.1080/14725843.2017.1319754 .

S2CID 151467416 .

Davenport, T. R. H.

South Africa. A Modern History .

MacMillan , 1977.

Davies, Rob, Dan O'Meara and Sipho Dlamini.

The Struggle For South Africa: A reference guide to movements, organisations and institution . Volume Two. London: Zed Books , 1984 De Klerk, F. W.

The last Trek. A New Beginning . MacMillan, 1998.

[ ISBN missing ] Dowling, Owen (12 February 2023).

"South Africa's Communists Were Crucial to the Fight Against Apartheid" .

Jacobin .

Du Pre, R. H.

Separate but Unequal – The 'Coloured' People of South Africa – A Political History.

. Jonathan Ball, 1994.

Eiselen, W. W. N. The Meaning of Apartheid, Race Relations , 15 (3), 1948.

Federal Research Division.

South Africa – a country study .

Library of Congress , 1996.

Giliomee, Herman The Afrikaners . Hurst & Co., 2003.

[ ISBN missing ] Goodman, Peter S. (24 October 2017).

"End of Apartheid in South Africa? Not in Economic Terms" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 20 March 2018 .

Political liberation has yet to translate into material gains for blacks. As one woman said, 'I've gone from a shack to a shack.' Hexham, Irving, The Irony of Apartheid: The Struggle for National Independence of Afrikaner Calvinism against British Imperialism . Edwin Mellen, 1981.

Keable, Ken London Recruits: The Secret War Against Apartheid .

Pontypool , UK : Merlin Press. 2012.

Lapchick, Richard and Urdang, Stephanie. Oppression and Resistance. The Struggle of Women in Southern Africa. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press . 1982.

Louw, P. Eric.

The Rise, Fall and Legacy of Apartheid . Praeger, 2004.

[ ISBN missing ] Makdisi, Saree (2018). "Apartheid".

Critical Inquiry .

44 (2): 304– 330.

doi : 10.1086/695377 .

S2CID 224798450 .

Meredith, Martin.

In the name of apartheid: South Africa in the postwar period . 1st US ed. New York: Harper & Row , 1988.

Meredith, Martin.

The State of Africa .

The Free Press , 2005.

Merrett, Christopher (2005). "Sport and Apartheid".

History Compass .

3 : **.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-0542.2005.00165.x .

Morris, Michael.

Apartheid: An illustrated history . Jonathan Ball Publishers. Johannesburg and Cape Town, 2012.

Newbury, Darren.

Defiant Images: Photography and Apartheid South Africa , University of South Africa (UNISA) Press, 2009.

Noah, Trevor.

Born a Crime: Stories from a South African Childhood , Random House 2016, ISBN 978-0399588174 .

Suze, Anthony (2010). "The untold story of Robben Island: Sports and the anti-Apartheid movement".

Sport in Society .

13 : 36– 42.

doi : 10.1080/17430430903377706 .

S2CID 144871273 .

Terreblanche, S.

A History of Inequality in South Africa, 1652–2002 . University of Natal Press, 2003.

Visser, Pippa.

In search of history .

Oxford University Press Southern Africa, 2003.

Williams, Michael.

Crocodile Burning . 1994 [ ISBN missing ] Memorandum van die Volksraad, 2016 External links [ edit ] Apartheid at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Apartheid: 20th Century Slavery 1971 United Nations Report on Apartheid.

Byrnes, Mark (10 December 2010).

"Life in Apartheid-Era South Africa" .

Bloomberg.com .

– Includes many photos Understanding Apartheid Learner's Book Archived 8 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine – Series of PDFs published by the Apartheid Museum The evolution of the white right – Volk , faith and fatherland: The security threat posed by the white right, by Martin Schönteich and Henri Boshoff, 2003 Freedom Charter 1955 – About the Freedom Charter (SA History online) District 6 Museum – Cape Town's District Six Museum, which examines forced removals The International Centre for Transitional Justice (ICTJ) provides resources on the legacy of apartheid and transitional justice in South Africa post-apartheid.

"Struggles for Freedom: Southern Africa" .

JSTOR .

Collection of primary source historical materials about apartheid South Africa Apartheid archives subject guide – London University v t e Political history of South Africa Defunct polities Kingdom of Mapungubwe ( c.

1075 – c.

1220 ) Dutch Cape Colony (1652–1806) Mthethwa Paramountcy ( c.

1780 –1817) Ndwandwe Kingdom ( c.

1780 –1819) Cape Colony (1795–1910) Zulu Kingdom (1816–1897) Natalia Republic (1839–1843) Natal Colony (1843–1910) Orange Free State (1854–1902) South African Republic (1856–1902) Griqualand East (1861–1879) Griqualand West (1870–1873) Goshen (1882–1883) Stellaland (1882–1885) Nieuwe Republiek (1884–1888) Upingtonia (1885–1887) Klein Vrystaat (1886–1891) Orange River Colony (1902–1910) Transvaal Colony (1902–1910) Union of South Africa (1910–1961) Transkei (1976–1994) Bophuthatswana (1977–1994) Venda (1979–1994) Ciskei (1981–1994) Events Pre-colonial Bantu migrations Battle of Salt River 1652–1815 Dutch settlement French Huguenot settlement Khoikhoi–Dutch Wars Xhosa Wars Battle of Muizenberg Battle of Blaauwberg Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 1815–1910 Mfecane 1820 Settlers Great Trek Boer Republics Transvaal Civil War Mineral Revolution Witwatersrand Gold Rush South African Wars South Africa Act 1909 ( National Convention ) 1910–1948 South West Africa campaign Maritz rebellion Rand Rebellion Great Depression 1946 African Mine Workers' Union strike Bantustans Apartheid 1948 general election Apartheid legislation Pass laws Internal resistance Coloured-vote constitutional crisis Defiance Campaign Congress of the People Freedom Charter Women's March 1956 1957 Alexandra bus boycott Sharpeville massacre 1960 republic referendum International isolation UN Resolution 1761 UNSC Resolution 591 Academic boycott Disinvestment Constructive engagement Tar Baby Option Sporting boycott Olympics Rugby union Rivonia Trial Durban Moment Border War Israeli alliance Israel–South Africa Agreement Mafeje affair Soweto Uprising Weapons of mass destruction Project Coast Church Street bombing 1983 constitutional referendum Vaal uprising Langa massacre Rubicon speech Operation Vula Dakar Conference Transkei coup d'état Ciskei coup d'état Venda coup d'état Third Force CODESA Storming of the Kempton Park World Trade Centre Bisho massacre 1992 apartheid referendum Saint James Church massacre Bophuthatswana crisis Shell House massacre Sauer Commission Post- apartheid 1994 general election Government of National Unity Reconstruction and Development Programme Truth and Reconciliation Commission Arms Deal Floor crossing Soweto bombings African Renaissance Travelgate Xenophobia Attack on Kennedy Road Blikkiesdorp Marikana massacre 2012 Western Cape farm workers' strike Nkandlagate Racism 2014 platinum strike #RhodesMustFall protests #FeesMustFall student protests Tshwane riots 2019 service delivery protests 2019 Johannesburg riots COVID-19 pandemic 2020 Phala Phala Robbery 2021 unrest Lady R incident Political culture African nationalism Afrikaner Calvinism Afrikaner nationalism Anarchism Azania Baasskap Boerehaat Black Consciousness Movement Cape Independence Day of the Vow Greater South Africa Honorary whites Rooi gevaar Slavery Swart gevaar Uitlander Volkstaat Defunct organisations Civic and political organisations Afrikaner Bond Afrikaner Broederbond Afrikaner Party AITUP APO AVF BPC Black Sash Boerestaat Party CDA CNIP CTEG COD Congress Alliance COSG CP DLF Dominion Party DP (1973–1977) DP (1989–2000) DPP DSM ECC FA FD Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners GNP Het Volk HNP (Herenigde) HNP (Herstigte) IDASA ID IP ISL Jeugkrag Johannesburg Reform Committee Labour Party (1910–1958) Labour Party (1969–1994) Liberal Party (1953–1968) NA NCP Natal Indian Congress NLP NNP NP NPP NRP NUSAS Occupy Orangia Unie Oranjewerkers Orde Boerevolk PAVN PFP Progressive Party (Cape Colony) Progressive Party PRP Radio Freedom Reform Party SABP SADECO SAIC SASO SAYCO SAYRCO South African Party (Cape Colony) South African Party (1911–1934) South African Party (1977–1980) TNIP Torch Commando UFP United Party Unionist Party National Party of Venda Volksparty Workers Party WOSA Trade unions and social movements APF BCM BLATU CNETU CTSWU FCWU FNETU FOSATU ICU IWW MUSA NEUM NURHS PAWE SAAPAWU SACTU SAIF SARHU SATUC Die Spoorbund UDF Umkosi Wezintaba Paramilitary and terrorist organisations APLA ARM AWB BBB Boeremag Greyshirts MK Ossewabrandwag Orde van die Dood PAGAD SANF Histories of political parties African National Congress Democratic Alliance Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Category v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e South Africa articles History Timeline Years Early history Kingdom of Mapungubwe Kingdom of Mutapa Kaditshwene Dutch Cape Colony Mthethwa Paramountcy Ndwandwe Cape Colony Zulu Kingdom Orange Free State Transvaal Republic First Boer War Second Boer War Great Depression World War II Apartheid Border War Democratic South Africa By topic Economy Military Geography Biodiversity Climate Climate change Districts Earthquakes Estuaries Forests Islands Lakes Mountain ranges Municipalities National parks Populated places Provinces Rivers Wildlife Politics Constitution Courts Corruption Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Intergovernmental relations Law Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties President timeline Public administration State security Traditional leaders Economy Agriculture Banking Companies Communications Economic history Energy Foreign trade Income inequality Mining industry Rand (currency) State-owned enterprises Stock exchange Taxation Tourism Trade unions Transport Water and sanitation Wealth inequality Society Cannabis Crime Disability Education Feminism Health Healthcare Immigration Intersex Land invasion Languages LGBT Life expectancy Poverty Racism Religion Sexual violence Slum clearance Smoking Social issues Social movements Women Xenophobia Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine ( wine ) HIV/AIDS Homelessness Flag Literature Media Music National symbols Public holidays Sports World Heritage Sites heritage sites Demographics South African Bantu-speaking peoples Ndebele Pedi Sotho Swazi Tsonga Tswana Venda Xhosa Zulu Khoisan Khoekhoe San people Whites Afrikaners British Coloureds Cape Coloureds Cape Malays Griquas Indians Chinese Outline Index Category Portal v t e Years in South Africa ( 1901 –present) 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 v t e White people Bold refers to countries, regions and territories in which the majority ethnic group is generally considered to be people of white European descent.

European emigration by location Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Democratic Republic of the Congo Kenya Malawi Morocco Namibia Reunion South Africa Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia China India Pakistan North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Canada Caribbean Cayman Islands Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Panama Trinidad and Tobago United States California Hawaii Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Southern United States Puerto Rico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia New Caledonia Hawaii New Zealand Historical concepts Apartheid Aryan Blanqueamiento Castas Peninsulares Criollos First white child Honorary whites Play the white man Pre-modern conceptions of whiteness Settler colonialism White Australia policy The White Man's Burden White gods Sociological phenomena and theories Acting white ( Passing as white ) Becoming white thesis Missing white woman syndrome Skin whitening White flight White guilt White privilege Whiteness studies Whitewashing in art Whitewashing in film White savior White demographic decline White people terms White supremacy Reverse racism Anti-white racism Negative stereotypes of Whites In the United States Appalachian stereotypes Hillbilly Mountain whites Poor Whites Redlegs Rednecks White trash Karen Angry white male Becky Basic Trixie White monkey White identity politics US definitions of whiteness One-drop rule Alt-right Christian Identity European New Right Great Replacement Identitarian movement Non-Hispanic whites Old Stock Americans Canadians Quebeckers White Anglo-Saxon Protestants White ethnic White genocide conspiracy theory White Hispanic White identity White nationalism White pride White supremacy Race Ethnic groups in Europe Commons Portals : South Africa 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apartheid&oldid=1303096313 " Categories : 1940s in South Africa 1948 establishments in South Africa 1950s in South Africa 1960s in South Africa 1970s in South Africa 1980s in South Africa 1990s in South Africa 1994 disestablishments in South Africa 20th century in South Africa Apartheid Apartheid in South Africa Apartheid in South West Africa Crimes against humanity Discrimination in South Africa Ethnic nationalism Ethnicity in politics Far-right politics in South Africa Fascism Human rights abuses in South Africa Neo-fascism Political terminology in South Africa Politics and race Racial segregation Racism in South Africa White supremacy in Africa Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2010 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from April 2024 Use South African English from April 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in South African English Articles that may be too long from October 2024 All articles that may be too long Pages with Afrikaans IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Articles needing additional references from January 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2014 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Pages with missing ISBNs Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 02:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apartheid 139 languages Add topic

