Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Occurrence Toggle Occurrence subsection 2.1 Ciliate protozoans 2.2 True fungi 2.3 Slime molds 3 Artificial heterokaryon 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Heterokaryon 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heterokaryon in fungal mitosis In biology, a heterokaryon is a multinucleate cell that contains genetically different nuclei . This is a special type of syncytium . This can occur naturally, such as in the mycelium of fungi during sexual reproduction, or artificially as formed by the experimental fusion of two genetically different cells, as e.g., in hybridoma technology .

Etymology [ edit ] The term heterokaryosis for the property of having genetically unlike nuclei
is borrowed from the German Heterokaryosis , which was coined by the German botanist Hans Burgeff in a 1912 paper about his work on the fungus Phycomyces nitens .

[ 1 ] It is based on Greek hetero , meaning "different," and karyon , meaning "kernel" or in this case "nucleus.".

[ 2 ] Occurrence [ edit ] Heterokaryons are found in the life cycle of yeasts, for example Saccharomyces cerevisiae , a genetic model organism. The heterokaryon stage is produced from the fusion of two haploid cells. This transient heterokaryon can produce further haploid buds, or cell nuclei can fuse and produce a diploid cell, which can then undergo mitosis.

Ciliate protozoans [ edit ] The term was first used for ciliate protozoans such as Tetrahymena . This has two types of cell nuclei, a large, somatic macronucleus and a small, germline micronucleus . Both exist in a single cell at the same time and carry out different functions with distinct cytological and biochemical properties.

True fungi [ edit ] Many fungi (notably the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi ) exhibit heterokaryosis. The haploid nuclei within a mycelium may differ from one another not merely by accumulating mutations , but by the non-sexual fusion of genetically distinct fungal hyphae , although a self / non-self recognition system exists in Fungi and usually prevents fusions with non-self.

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] Heterokaryosis is also common upon mating, as in Dikarya ( Ascomycota and Basidiomycota ). Mating requires the encounter of two haploid nuclei of compatible mating types. These nuclei do not immediately fuse, and remain haploid in a n+n state until the very onset of meiosis: this phenomenon is called delayed karyogamy. Heterokaryosis can lead to individuals that have different nuclei in different parts of their mycelium, although in ascomycetes, particularly in " Neurospora ", nuclei have been shown to flow and mix throughout the mycelium.

[ 4 ] In heterokaryons, the notion of individual itself becomes vague since the rule of “one genome = one individual” does not apply any more.

[ 5 ] Genetic heterogeneity within an individual is indeed usually considered to be detrimental, as selfish variants may be selected for and disrupt the integrity of the individual level.

[ 6 ] Slime molds [ edit ] Heterokaryosis is most common in fungi, but also occurs in slime molds . This happens because the nuclei in the 'plasmodium' form are the products of many pairwise fusions between amoeboid haploid individuals. When genetically divergent nuclei come together in the plasmodium form, cheaters have been shown to emerge. However, genetic homogeneity among fusing amoeboid serves to maintain the multicellular plasmodium.

[ 7 ] Artificial heterokaryon [ edit ] A medical example is a heterokaryon composed of nuclei from Hurler syndrome and Hunter syndrome . Both of these diseases result in problems in mucopolysaccharide metabolism. However, a heterokaryon of nuclei from both of these diseases exhibits normal mucopolysaccharide metabolism, proving that the two syndromes affect different proteins and so can correct each other in the heterokaryon.

See also [ edit ] Dikaryon Heterokairy References [ edit ] ^ a b Strom, Noah B.; Bushley, Kathryn E. (2016).

"Two genomes are better than one: History, genetics, and biotechnological applications of fungal heterokaryons" .

Fungal Biology and Biotechnology .

3 : 4.

doi : 10.1186/s40694-016-0022-x .

ISSN 2054-3085 .

PMC 5611628 .

PMID 28955463 .

^ "heterokaryon" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 14 February 2025 .

^ Glass, N. L. and I. Kaneko. 2003. Fatal attraction: Nonself recognition and heterokaryon incompatibility in filamentous fungi.

Eukaryotic Cell , 2:1-8 ^ Roper, M., C. Ellison, J. W. Taylor, and N. L. Glass. 2011. Nuclear and Genome Dynamics in Multinucleate Ascomycete Fungi.

Current Biology 21:R786-R793 ^ King R.C., Stansfield W.D. & Mulligan P.K. 2006.

A dictionary of genetics . 7th ed, Oxford. p.204 ^ Maynard-Smith, J. and E. Szathmary. 1995. The major transitions in evolution. Oxford University Press ^ Kuzdzal-Fick, J. J., S. A. Fox, J. E. Strassmann, and D. C. Queller. 2011. High Relatedness is Necessary and Sufficient to Maintain Multicellularity in Dictyostelium.

Science 334:1548-1551 External links [ edit ] Look up heterokaryon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

MedicineNet.com Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heterokaryon&oldid=1282496753 " Categories : Eukaryotic cells Mycology Cell biology This page was last edited on 26 March 2025, at 19:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heterokaryon 10 languages Add topic

