Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Title 2 Date of composition 3 Structure and contents 4 Comparison to Plato's dialogues 5 Influence 6 Translations 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Memorabilia (Xenophon) 12 languages Azərbaycanca Ελληνικά Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 371 BCE collection of Socratic dialogues Memorabilia (original title in Ancient Greek : Ἀπομνημονεύματα , romanized : Apomnemoneumata ) is a collection of Socratic dialogues by Xenophon (ca. 430 to ca. 354 BC), a student of Socrates (ca. 470 – 399 BC). The lengthiest and most famous of Xenophon 's Socratic writings, the Memorabilia is essentially an apologia (defense) of Socrates , differing from both Xenophon's Apology of Socrates to the Jury and Plato's Apology . The Apologies present Socrates as defending himself before the jury, whereas the Memorabilia presents Xenophon's own defense of Socrates, offering edifying examples of Socrates' conversations and activities along with occasional commentary from Xenophon.

Memorabilia was particularly influential in Cynic and later Stoic philosophy.

Title [ edit ] Memorabilia is also known by its Latin title Commentarii and a variety of English translations (Recollections, Memoirs, Conversations of Socrates, etc.).

Date of composition [ edit ] The Memorabilia was probably completed after 371 BC, as one passage (III.5) appears to assume the military situation after the Spartan defeat at the Battle of Leuctra in that year.

Structure and contents [ edit ] The Memorabilia contains 39 chapters broken into four books; Book I contains 7 chapters, Book II contains 10 chapters, Book III contains 14 chapters, and Book IV contains 8 chapters.

The overall organization of the Memorabilia is not always easy to make out: Book I. After the direct defense of Socrates (I.1-I.2), the rest of Book I consists of an account of Socrates' piety and self-control.

Books II and III are devoted largely to showing how Socrates benefited his family, friends, and various Athenians who came to him for advice.

Book IV turns to a more detailed account of how Socrates educated one particular student, Euthydemus.  It includes an early example (possibly the earliest) of the Argument from Design (i.e. the Teleological Argument ) (IV.3, anticipated already in I.4).  Chapter 4 gives a related account of Natural Law .

In the lengthy first two chapters of the work, Xenophon argues that Socrates was innocent of the formal charges against him: failure to recognize the gods of Athens, introduction of new gods, and corruption of the youth.  In addition to arguing that Socrates was most pious, and, as the most self-controlled of men, the least likely to corrupt the youth, Xenophon deals with informal political accusations not directly addressed in the Apology of Plato (or Xenophon's own Apology ).  Xenophon defends Socrates against the charge that he led the youth of Athens to despise democracy as a regime, and defends Socrates' association with Critias , the worst of the Thirty Tyrants who briefly ruled Athens in 404-403, and Alcibiades , the brilliant renegade democratic politician and general.  It has often been argued that Xenophon is here responding not to charges in the air at time of the trial of Socrates in 399 BC, but to charges made some years later by the Athenian sophist Polycrates in his Accusation of Socrates .  But Polycrates' work is lost, and our sources for reconstructing it are late and unreliable. The assumption that Xenophon was responding to Polycrates point by point may be driven as much by the traditionally low esteem for Xenophon's literary powers as to any historical influence from Polycrates. The role of Polycrates is one item in the debate over whether Xenophon's treatment of Socrates reflects the historical Socrates, or is a largely fictional contribution to the literary debate about Socrates. This debate is in turn an important element in our understanding the trial of Socrates , and in particular to the debate over whether the religious terms of the official accusation against Socrates (impiety) were a cover for political animosity against him.

Xenophon devotes the rest of the Memorabilia to demonstrating how Socrates benefited his friends and a wide range of other Athenians. It thus consists of episodes, mainly rather short and none more than a few pages in length, in which Socrates engages with a variety of persons: named and unnamed companions, rival teachers, famous and less famous Athenians. A few of the interlocutors appear several times. Typically Xenophon introduces the reason why he is writing about a particular conversation, and he will also occasionally interject a remark into the narrative, or at its conclusion.

Comparison to Plato's dialogues [ edit ] Xenophon's Socrates is more likely to give practical advice than to ask probing philosophical questions, and Xenophon is more interested in defending Socrates than in developing his philosophy.  Where Plato's Socrates emphasizes self-knowledge, Xenophon's Socrates speaks more of self-control. Yet the Memorabilia also contains charming set-pieces (including Socrates' conversation with the glamorous courtesan ( hetaera ) Theodote in III.11, and his sharp exchanges with two of the Thirty Tyrants in I.2).  And Xenophon likely aimed to reach a wider range of readers, many of whom may have welcomed the more down-to-earth advice his Socrates gives.

Influence [ edit ] Xenophon's portrayal of Socrates was influential in antiquity, and helps us understand how various schools of ancient thought made use of Socrates.  The self-control of Xenophon's Socrates is in keeping with his role in inspiring ancient cynicism , which was traditionally said to be founded by Socrates' follower Antisthenes .  It is clear that the Stoics made considerable use of Xenophon's version of the argument from design, and their account of natural law also owed something to Socrates, if not only to Xenophon's Socrates.

Aside from Plato and Aristophanes, Xenophon is the only contemporary of Socrates whose writings on the latter are extant.

Xenophon's account of how Heracles had to choose between Virtue and Vice , a story he attributes to Prodicus , became a popular motif in ancient Greek and Roman culture. It became popular again in the Renaissance .

Translations [ edit ] Xenophon, Memorabilia , trans. Amy L. Bonnette, introd. by Christopher Bruell , Ithaca: Cornell University Press , The Agora Editions, 1994.

Xenophon, "Memoirs of Socrates," in Conversations of Socrates, translated by Hugh Tredennick and Robin Waterfield, edited with new material by Robin Waterfield, pp. 53-216. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1990. [The collection contains all of Xenophon's Socratic works.] Xenophon, Xenophon IV: Memorabilia, Oeconomicus, Symposium, Apology , trans. by E.C. Marchant, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, Loeb Classical Library , 1923.  [Includes ancient Greek text and English translation on facing pages.] Xenophon The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates Edward Bysshe translation 1888 Xenophon, Memorabilia , trans. Henry Graham Dakyns, London: Macmillan, 1897. (In Vol. 3 of The Works of Xenophon in Four Volumes .) link Xenophon, "The Anabasis, or Expedition of Cyrus and the Memorabilia of Socrates", translated by Rev. J.S. Watson, London: George Bell and Sons, Covent Garden, 1875.

Xenophon, "Memoirs of Socrates", translated by Sarah Fielding, Bath: C. Pope, Stall Street, 1762.

References [ edit ] DeFilippo, J. and P. Mitsis.  "Socrates and Stoic Natural Law." 252-271 in Vander Waerdt 1994 (see below).

Dorion, Louis-André, ed.  "Memorables".  Paris, vol. 1 , Introduction and Book 1 (2003); Volume 2, Books II and III (2010); and Volume 3, Book IV 2010. [The best modern edition of the "Memorabilia", with a new edition of the text, new translation, and copious notes--in French.] Gray, Vivienne J.

The Framing of Socrates: The Literary Interpretation of Xenophon's Memorabilia.

Hermes Einzelschriften 79. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1998.

Johnson, David. "Xenophon's Socrates on Justice and the Law." Ancient Philosophy 23 (2003) 255-281. [Counters Morrison, below.] Livingstone, Niall.

A Commentary on Isocrates' Busiris . Brill, 2001. [Rejects the view that Polycrates was Xenophon's source.] McPherran, Mark.

The Religion of Socrates . The Penn State University Press, 1996. [Includes a defense of Xenophon's account of Socratic religion.] Morrison, Donald.  "Xenophon's Socrates on the Just and the Lawful." Ancient Philosophy 15 (1995) 329-347. [Argues that Xenophon's Socrates is a legal positivist.] Pangle, Thomas L.

The Socratic Way of Life: Xenophon's Memorabilia.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018.

Strauss, Leo, Xenophon's Socrates , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1972.

Vander-Waerdt, Paul, ed.

The Socratic Movement , Cornell University Press, 1994. [Fine collection of essays from a variety of perspectives, many on Xenophon's Socrates.] External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Memorabilia (Xenophon) .

Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἀπομνημονεύματα The Henry Graham Dakyns translation of The Memorabilia at Project Gutenberg v t e Works by Xenophon Historical and biographical works Anabasis Cyropaedia Hellenica Agesilaus Constitution of the Lacedaemonians Socratic works and dialogues Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Apology Hiero Short treatises On Horsemanship Hipparchicus Cynegeticus Ways and Means Falsely attributed to Xenophon Constitution of the Athenians ('Old Oligarch') v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Memorabilia_(Xenophon)&oldid=1305457832 " Categories : Socratic dialogues Works by Xenophon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 04:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Memorabilia (Xenophon) 12 languages Add topic

