Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Antiquity Toggle Antiquity subsection 1.1 New Testament 1.2 Early Judeo-Christian 1.3 Roman Empire 1.3.1 Neronian persecution 1.3.2 From Nero to Decius 1.3.2.1 Voluntary martyrdom 1.3.3 Decian persecution 1.3.4 Valerianic persecution 2 Late antiquity Toggle Late antiquity subsection 2.1 Roman Empire 2.1.1 The Great Persecution 2.1.2 Constantinian period 2.1.3 Valentinianic–Theodosian period 2.1.4 Heraclian period 2.2 Sassanian Empire 2.2.1 During the Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628 2.3 Pre-Islamic Arabia 3 Early Middle Ages Toggle Early Middle Ages subsection 3.1 Viking invasion of Europe 3.1.1 Christians of Scotland killed by Vikings 3.2 Caliphates 3.2.1 Rashidun Caliphate 3.2.2 Umayyad Caliphate 3.2.3 Almoravid Caliphate 3.2.4 Abbasid Caliphate 3.3 Byzantine Empire 4 High Middle Ages (1000–1200) Toggle High Middle Ages (1000–1200) subsection 4.1 Fatimid Caliphate 4.2 Seljuk Empire 4.3 Crusades 4.3.1 Albigensian Crusade 4.3.2 Northern (Baltic) crusades 4.4 Ilkhanate 5 Late Middle Ages Toggle Late Middle Ages subsection 5.1 Western Europe 5.2 Mamluk Sultanate 5.3 Timurid Empire 6 Early modern period Toggle Early modern period subsection 6.1 Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation 6.2 China 6.3 French Revolution 6.4 Japan 6.5 Kingdom of Mysore 6.6 Ottoman Empire 6.6.1 Ottoman Albania and Kosovo 7 Modern era (1815 to 1989) Toggle Modern era (1815 to 1989) subsection 7.1 Communist Albania 7.2 Iraq 7.3 Madagascar 7.4 Nazi Germany 7.5 Ottoman Empire 7.6 Turkey 7.7 Soviet Union 7.8 Spain 7.9 United States 7.10 Warsaw Pact 7.11 North Korea 8 Current situation (1989 to the present) 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Christians 40 languages Alemannisch العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Kiswahili Latina Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .  When this tag was added, its readable prose size was 22,000 words.

Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page .

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Greek Christians in 1922, fleeing from their homes in Kharput and moving to Trebizond . In the 1910s and 1920s, the Armenian , Greek , and Assyrian genocides were perpetrated by the Ottoman Empire and its successor state, the Republic of Turkey .

[ 11 ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The persecution of Christians can be traced from the first century of the Christian era to the present day .

Christian missionaries and converts to Christianity have both been targeted for persecution, sometimes to the point of being martyred for their faith , ever since the emergence of Christianity.

Early Christians were persecuted at the hands of both Jews , from whose religion Christianity arose , and the Romans who controlled many of the early centers of Christianity in the Roman Empire . Since the emergence of Christian states in Late Antiquity , Christians have also been persecuted by other Christians due to differences in doctrine which have been declared heretical .

Early in the fourth century , the empire's official persecutions were ended by the Edict of Serdica in 311 and the practice of Christianity legalized by the Edict of Milan in 312. By the year 380, Christians had begun to persecute each other. The schisms of late antiquity and the Middle Ages – including the Rome–Constantinople schisms and the many Christological controversies – together with the later Protestant Reformation provoked severe conflicts between Christian denominations . During these conflicts, members of the various denominations frequently persecuted each other and engaged in sectarian violence . In the 20th century, Christian populations were persecuted, sometimes, they were persecuted to the point of genocide , by various states, including the Ottoman Empire and its successor state, the Republic of Turkey , [ 12 ] which committed the Hamidian massacres , the late Ottoman genocides (comprising the Armenian , Greek , and Assyrian genocides ), [ 13 ] and the Diyarbekir genocide , and atheist states such as those of the former Eastern Bloc .

The persecution of Christians has continued to occur during the 21st century . Christianity is the largest world religion and its adherents live across the globe. Approximately 10% of the world's Christians are members of minority groups which live in non-Christian-majority states.

[ 14 ] The contemporary persecution of Christians includes the official state persecution mostly occurring in countries which are located in Africa and Asia because they have state religions or because their governments and societies practice religious favoritism. Such favoritism is frequently accompanied by religious discrimination and religious persecution .

According to the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom 's 2020 report, Christians in Burma , China , Eritrea , India , Iran , Nigeria , North Korea , Pakistan , Russia , Saudi Arabia , Syria , and Vietnam are persecuted; these countries are labelled "countries of particular concern" by the United States Department of State , because of their governments' engagement in, or toleration of, "severe violations of religious freedom".

[ 15 ] : 2 The same report recommends that Afghanistan , Algeria , Azerbaijan , Bahrain , the Central African Republic , Cuba , Egypt , Indonesia , Iraq , Kazakhstan , Malaysia , Sudan , and Turkey constitute the US State Department's "special watchlist" of countries in which the government allows or engages in "severe violations of religious freedom ".

[ 15 ] : 2 Much of the persecution of Christians in recent times is perpetrated by non-state actors which are labelled "entities of particular concern" by the US State Department, including the Islamist groups Boko Haram in Nigeria , the Houthi movement in Yemen , the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant – Khorasan Province in Pakistan , al-Shabaab in Somalia , the Taliban in Afghanistan , the Islamic State as well as the United Wa State Army and participants in the Kachin conflict in Myanmar .

[ 15 ] : 2 Antiquity [ edit ] Death of Saint Stephen , "the Protomartyr", recounted in Acts 7 , depicted in an engraving by Gustave Doré (published 1866) Crucifixion of Saint Peter by Caravaggio (1600, Cerasi Chapel ) New Testament [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Christians in the New Testament Early Christianity began as a sect among Second Temple Jews . Inter-communal dissension began almost immediately.

[ 16 ] According to the New Testament account, Saul of Tarsus prior to his conversion to Christianity persecuted early Judeo-Christians . 
According to the Acts of the Apostles , a year after the Roman crucifixion of Jesus , Stephen was stoned for what the Jews saw as transgressions of the Jewish law .

[ 17 ] And Saul (also known as Paul ) acquiesced, looking on and witnessing Steven's death.

[ 16 ] Later, Paul begins a listing of his own sufferings after conversion in 2 Corinthians 11:24 "Five times I received from the Jews the forty lashes minus one. Three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned ..." [ 18 ] Early Judeo-Christian [ edit ] In 41 AD, Herod Agrippa , who already possessed the territory of Herod Antipas and Philip (his former colleagues in the Herodian Tetrarchy ), obtained the title of King of the Jews , and in a sense, re-formed the Kingdom of Judea of Herod the Great ( r.

37–4 BC ). Herod Agrippa was reportedly responsible for the persecution in which James the Great lost his life, Saint Peter narrowly escaped and the rest of the apostles took flight.

[ 16 ] After Agrippa's death in 44, the Roman procuratorship began (before 41 they were Prefects in Iudaea Province) and those leaders maintained a neutral peace, until the procurator Porcius Festus died in 62 and the high priest Ananus ben Ananus took advantage of the power vacuum to execute James the Just , then leader of Jerusalem's Christians .

According to the New Testament, Paul was imprisoned on several occasions by the Roman authorities, stoned by Jews and left for dead on one occasion, and was eventually taken to Rome as a prisoner. Peter and other early Christians were also imprisoned and prosecuted. The First Jewish Rebellion led to the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD , the end of Second Temple Judaism (and the subsequent slow rise of Rabbinic Judaism ).

[ 16 ] Claudia Setzer asserts that, "Jews did not see Christians as clearly separate from their own community until at least the middle of the second century" but most scholars place the "parting of the ways" much earlier, with theological separation occurring immediately.

[ 19 ] Second Temple Judaism had allowed more than one way to be Jewish. After the fall of the Temple, one way led to rabbinic Judaism, while another way became Christianity; but Christianity was "molded around the conviction that the Jew, Jesus of Nazareth, was not only the Messiah promised to the Jews, but God's son, offering access to God, and God's blessing to non-Jew as much as, and perhaps eventually more than, to Jews".

[ 20 ] : 189 While Messianic eschatology had deep roots in Judaism, and the idea of the suffering servant, known as Messiah Ephraim, had been an aspect since the time of Isaiah (7th century BCE), in the first century, this idea was seen as being usurped by the Christians. It was then suppressed, and did not make its way back into rabbinic teaching till the seventh century writings of Pesiqta Rabati.

[ 21 ] The traditional view of the separation of Judaism and Christianity has Jewish-Christians fleeing, en masse , to Pella (shortly before the fall of the Temple in 70 AD) as a result of persecution.

[ 22 ] Steven D. Katz says "there can be no doubt that the post-70 situation witnessed a change in the relations of Jews and Christians".

[ 23 ] Judaism sought to reconstitute itself after the disaster which included determining the proper response to Jewish Christianity. The exact shape of this is not directly known but is traditionally alleged to have taken four forms: the circulation of official anti-Christian pronouncements, the issuing of an official ban against Christians attending synagogue, a prohibition against reading heretical writings, and the spreading of the curse against heretics.

[ 23 ] Roman Empire [ edit ] Main articles: Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire and Religious persecution in the Roman Empire § Christianity Neronian persecution [ edit ] A Christian Dirce , by Henryk Siemiradzki (1897, National Museum, Warsaw ) A Christian woman is martyred under Nero in this re-enactment of the myth of Dirce Main article: Neronian persecution The first documented case of imperially supervised persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire begins with Nero (54–68). In the Annals , Tacitus states that Nero blamed Christians for the Great Fire of Rome , and while it is generally believed to be authentic and reliable, some modern scholars have cast doubt on this view, largely because there is no further reference to Nero's blaming of Christians for the fire until the late 4th century.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Suetonius mentions punishments inflicted on Christians, defined as men following a new and malefic superstition, but does not specify the reasons for the punishment; he simply lists the fact together with other abuses put down by Nero.

[ 25 ] : 269 It is widely agreed on that the Number of the beast in the Book of Revelation , adding up to 666, is derived from a gematria of the name of Nero Caesar, indicating that Nero was viewed as an exceptionally evil figure.

[ 26 ] Several Christian sources report that Paul the Apostle and Saint Peter both died during the Neronian persecution.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] From Nero to Decius [ edit ] The Christian Martyrs' Last Prayer by Jean-Léon Gérôme (1863–1883, Walters Art Museum ). A fanciful scene of damnatio ad bestias in ancient Rome's Circus Maximus beneath the Palatine Hill .

In the first two centuries Christianity was a relatively small sect which was not a significant concern of the Emperor.

Rodney Stark estimates there were fewer than 10,000 Christians in the year 100. Christianity grew to about 200,000 by the year 200, which works out to about 0.36% of the population of the empire, and then to almost 2 million by 250, still making up less than 2% of the empire's overall population.

[ 31 ] According to Guy Laurie , the Church was not in a struggle for its existence during its first centuries.

[ 32 ] However, Bernard Green says that, although early persecutions of Christians were generally sporadic, local, and under the direction of regional governors, not emperors, Christians "were always subject to oppression and at risk of open persecution." [ 33 ] Trajan 's policy towards Christians was no different from the treatment of other sects; that is, they would only be punished if they refused to worship the emperor and the gods, but they were not to be sought out.

[ 34 ] Execution of Ignatius of Antioch , reputed to have been killed in Rome under the emperor Trajan , depicted in the Menologion of Basil II , an illuminated manuscript prepared for the emperor Basil II in c.

1000 James L. Papandrea says there are ten emperors generally accepted to have sponsored state-sanctioned persecution of Christians, [ 35 ] though the first empire-wide government-sponsored persecution was not until Decius in 249.

[ 36 ] One early account of a mass killing is the persecution in Lyon in which Christians were purportedly mass-slaughtered by being thrown to wild beasts under the decree of Roman officials for reportedly refusing to renounce their faith according to Irenaeus .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] In the 3rd century, Emperor Severus Alexander 's household contained many Christians, but his successor, Maximinus Thrax , hating this household, ordered that the leaders of the churches should be put to death.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] According to Eusebius, this persecution sent Hippolytus of Rome and Pope Pontian into exile, but other evidence suggests that the persecutions were local to the provinces where they occurred rather than happening under the direction of the Emperor.

[ 41 ] According to two different Christian traditions, Simon bar Kokhba , the leader of the third Jewish revolt against Rome (132–136 AD), who was proclaimed Messiah, persecuted the Christians: Justin Martyr claims that Christians were punished if they did not deny and blaspheme Jesus Christ, while Eusebius asserts that Bar Kokhba harassed them because they refused to join his revolt against the Romans.

[ 42 ] Voluntary martyrdom [ edit ] Woodcut illustration for the 1570 edition of John Foxe 's Book of Martyrs showing the "persecutions of the primitive Church under the heathen tyrants of Rome" and depicting the "sundry kinds of torments devised against the Christians" Some early Christians sought out and welcomed martyrdom.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] According to Droge and Tabor, "in 185 the proconsul of Asia, Arrius Antoninus, was approached by a group of Christians demanding to be executed. The proconsul obliged some of them and then sent the rest away, saying that if they wanted to kill themselves there was plenty of rope available or cliffs they could jump off." [ 45 ] Such enthusiasm for death is found in the letters of Saint Ignatius of Antioch , who was arrested and condemned as a criminal before writing his letters while on the way to execution. Ignatius casts his own martyrdom as a voluntary eucharistic sacrifice to be embraced.

[ 46 ] : 55 "Many martyr acts present martyrdom as a sharp choice that cut to the core of Christian identity – life or death, salvation or damnation, Christ or apostacy..." [ 46 ] : 145 Subsequently, the martyr literature has drawn distinctions between those who were enthusiastically pro-voluntary-martyrdom (the Montanists and Donatists ), those who occupied a neutral, moderate position (the orthodox), and those who were anti-martyrdom (the Gnostics ).

[ 46 ] : 145 The category of voluntary martyr began to emerge only in the third century in the context of efforts to justify flight from persecution.

[ 47 ] The condemnation of voluntary martyrdom is used to justify Clement fleeing the Severan persecution in Alexandria in 202 AD, and the Martyrdom of Polycarp justifies Polycarp's flight on the same grounds. "Voluntary martyrdom is parsed as passionate foolishness" whereas "flight from persecution is patience" and the result a true martyrdom.

[ 46 ] : 155 Daniel Boyarin rejects use of the term "voluntary martyrdom", saying, "if martyrdom is not voluntary, it is not martyrdom".

[ 48 ] G. E. M. de Ste. Croix adds a category of "quasi-voluntary martyrdom": "martyrs who were not directly responsible for their own arrest but who, after being arrested, behaved with" a stubborn refusal to obey or comply with authority.

[ 46 ] : 153 Candida Moss asserts that De Ste. Croix's judgment of what values are worth dying for is modern, and does not represent classical values. According to her there was no such concept as "quasi-volunteer martyrdom" in ancient times.

[ 46 ] : 153 Decian persecution [ edit ] Main article: Decian persecution In the reign of the emperor Decius ( r.

249–251 ), a decree was issued requiring that all residents of the empire should perform sacrifices, to be enforced by the issuing of each person with a libellus certifying that they had performed the necessary ritual.

[ 49 ] It is not known what motivated Decius's decree, or whether it was intended to target Christians, though it is possible the emperor was seeking divine favors in the forthcoming wars with the Carpi and the Goths .

[ 49 ] Christians that refused to publicly offer sacrifices or burn incense to Roman gods were accused of impiety and punished by arrest, imprisonment, torture or execution.

[ 36 ] According to Eusebius, bishops Alexander of Jerusalem , Babylas of Antioch , and Fabian of Rome were all imprisoned and killed.

[ 49 ] The patriarch Dionysius of Alexandria escaped captivity, while the bishop Cyprian of Carthage fled his episcopal see to the countryside.

[ 49 ] The Christian church, despite no indication in the surviving texts that the edict targeted any specific group, never forgot the reign of Decius whom they labelled as that "fierce tyrant".

[ 36 ] After Decius died, Trebonianus Gallus ( r.

251–253 ) succeeded him and continued the Decian persecution for the duration of his reign.

[ 49 ] Valerianic persecution [ edit ] The accession of Trebonianus Gallus's successor Valerian ( r.

253–260 ) ended the Decian persecution.

[ 49 ] In 257 however, Valerian began to enforce public religion. Cyprian of Carthage was exiled and executed the following year, while Pope Sixtus II was also put to death.

[ 49 ] Dionysius of Alexandria was tried, urged to recognize "the natural gods" in the hope his congregation would imitate him, and exiled when he refused.

[ 49 ] Valerian was defeated by the Persians at the Battle of Edessa and himself taken prisoner in 260. According to Eusebius, Valerian's son, co- augustus , and successor Gallienus ( r.

253–268 ) allowed Christian communities to use again their cemeteries and made restitution of their confiscated buildings.

[ 49 ] Eusebius wrote that Gallienus allowed the Christians "freedom of action".

[ 49 ] Late antiquity [ edit ] Roman Empire [ edit ] Execution of Saint Barbara , reputed to have been killed under the emperor Diocletian , depicted in the Menologion of Basil II The Great Persecution [ edit ] Main article: Diocletianic Persecution See also: Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire The Great Persecution, or Diocletianic Persecution, was begun by the senior augustus and Roman emperor Diocletian ( r.

284–305 ) on 23 February 303.

[ 49 ] In the eastern Roman empire, the official persecution lasted intermittently until 313, while in the Western Roman Empire the persecution went unenforced from 306.

[ 49 ] According to Lactantius 's De mortibus persecutorum ("on the deaths of the persecutors"), Diocletian's junior emperor, the caesar Galerius ( r.

293–311 ) pressured the augustus to begin persecuting Christians.

[ 49 ] Eusebius of Caesarea 's Church History reports that imperial edicts were promulgated to destroy churches and confiscate scriptures, and to remove Christian occupants of government positions, while Christian priests were to be imprisoned and required to perform sacrifice in ancient Roman religion .

[ 49 ] In the account of Eusebius, an unnamed Christian man (named by later hagiographers as Euethius of Nicomedia [ el ; es ; it ; sw ] and venerated on 27 February) tore down a public notice of an imperial edict while the emperors Diocletian and Galerius were in Nicomedia ( İzmit ), one of Diocletian's capitals; according to Lactantius, he was tortured and burned alive.

[ 50 ] According to Lactantius, the church at Nicomedia ( İzmit ) was destroyed, while the Optatan Appendix has an account from the praetorian prefecture of Africa involving the confiscation of written materials which led to the Donatist schism .

[ 49 ] According to Eusebius's Martyrs of Palestine and Lactantius's De mortibus persecutorum , a fourth edict in 304 demanded that everyone perform sacrifices, though in the western empire this was not enforced.

[ 49 ] An "unusually philosophical" dialogue is recorded in the trial proceedings of Phileas of Thmuis , bishop of Thmuis in Egypt 's Nile Delta , which survive on Greek papyri from the 4th century among the Bodmer Papyri and the Chester Beatty Papyri of the Bodmer and Chester Beatty libraries and in manuscripts in Latin , Ethiopic , and Coptic languages from later centuries, a body of hagiography known as the Acts of Phileas .

[ 49 ] Phileas was condemned at his fifth trial at Alexandria under Clodius Culcianus [ ru ] , the praefectus Aegypti on 4 February 305 (the 10th day of Mecheir ).

In the western empire, the Diocletianic Persecution ceased with the usurpation by two emperors' sons in 306: that of Constantine, who was acclaimed augustus by the army after his father Constantius I ( r.

293–306 ) died, and that of Maxentius ( r.

306–312 ) who was elevated to augustus by the Roman Senate after the grudging retirement of his father Maximian ( r.

285–305 ) and his co- augustus Diocletian in May 305.

[ 49 ] Of Maxentius, who controlled Italy with his now un-retired father, and Constantine, who controlled Britain , Gaul , and Iberia , neither was inclined to continue the persecution.

[ 49 ] In the eastern empire however, Galerius, now augustus , continued Diocletian's policy.

[ 49 ] Eusebius's Church History and Martyrs of Palestine both give accounts of martyrdom and persecution of Christians, including Eusebius's own mentor Pamphilus of Caesarea , with whom he was imprisoned during the persecution.

[ 49 ] The execution of the patriarch Peter of Alexandria under the emperor Maximinus Daia , depicted in the Menologion of Basil II The execution of the martyrs Luke the Deacon , Mocius the Reader , and Silvanus, bishop of Emesa [ fr ; it ; sw ] , reputed to have been killed under the emperor Maximinus Daia , depicted in the Menologion of Basil II When Galerius died in May 311, he is reported by Lactantius and Eusebius to have composed a deathbed edict – the Edict of Serdica – allowing the assembly of Christians in conventicles and explaining the motives for the prior persecution.

[ 49 ] Eusebius wrote that Easter was celebrated openly.

[ 49 ] By autumn however, Galerius's nephew, former caesar , and co- augustus Maximinus Daia ( r.

310–313 ) was enforcing Diocletian's persecution in his territories in Anatolia and the Diocese of the East in response to petitions from numerous cities and provinces, including Antioch , Tyre , Lycia , and Pisidia .

[ 49 ] Maximinus was also encouraged to act by an oracular pronouncement made by a statue of Zeus Philios set up in Antioch by Theotecnus of Antioch , who also organized an anti-Christian petition to be sent from the Antiochenes to Maximinus, requesting that the Christians there be expelled.

[ 49 ] Among the Christians known to have died in this phase of the persecution are the presbyter Lucian of Antioch , the bishop Methodius of Olympus in Lycia , and Peter , the patriarch of Alexandria . Defeated in a civil war by the augustus Licinius ( r.

308–324 ), Maximinus died in 313, ending the systematic persecution of Christianity as a whole in the Roman Empire.

[ 49 ] Only one martyr is known by name from the reign of Licinius, who issued the Edict of Milan jointly with his ally, co- augustus , and brother-in-law Constantine, which had the effect of resuming the toleration of before the persecution and returning confiscated property to Christian owners.

[ 49 ] The New Catholic Encyclopedia states that "Ancient, medieval and early modern hagiographers were inclined to exaggerate the number of martyrs. Since the title of martyr is the highest title to which a Christian can aspire, this tendency is natural".

[ 51 ] Attempts at estimating the numbers involved are inevitably based on inadequate sources.

[ 52 ] Constantinian period [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire See also: Religious policies of Constantine the Great The Christian church marked the conversion of Constantine the Great as the final fulfillment of its heavenly victory over the "false gods".

[ 53 ] : xxxii The Roman state had always seen itself as divinely directed, now it saw the first great age of persecution, in which the Devil was considered to have used open violence to dissuade the growth of Christianity, at an end.

[ 54 ] The orthodox catholic Christians close to the Roman state represented imperial persecution as an historical phenomenon, rather than a contemporary one.

[ 54 ] According to MacMullan, the Christian histories are colored by this "triumphalism".

[ 55 ] : 4 Peter Leithart says that, "[Constantine] did not punish pagans for being pagans, or Jews for being Jews, and did not adopt a policy of forced conversion".

[ 56 ] : 61 Pagans remained in important positions at his court.

[ 56 ] : 302 He outlawed the gladiatorial shows, destroyed some temples and plundered more, and used forceful rhetoric against non-Christians, but he never engaged in a purge.

[ 56 ] : 302 Maxentius' supporters were not slaughtered when Constantine took the capital; Licinius' family and court were not killed.

[ 56 ] : 304 However, followers of doctrines which were seen as heretical or causing schism were persecuted during the reign of Constantine, the first Christian Roman emperor, and they would be persecuted again later in the 4th century.

[ 57 ] The consequence of Christian doctrinal disputes was generally mutual excommunication, but once Roman government became involved in ecclesiastical politics, rival factions could find themselves subject to "repression, expulsion, imprisonment or exile" carried out by the Roman army.

[ 58 ] : 317 In 312, the Christian sect called Donatists appealed to Constantine to solve a dispute. He convened a synod of bishops to hear the case, but the synod sided against them. The Donatists refused to accept the ruling, so a second gathering of 200 at Arles, in 314, was called, but they also ruled against them. The Donatists again refused to accept the ruling, and proceeded to act accordingly by establishing their own bishop, building their own churches, and refusing cooperation.

[ 58 ] : 317 [ 57 ] : xv This was a defiance of imperial authority, and it produced the same response Rome had taken in the past against such refusals. For a Roman emperor, "religion could be tolerated only as long as it contributed to the stability of the state".

[ 59 ] : 87 Constantine used the army in an effort to compel Donatist' obedience, burning churches and martyring some from 317 – 321.

[ 57 ] : ix, xv Constantine failed in reaching his goal and ultimately conceded defeat. The schism remained and Donatism continued.

[ 58 ] : 318 After Constantine, his youngest son Flavius Julius Constans , initiated the Macarian campaign against the Donatists from 346 – 348 which only succeeded in renewing sectarian strife and creating more martyrs. Donatism continued.

[ 57 ] : xvii The fourth century was dominated by its many conflicts defining orthodoxy versus heterodoxy and heresy. In the Eastern Roman empire, known as Byzantium, the Arian controversy began with its debate of Trinitarian formulas which lasted 56 years.

[ 60 ] : 141 As it moved into the West, the center of the controversy was the "champion of orthodoxy", Athanasius . In 355 Constantius, who supported Arianism, ordered the suppression and exile of Athanasius, expelled the orthodox Pope Liberius from Rome, and exiled bishops who refused to assent to Athanasius's exile.

[ 61 ] In 355, Dionysius , bishop of Mediolanum ( Milan ) was expelled from his episcopal see and replaced by the Arian Christian Auxentius of Milan .

[ 62 ] When Constantius returned to Rome in 357, he consented to allow the return of Liberius to the papacy; the Arian Pope Felix II , who had replaced him, was then driven out along with his followers.

[ 61 ] The last emperor of the Constantinian dynasty , Constantine's half-brother 's son Julian ( r.

361–363 ) opposed Christianity and sought to restore traditional religion, though he did not arrange a general or official persecution.

[ 49 ] Valentinianic–Theodosian period [ edit ] According to the Collectio Avellana , on the death of Pope Liberius in 366, Damasus, assisted by hired gangs of "charioteers" and men "from the arena", broke into the Basilica Julia to violently prevent the election of Pope Ursicinus .

[ 61 ] The battle lasted three days, "with great slaughter of the faithful" and a week later Damasus seized the Lateran Basilica , had himself ordained as Pope Damasus I , and compelled the praefectus urbi Viventius and the praefectus annonae to exile Ursicinus.

[ 61 ] Damasus then had seven Christian priests arrested and awaiting banishment, but they escaped and "gravediggers" and minor clergy joined another mob of hippodrome and amphitheatre men assembled by the pope to attack the Liberian Basilica , where Ursacinus's loyalists had taken refuge.

[ 61 ] According to Ammianus Marcellinus , on 26 October, the pope's mob killed 137 people in the church in just one day, and many more died subsequently.

[ 61 ] The Roman public frequently enjoined the emperor Valentinian the Great to remove Damasus from the throne of Saint Peter, calling him a murderer for having waged a "filthy war" against the Christians.

[ 61 ] In the 4th century, the Terving king Athanaric in c.

375 ordered the Gothic persecution of Christians .

[ 63 ] Athanaric was perturbed by the spread of Gothic Christianity among his followers, and feared for the displacement of Gothic paganism .

It was not until the later 4th century reigns of the augusti Gratian ( r.

367–383 ), Valentinian II ( r.

375–392 ), and Theodosius I ( r.

379–395 ) that Christianity would become the official religion of the empire with the joint promulgation of the Edict of Thessalonica , establishing Nicene Christianity as the state religion and as the state church of the Roman Empire on 27 February 380. After this began state persecution of non-Nicene Christians, including Arian and Nontrinitarian devotees.

[ 64 ] : 267 When Augustine became coadjutor Bishop of Hippo in 395, both Donatist and Catholic parties had, for decades, existed side-by-side, with a double line of bishops for the same cities, all competing for the loyalty of the people.

[ 57 ] : xv [ a ] : 334 Augustine was distressed by the ongoing schism, but he held the view that belief cannot be compelled, so he appealed to the Donatists using popular propaganda, debate, personal appeal, General Councils, appeals to the emperor and political pressure, but all attempts failed.

[ 66 ] : 242, 254 The Donatists fomented protests and street violence, accosted travelers, attacked random Catholics without warning, often doing serious and unprovoked bodily harm such as beating people with clubs, cutting off their hands and feet, and gouging out eyes while also inviting their own martyrdom.

[ 67 ] : 120–121 By 408, Augustine supported the state's use of force against them.

[ 65 ] : 107–116 Historian Frederick Russell says that Augustine did not believe this would "make the Donatists more virtuous" but he did believe it would make them "less vicious".

[ 68 ] : 128 Augustine wrote that there had, in the past, been ten Christian persecutions, beginning with the Neronian persecution, and alleging persecutions by the emperors Domitian , Trajan , "Antoninus" ( Marcus Aurelius ), "Severus" ( Septimius Severus ), and Maximinus ( Thrax ), as well as Decian and Valerianic persecutions, and then another by Aurelian as well as by Diocletian and Maximian.

[ 54 ] These ten persecutions Augustine compared with the 10 Plagues of Egypt in the Book of Exodus .

[ note 1 ] [ 69 ] Augustine did not see these early persecutions in the same light as that of fourth century heretics. In Augustine's view, when the purpose of persecution is to "lovingly correct and instruct", then it becomes discipline and is just.

[ 70 ] : 2 Augustine wrote that "coercion cannot transmit the truth to the heretic, but it can prepare them to hear and receive the truth".

[ 65 ] : 107–116 He said the church would discipline its people out of a loving desire to heal them, and that, "once compelled to come in, heretics would gradually give their voluntary assent to the truth of Christian orthodoxy." [ 68 ] : 115 He opposed the severity of Rome and the execution of heretics.

[ 71 ] : 768 It is his teaching on coercion that has literature on Augustine frequently referring to him as le prince et patriarche de persecuteurs (the prince and patriarch of persecutors).

[ 67 ] : 116 [ 65 ] : 107 Russell says Augustine's theory of coercion "was not crafted from dogma, but in response to a unique historical situation" and is therefore context dependent, while others see it as inconsistent with his other teachings.

[ 68 ] : 125 His authority on the question of coercion was undisputed for over a millennium in Western Christianity , and according to Brown "it provided the theological foundation for the justification of medieval persecution." [ 65 ] : 107–116 Heraclian period [ edit ] Callinicus I , initially a priest and skeuophylax in the Church of the Theotokos of Blachernae [ ka ; ru ] , became patriarch of Constantinople in 693 or 694.

[ 72 ] : 58–59 Having refused to consent to the demolition of a chapel in the Great Palace , the Theotokos ton Metropolitou , and having possibly been involved in the deposition and exile of Justinian II ( r.

685–695, 705–711 ), an allegation denied by the Synaxarion of Constantinople , he was himself exiled to Rome on the return of Justinian to power in 705.

[ 72 ] : 58–59 The emperor had Callinicus immured .

[ 72 ] : 58–59 He is said to have survived forty days when the wall was opened to check his condition, though he died four days later.

[ 72 ] : 58–59 Sassanian Empire [ edit ] Violent persecutions of Christians began in earnest in the long reign of Shapur II ( r.

309–379 ).

[ 73 ] A persecution of Christians at Kirkuk is recorded in Shapur's first decade, though most persecution happened after 341.

[ 73 ] At war with the Roman emperor Constantius II ( r.

337–361 ), Shapur imposed a tax to cover the war expenditure, and Shemon Bar Sabbae , the Bishop of Seleucia-Ctesiphon , refused to collect it.

[ 73 ] Often citing collaboration with the Romans, the Persians began persecuting and executing Christians.

[ 73 ] Passio narratives describe the fate of some Christians venerated as martyrs; they are of varying historical reliability, some being contemporary records by eyewitnesses, others were reliant on popular tradition at some remove from the events.

[ 73 ] An appendix to the Syriac Martyrology of 411 lists the Christian martyrs of Persia , but other accounts of martyrs' trials contain important historical details on the workings of the Sassanian Empire's historical geography and judicial and administrative practices.

[ 73 ] Some were translated into Sogdian and discovered at Turpan .

[ 73 ] Under Yazdegerd I ( r.

399–420 ) there were occasional persecutions, including an instance of persecution in reprisal for the burning of a Zoroastrian fire temple by a Christian priest, and further persecutions occurred in the reign of Bahram V ( r.

420–438 ).

[ 73 ] Under Yazdegerd II ( r.

438–457 ) an instance of persecution in 446 is recorded in the Syriac martyrology Acts of Ādur-hormizd and of Anāhīd .

[ 73 ] Some individual martyrdoms are recorded from the reign of Khosrow I ( r.

531–579 ), but there were likely no mass persecutions.

[ 73 ] While according to a peace treaty of 562 between Khosrow and his Roman counterpart Justinian I ( r.

527–565 ), Persia's Christians were granted the freedom of religion; proselytism was, however, a capital crime.

[ 73 ] By this time the Church of the East and its head, the Catholicose of the East , were integrated into the administration of the empire and mass persecution was rare.

[ 73 ] The Sassanian policy shifted from tolerance of other religions under Shapur I to intolerance under Bahram I and apparently a return to the policy of Shapur until the reign of Shapur II . The persecution at that time was initiated by Constantine 's conversion to Christianity which followed that of Armenian king Tiridates in about 301. The Christians were thus viewed with suspicions of secretly being partisans of the Roman Empire. This did not change until the fifth century when the Church of the East broke off from the Church of the West .

[ 74 ] Zoroastrian elites continued viewing the Christians with enmity and distrust throughout the fifth century with threat of persecution remaining significant, especially during war against the Romans.

[ 75 ] Zoroastrian high priest Kartir , refers in his inscription dated about 280 on the Ka'ba-ye Zartosht monument in the Naqsh-e Rostam necropolis near Zangiabad, Fars , to persecution ( zatan – "to beat, kill") of Christians ("Nazareans n'zl'y and Christians klstyd'n "). Kartir took Christianity as a serious opponent. The use of the double expression may be indicative of the Greek-speaking Christians deported by Shapur I from Antioch and other cities during his war against the Romans.

[ 76 ] Constantine 's efforts to protect the Persian Christians made them a target of accusations of disloyalty to Sasanians. With the resumption of Roman-Sasanian conflict under Constantius II , the Christian position became untenable. Zoroastrian priests targeted clergy and ascetics of local Christians to eliminate the leaders of the church. A Syriac manuscript in Edessa in 411 documents dozens executed in various parts of western Sasanian Empire.

[ 75 ] In 341, Shapur II ordered the persecution of all Christians.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] In response to their subversive attitude and support of Romans, Shapur II doubled the tax on Christians.

Shemon Bar Sabbae informed him that he could not pay the taxes demanded from him and his community. He was martyred and a forty-year-long period of persecution of Christians began. The Council of Seleucia-Ctesiphon gave up choosing bishops since it would result in death. The local mobads – Zoroastrian clerics – with the help of satraps organized slaughters of Christians in Adiabene , Beth Garmae , Khuzistan and many other provinces.

[ 79 ] Yazdegerd I showed tolerance towards Jews and Christians for much of his rule. He allowed Christians to practice their religion freely, demolished monasteries and churches were rebuilt and missionaries were allowed to operate freely. He reversed his policies during the later part of his reign however, suppressing missionary activities.

[ 80 ] Bahram V continued and intensified their persecution, resulting in many of them fleeing to the eastern Roman empire . Bahram demanded their return, beginning the Roman–Sasanian War of 421–422 . The war ended with an agreement of freedom of religion for Christians in Iran with that of Mazdaism in Rome. Meanwhile, Christians suffered destruction of churches, renounced the faith, had their private property confiscated and many were expelled.

[ 81 ] Yazdegerd II had ordered all his subjects to embrace Mazdeism in an attempt to unite his empire ideologically. The Caucasus rebelled to defend Christianity which had become integrated in their local culture, with Armenian aristocrats turning to the Romans for help. The rebels were however defeated in a battle on the Avarayr Plain .

Yeghishe in his The History of Vardan and the Armenian War , pays a tribute to the battles waged to defend Christianity.

[ 82 ] Another revolt was waged from 481 to 483 which was suppressed. However, the Armenians succeeded in gaining freedom of religion among other improvements.

[ 83 ] Accounts of executions for apostasy of Zoroastrians who converted to Christianity during Sasanian rule proliferated from the fifth to early seventh century, and continued to be produced even after collapse of Sasanians. The punishment of apostates increased under Yazdegerd I and continued under successive kings. It was normative for apostates who were brought to the notice of authorities to be executed, although the prosecution of apostasy depended on political circumstances and Zoroastrian jurisprudence. Per Richard E. Payne, the executions were meant to create a mutually recognised boundary between interactions of the people of the two religions and preventing one religion challenging another's viability. Although the violence on Christians was selective and especially carried out on elites, it served to keep Christian communities in a subordinate and yet viable position in relation to Zoroastrianism. Christians were allowed to build religious buildings and serve in the government as long as they did not expand their institutions and population at the expense of Zoroastrianism.

[ 84 ] Khosrow I was generally regarded as tolerant of Christians and interested in the philosophical and theological disputes during his reign.

Sebeos claimed he had converted to Christianity on his deathbed.

John of Ephesus describes an Armenian revolt where he claims that Khusrow had attempted to impose Zoroastrianism in Armenia. The account, however, is very similar to the one of Armenian revolt of 451. In addition, Sebeos does not mention any religious persecution in his account of the revolt of 571.

[ 85 ] A story about Hormizd IV 's tolerance is preserved by the historian al-Tabari . Upon being asked why he tolerated Christians, he replied, "Just as our royal throne cannot stand upon its front legs without its two back ones, our kingdom cannot stand or endure firmly if we cause the Christians and adherents of other faiths, who differ in belief from ourselves, to become hostile to us." [ 86 ] During the Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628 [ edit ] Main article: Sasanian conquest and occupation of Jerusalem Several months after the Persian conquest in AD 614, a riot occurred in Jerusalem, and the Jewish governor of Jerusalem Nehemiah was killed by a band of young Christians along with his "council of the righteous" while he was making plans for the building of the Third Temple . At this time the Christians had allied themselves with the Eastern Roman Empire . Shortly afterward, the events escalated into a full-scale Christian rebellion, resulting in a battle against the Jews and Christians who were living in Jerusalem. In the battle's aftermath, many Jews were killed and the survivors fled to Caesarea, which was still being held by the Persian army.

The Judeo-Persian reaction was ruthless – Persian Sasanian general Xorheam assembled Judeo-Persian troops and went and encamped around Jerusalem and besieged it for 19 days.

[ 87 ] Eventually, digging beneath the foundations of the Jerusalem, they destroyed the wall and on the 19th day of the siege, the Judeo-Persian forces took Jerusalem.

[ 87 ] According to the account of the Armenian ecclesiastic and historian Sebeos , the siege resulted in a total Christian death toll of 17,000, the earliest and thus most commonly accepted figure.

[ 88 ] : 207 Per Strategius, following the conquest between 4,518 to 66,509 Christians were massacred by Jews at the Mamilla Pool .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Israeli archaeologist Ronny Reich estimates a death toll of 60,000 people before the Persian authorities put an end to the killing.

[ 92 ] In 1989, a mass burial grave at Mamilla cave was discovered in by Israeli archeologist Ronny Reich, near the site where Strategius recorded the massacre took place. The human remains were in poor condition containing a minimum of 526 individuals.

[ 93 ] The eyewitness account of Strategius of St. Sabas narrates: "Jews ransomed the Christians from the hands of the Persian soldiers for good money, and slaughtered them with great joy at Mamilla Pool, and it ran with blood." [ 92 ] The Sulha al-Quds , the treaty of Jerusalem's capitulation to Muslim forces in 638, can only be understood in the context of the massacre at Mamilla. In it, the Christian Patriarch Sophronius of Jerusalem required that the Arab ruler Umar protect the people of Jerusalem from the Jews.

[ 92 ] From the many excavations carried out in the Galilee , it is clear that all churches had been destroyed during the period between the Persian invasion and the Arab conquest in 637 . The church at Shave Ziyyon was destroyed and burnt in 614. Similar fate befell churches at Evron , Nahariya , 'Arabe and monastery of Shelomi . The monastery at Kursi was damaged in the invasion.

[ 94 ] Pre-Islamic Arabia [ edit ] See also: Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia and Christian community of Najran In AD 516, tribal unrest broke out in Yemen and several tribal elites fought for power. One of those elites was Joseph Dhu Nuwas or "Yūsuf Asʾar Yathʾar", a Jewish king of the Himyarite Kingdom who is mentioned in ancient south Arabian inscriptions.

Syriac and Byzantine Greek sources claim that he fought his war because Christians in Yemen refused to renounce Christianity. In 2009, a documentary that aired on the BBC defended the claim that the villagers had been offered the choice between conversion to Judaism or death and 20,000 Christians were then massacred by stating that "The production team spoke to many historians over a period of 18 months, among them Nigel Groom , who was our consultant, and Professor Abdul Rahman Al-Ansary , a former professor of archaeology at the King Saud University in Riyadh." [ 95 ] Inscriptions documented by Yousef himself show the great pride that he expressed after killing more than 22,000 Christians in Zafar and Najran .

[ 96 ] Historian Glen Bowersock described this massacre as a "savage pogrom that the Jewish king of the Arabs launched against the Christians in the city of Najran. The king himself reported in excruciating detail to his Arab and Persian allies about the massacres that he had inflicted on all Christians who refused to convert to Judaism." [ 97 ] Early Middle Ages [ edit ] Viking invasion of Europe [ edit ] Viking invasions of European Anglo-Saxon land resulted in massacres and atrocities made by pagan Vikings against Christians.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicles , Viking raiders struck England in 793 and raided Lindisfarne , the monastery that held Saint Cuthbert 's relics, killing the monks and capturing the valuables. The raid marked the beginning of the "Viking Age of Invasion".

[ 100 ] In 793, when the monastery at Lindisfarne , an island off England's eastern coast, was sacked by a Viking raiding party on 8 June and Christian priests and monks were killed and massacred by Viking invaders.

[ 98 ] Lo, it is nearly 350 years that we and our fathers have inhabited this most lovely land, and never before has such a terror appeared as we have now suffered from a pagan race, nor was it thought that such an inroad from the sea could be made. Behold the church of St Cuthbert spattered with the blood of the priests of God, despoiled of all its ornaments.

Archbishop Alcuin of York on the sacking of Lindisfarne and massacre of Christians by Viking polytheist pagans.

[ 98 ] Christians of Scotland killed by Vikings [ edit ] The following year, pagan Vikings sacked the nearby Monkwearmouth–Jarrow Abbey .

[ 99 ] In 795, they once again attacked, this time raiding Iona Abbey off Scotland's west coast.

[ 99 ] This Christian monastery was attacked again in 802 and 806, when 68 Christian people living there were killed. After this devastation, the monastic community at Iona abandoned the site and fled to Kells in Ireland.

[ 101 ] Caliphates [ edit ] Rashidun Caliphate [ edit ] Since they are considered " People of the Book " in the Islamic religion , Christians under Muslim rule were subjected to the status of dhimmi (along with Jews, Samaritans , Gnostics , Mandeans , and Zoroastrians ), which was inferior [ tone ] to the status of Muslims.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Christians and other religious minorities thus faced religious discrimination and persecution in that they were banned from proselytising (for Christians, it was forbidden to evangelize or spread Christianity ) in the lands invaded by the Arab Muslims on pain of death, they were banned from bearing arms, undertaking certain professions, and were obligated to dress differently in order to distinguish themselves from Arabs.

[ 102 ] Under the Islamic law ( sharīʿa ), Non-Muslims were obligated to pay the jizya and kharaj taxes, [ 102 ] [ 103 ] together with periodic heavy ransom levied upon Christian communities by Muslim rulers in order to fund military campaigns, all of which contributed a significant proportion of income to the Islamic states while conversely reducing many Christians to poverty, and these financial and social hardships forced many Christians to convert to Islam .

[ 102 ] Christians unable to pay these taxes were forced to surrender their children to the Muslim rulers as payment who would sell them as slaves to Muslim households where they were forced to convert to Islam .

[ 102 ] According to the tradition of the Syriac Orthodox Church , the Muslim conquest of the Levant was a relief for Christians oppressed by the Western Roman Empire.

[ 103 ] Michael the Syrian , patriarch of Antioch , wrote later that the Christian God had "raised from the south the children of Ishmael to deliver us by them from the hands of the Romans".

[ 103 ] Various Christian communities in the regions of Palestine , Syria , Lebanon, and Armenia resented either the governance of the Western Roman Empire or that of the Byzantine Empire, and therefore preferred to live under more favourable economic and political conditions as dhimmi under the Muslim rulers.

[ 103 ] However, modern historians also recognize that the Christian populations living in the lands invaded by the Arab Muslim armies between the 7th and 10th centuries AD suffered religious persecution , religious violence , and martyrdom multiple times at the hands of Arab Muslim officials and rulers; [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] many were executed under the Islamic death penalty for defending their Christian faith through dramatic acts of resistance such as refusing to convert to Islam, repudiation of the Islamic religion and subsequent reconversion to Christianity , and blasphemy towards Muslim beliefs .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] When Amr ibn al-As conquered Tripoli in 643, he forced the Jewish and Christian Berbers to give their wives and children as slaves to the Arab army as part of their jizya .

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Around the year 666 C.E Uqba ibn Nafi “conquered the southern Tunisian cities... slaughtering all the Christians living there." [ 110 ] Muslim sources report him waging countless raids, often ending with the complete ransacking and mass enslavement of cities.

[ 111 ] Archaeological evidence from North Africa in the region of Cyrenaica points to the destruction of churches along the route the Islamic conquerors followed in the late seventh century, and the remarkable artistic treasures buried along the routes leading to the North of Spain by fleeing Visigoths and Hispano-Romans during the early eighth century consist largely of religious and dynastic paraphernalia that the Christian inhabitants obviously wanted to protect from Muslim looting and desecration.

[ 112 ] Umayyad Caliphate [ edit ] Roderick is venerated as one of the Martyrs of Córdoba According to the Ḥanafī school of Islamic law ( sharīʿa ), the testimony of a Non-Muslim (such as a Christian or a Jew) was not considered valid against the testimony of a Muslim in legal or civil matters. Historically, in Islamic culture and traditional Islamic law, Muslim women have been forbidden from marrying Christian or Jewish men , whereas Muslim men have been permitted to marry Christian or Jewish women [ 113 ] [ 114 ] ( see : Interfaith marriage in Islam ). Christians under Islamic rule had the right to convert to Islam or any other religion, while conversely a murtad , or an apostate from Islam , faced severe penalties or even hadd , which could include the death penalty .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] In general, Christians subject to Islamic rule were allowed to practice their religion with some notable limitations stemming from the apocryphal Pact of Umar . This treaty, supposedly enacted in 717 AD, forbade Christians from publicly displaying the cross on church buildings, from summoning congregants to prayer with a bell, from re-building or repairing churches and monasteries after they had been destroyed or damaged, and imposed other restrictions relating to occupations, clothing, and weapons.

[ 115 ] The Umayyad Caliphate persecuted many Berber Christians in the 7th and 8th centuries AD, who slowly converted to Islam.

[ 116 ] In Umayyad al-Andalus (the Iberian Peninsula ), the Mālikī school of Islamic law was the most prevalent.

[ 105 ] The martyrdoms of forty-eight Christian martyrs that took place in the Emirate of Córdoba between 850 and 859 AD [ 117 ] are recorded in the hagiographical treatise written by the Iberian Christian and Latinist scholar Eulogius of Córdoba .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] The Martyrs of Córdoba were executed under the rule of Abd al-Rahman II and Muhammad I , and Eulogius' hagiography describes in detail the executions of the martyrs for capital violations of Islamic law, including apostasy and blasphemy .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] After the Arab conquests, a number of Christian Arab tribes suffered enslavement and forced conversion.

[ 118 ] In the early eighth century under the Umayyads, 63 out of a group of 70 Christian pilgrims from Iconium were captured, tortured, and executed under the orders of the Arab Governor of Ceaserea for refusing to convert to Islam (seven were forcibly converted to Islam under torture). Soon afterwards, sixty more Christian pilgrims from Amorium were crucified in Jerusalem.

[ 119 ] Almoravid Caliphate [ edit ] The Almohads wreaked enormous destruction on the Christian population of Iberia. Tens of thousands of the native Christians in Iberia (Hispania) were deported from their ancestral lands to Africa by the Almoravids and Almohads. They suspected that the Christians could pose as a fifth column that could potentially help their coreligionists in the north of Iberia. Many Christians died en route to north Africa during these expulsions.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] Christians under the Almoravids suffered persecutions and mass expulsions to Africa. In 1099 the Almoravids sacked the great church of the city of Granada. In 1101 Christians fled from the city of Valencia to the Catholic kingdoms. In 1106 the Almoravids deported Christians from Malaga to Africa. In 1126, after a failed Christian rebellion in Granada, the Almoravids expelled the city's entire Christian population to Africa. And in 1138, Ibn Tashufin forcibly took many thousands of Christians with him to Africa.

[ 122 ] The oppressed Mozarabs sent emissaries to the king of Aragon, Alphonso 1st le Batailleur (1104–1134), asking him to come to their rescue and deliver them from the Almoravids. Following the raid the king of Aragon launched in Andalusia in 1125–26 in responding to the pleas of Grenada's Mozarabs, the latter were deported en masse to Morocco in the fall of 1126.

[ 123 ] Another wave of expulsions to Africa took place 11 years later and as a result very very few Christians were left in Andalusia. Whatever was left of the Christian Catholic population in Granada was exterminated in the aftermath of a revolt against the Almohads in 1164. The Caliph Abu Yaqub Yusuf boasted that he had left no church or synagogue standing in al-Andalus.

[ 121 ] Muslim clerics in Al Andalus viewed Christians and Jews as unclean and dirty and feared that too much contact with them would contaminate Muslims. In Seville the faqih Ibn Abdun issued these regulations segregating people of the two faiths: [ 124 ] A Muslim must not massage a Jew or a Christian nor throw away his refuse nor clean his latrines. The Jew and the Christian are better fitted for such trades, since they are the trades of those who are vile. A Muslim should not attend to the animal of a Jew or of a Christian, nor serve him as a muleteer [neither Catholics nor Jews could ride horses; only Muslims could], nor hold his stirrup. If any Muslim is known to do this, he should be denounced.… No … [unconverted] Jew or Christian must be allowed to dress in the costume of people of position, of a jurist, or of a worthy man [this provision echoes the Pact of Umar]. They must on the contrary be abhorred and shunned and should not be greeted with the formula, “Peace be with you,” for the devil has gained mastery over them and has made them forget the name of God. They are the devil's party, “and indeed the devil's party are the losers” (Qur’an 57:22). They must have a distinguishing sign by which they are recognized to their shame [emphasis added].

Abbasid Caliphate [ edit ] The Abbasid Caliphate was less tolerant of Christianity than had been the Umayyad caliphs .

[ 103 ] Nonetheless, Christian officials continued to be employed in the government, and the Christians of the Church of the East were often tasked with the translation of Ancient Greek philosophy and Greek mathematics .

[ 103 ] The writings of al-Jahiz attacked Christians for being too prosperous, and indicates they were able to ignore even those restrictions placed on them by the state.

[ 103 ] In the late 9th century, the patriarch of Jerusalem , Theodosius , wrote to his colleague the patriarch of Constantinople Ignatios that "they are just and do us no wrong nor show us any violence".

[ 103 ] Elias of Heliopolis , having moved to Damascus from Heliopolis ( Ba'albek ), was accused of apostasy from Christianity after attending a party held by a Muslim Arab, and was forced to flee Damascus for his hometown, returning eight years later, where he was recognized and imprisoned by the " eparch ", probably the jurist al-Layth ibn Sa'd .

[ 72 ] : 34 After refusing to convert to Islam under torture, he was brought before the Damascene emir and relative of the caliph al-Mahdi ( r.

775–785 ), Muhammad ibn-Ibrahim , who promised good treatment if Elias would convert.

[ 72 ] : 34 On his repeated refusal, Elias was tortured and beheaded and his body burnt, cut up, and thrown into the river Chrysorrhoes (the Barada ) in 779 AD.

[ 72 ] : 34 Raid on the Monastery of Zobe and the death of hegumenos Michael and his 36 brothers, depicted in the Menologion of Basil II .

According to the Synaxarion of Constantinople , the hegumenos Michael of Zobe and thirty-six of his monks at the Monastery of Zobe near Sebasteia ( Sivas ) were killed by a raid on the community.

[ 72 ] : 70 The perpetrator was the " emir of the Hagarenes ", "Alim", probably Ali ibn-Sulayman , an Abbasid governor who raided Roman territory in 785 AD.

[ 72 ] : 70 Bacchus the Younger was beheaded in Jerusalem in 786–787 AD. Bacchus was Palestinian, whose family, having been Christian, had been converted to Islam by their father.

[ 72 ] : 29–30 Bacchus however, remained crypto-Christian and undertook a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, upon which he was baptized and entered the monastery of Mar Saba .

[ 72 ] : 29–30 Reunion with his family prompted their reconversion to Christianity and Bacchus's trial and execution for apostasy under the governing emir Harthama ibn A'yan .

[ 72 ] : 29–30 After the 838 Sack of Amorium , the hometown of the emperor Theophilos ( r.

829–842 ) and his Amorian dynasty , the caliph al-Mu'tasim ( r.

833–842 ) took more than forty Roman prisoners.

[ 72 ] : 41–42 These were taken to the capital, Samarra , where after seven years of theological debates and repeated refusals to convert to Islam, they were put to death in March 845 under the caliph al-Wathiq ( r.

842–847 ).

[ 72 ] : 41–42 Within a generation they were venerated as the 42 Martyrs of Amorium . According to their hagiographer Euodius, probably writing within a generation of the events, the defeat at Amorium was to be blamed on Theophilos and his iconoclasm.

[ 72 ] : 41–42 According to some later hagiographies, including one by one of several Middle Byzantine writers known as Michael the Synkellos, among the forty-two were Kallistos, the doux of the Koloneian thema , and the heroic martyr Theodore Karteros.

[ 72 ] : 41–42 During the 10th-century phase of the Arab–Byzantine wars , the victories of the Romans over the Arabs resulted in mob attacks on Christians, who were believed to sympathize with the Roman state.

[ 103 ] According to Bar Hebraeus , the catholicus of the Church of the East, Abraham III ( r.

906–937 ), wrote to the grand vizier that "we Nestorians are the friends of the Arabs and pray for their victories".

[ 103 ] The attitude of the Nestorians "who have no other king but the Arabs", he contrasted with the Greek Orthodox Church, whose emperors he said "had never cease to make war against the Arabs.

[ 103 ] Between 923 and 924, several Orthodox churches were destroyed in mob violence in Ramla , Ascalon , Caesarea Maritima , and Damascus .

[ 103 ] In each instance, according to the Arab Melkite Christian chronicler Eutychius of Alexandria , the caliph al-Muqtadir ( r.

908–932 ) contributed to the rebuilding of ecclesiastical property.

[ 103 ] During the late 700s in the Abbasid Empire, Muslims destroyed two churches and a monastery near Bethlehem and slaughtered its monks. In 796, Muslims burned another twenty monks to death. In the years 809 and 813 AD, multiple monasteries, convents, and churches were attacked in and around Jerusalem; both male and female Christians were gang raped and massacred. In 929, on Palm Sunday, another wave of atrocities broke out; churches were destroyed and Christians slaughtered.

al-Maqrizi records that in the year 936, “the Muslims in Jerusalem made a rising and burnt down the Church of the Resurrection [the Holy Sepulchre] which they plundered, and destroyed all they could of it".

[ 125 ] According to the Synaxarion of Constantinople , Dounale-Stephen , having journeyed to Jerusalem, continued his pilgrimage to Egypt, where he was arrested by the local emir and, refusing to relinquish his beliefs, died in jail c.

950 .

[ 72 ] : 33–34 When Abd Allah ibn Tahir went to besiege Kaisum, the fortress of Nasr: "There had been great oppression in the whole country because the inhabitants [christian dhimmis] were forced to bring provisions to the camp; and in every place it was a time of famine and a dearth of all sorts of things." In order to rotect themselves from their attackers cannons, Nasr ibn Shabath and his Arab troops used a stratagem that had already been tried at the siege of Balis (using Christian women and children as human shields): they forced Christian women and their children to mount the walls so that they were exposed as targets for the Persians. Nasr used the same tactics at the second siege of Kaisum.

[ 126 ] Byzantine Empire [ edit ] George Limnaiotes, a monk on Mount Olympus known only from the Synaxarion of Constantinople and other synaxaria , was supposed to have been 95 years old when he was tortured for his iconodulism .

[ 72 ] : 43 In the reign of Leo III the Isaurian ( r.

717–741 ), he was mutilated by rhinotomy and his head burnt.

[ 72 ] : 43 Germanus I of Constantinople , a son of the patrikios Justinian, a courtier of the emperor Heraclius ( r.

610–641 ), having been castrated and enrolled in the cathedral clergy of Hagia Sophia when his father was executed in 669, was later bishop of Cyzicus and then patriarch of Constantinople from 715.

[ 72 ] : 45–46 In 730, in the reign of Leo III ( r.

717–741 ), Germanus was deposed and banished, dying in exile at Plantanion ( Akçaabat ).

[ 72 ] : 45–46 Leo III also exiled the monk John the Psichaites, an iconodule, to Cherson , where he remained until after the emperor's death.

[ 72 ] : 57 According only to the Synaxarion of Constantinople , the clerics Hypatios and Andrew from the Thracesian thema were, during the persecution of Leo III, brought to the capital, jailed and tortured.

[ 72 ] : 49 The Synaxarion claims that they had the embers of burnt icons applied to their heads, subjected to other torments, and then dragged though the Byzantine streets to their public execution in the area of the city's VIIth Hill , the so-called Medieval Greek : ξηρόλοφος , romanized : Xērólophos , lit.

'dry hill' near the Forum of Arcadius .

[ 72 ] : 49 Andrew of Crete was beaten and imprisoned in Constantinople after having debated with the iconoclast emperor Constantine V ( r.

741–775 ), possibly in 767 or 768, and then abused by the Byzantines as he was dragged through the city, dying of blood loss when a fisherman cut off his foot in the Forum of the Ox .

[ 72 ] : 19 The church of Saint Andrew in Krisei was named after him, though his existence is doubted by scholars.

[ 72 ] : 19 Having defeated and killed the emperor Nikephoros I ( r.

802–811 ) at the Battle of Pliska in 811, the First Bulgarian Empire 's khan , Krum , also put to death a number of Roman soldiers who refused to renounce Christianity, though these martyrdoms, known only from the Synaxarion of Constantinople , may be entierely legendary.

[ 72 ] : 66–67 In 813 the Bulgarians invaded the thema of Thrace , led by Krum, and the city of Adrianople ( Edirne ) was captured.

[ 72 ] : 66 Krum's successor Dukum died shortly after Krum himself, being succeeded by Ditzevg , who killed Manuel the archbishop of Adrianople in January 815.

[ 72 ] : 66 According to the Synaxarion of Constantinople and the Menologion of Basil II , Ditzevg's own successor Omurtag killed some 380 Christians later that month.

[ 72 ] : 66 The victims included the archbishop of Develtos , George , and the bishop of Thracian Nicaea, Leo, as well as two strategoi called John and Leo. Collectively these are known as the Martyrs of Adrianople .

[ 72 ] : 66 The Byzantine monk Makarios, of the Pelekete monastery in Bithynia, having already refused an enviable position at court offered by the iconoclast emperor Leo IV the Khazar ( r.

775–780 ) in return for the repudiation of his iconodulism, was expelled from the monastery by Leo V the Armenian ( r.

813–820 ), who also imprisoned and exiled him.

[ 72 ] : 65 The patriarch Nikephoros I of Constantinople dissented from the iconoclast Council of Constantinople of 815 and was exiled by Leo V as a result.

[ 72 ] : 74–75 He died in exile in 828.

[ 72 ] : 74–75 In spring 816, the Constantinopolitan monk Athanasios of Paulopetrion was tortured and exiled for his iconophilism by the emperor Leo V.

[ 72 ] : 28 In 815, during the reign of Leo V, having been appointed hegoumenos of the Kathara Monastery in Bithynia by the emperor Nikephoros I, John of Kathara was exiled and imprisoned first in Pentadactylon, a stronghold in Phrygia , and then in the fortress of Kriotauros in the Bucellarian thema .

[ 72 ] : 55–56 In the reign of Michael II he was recalled, but exiled again under Theophilos, being banished to Aphousia ( Avşa ) where he died, probably in 835.

[ 72 ] : 55–56 Eustratios of Agauros, [ 127 ] a monk and hegumenos of the Agauros Monastery at the foot of Mount Trichalikos, near Prusa 's Mount Olympus in Bithynia, was forced into exile by the persecutions of Leo V and Theophilos ( r.

829–842 ).

[ 72 ] : 37–38 Leo V and Theophilos also persecuted and exiled Hilarion of Dalmatos , the son of Peter the Cappadocian , who had been made hegumenos of the Dalmatos Monastery by the patriarch Nikephoros I.

[ 72 ] : 48–49 Hilarion was allowed to return to his post only in the regency of Theodora .

[ 72 ] : 48–49 The same emperors also persecuted Michael Synkellos , an Arab monk of the Mar Saba monastery in Palestine who, as the syncellus of the patriarch of Jerusalem, had travelled to Constantinople on behalf of the patriarch Thomas I .

[ 72 ] : 70–71 On the Triumph of Orthodoxy, Michael declined the ecumenical patriarchate and became instead the hegumenos of the Chora Monastery .

[ 72 ] : 70–71 According to Theophanes Continuatus , the Armenian monk and iconographer of Khazar origin Lazarus Zographos refused to cease painting icons in the second official iconoclast period.

[ 72 ] : 61–62 Theophilos had him tortured and his hands burned with heated irons, though he was released at the intercession of the empress Theodora and hidden at the Monastery of John the Baptist tou Phoberou , where he was able to paint an image of the patron saint.

[ 72 ] : 61–62 After the death of Theophilos, and the Triumph of Orthodoxy, Lazarus re-painted the representation of Christ on the Chalke Gate of the Great Palace of Constantinople .

[ 72 ] : 61–62 Symeon Stylites of Lesbos was persecuted for his iconodulism in the second period of official iconoclasm. He was imprisoned and exiled, returning to Lesbos only after the vernation of icons was restored in 842.

[ 72 ] : 32–33 The bishop George of Mytilene , who may have been Symeon's brother, was exiled from Constantinople in 815 on account of his iconophilia. He spent the last six years of his life in exile on an island, probably one of the Princes' Islands , dying in 820 or 821.

[ 72 ] : 42–43 George's relics were taken to Mytilene to be venerated after the restoration of iconodulism to orthodoxy under the patriarch Methodios I , during which the hagiography of George was written.

[ 72 ] : 42–43 Miniature depicting the execution of the patriarch Euthymius of Sardis under the Byzantine Emperor Michael II , from an illuminated manuscript of the Madrid Skylitzes (12th century).

The bishop Euthymius of Sardis was the victim of several iconoclast Christian persecutions. Euthymius had previously been exiled to Pantelleria by the emperor Nikephoros I ( r.

802–811 ), recalled in 806, led the iconodule resistance against Leo V ( r.

813–820 ), and exiled again to Thasos in 814.

[ 72 ] : 38 After his recall to Constantinople in the reign of Michael II ( r.

820–829 ), he was again imprisoned and exiled to Saint Andrew's Island, off Cape Akritas ( Tuzla , Istanbul).

[ 72 ] : 38 According to the hagiography of by the patriarch Methodios I of Constantinople , who claimed to have shared Euthymius's exile and been present at his death, Theoktistos and two other imperial officials personally whipped Euthymius to death on account of his iconodulism ; Theoktistos was active in the persecution of iconodules under the iconoclast emperors, but later championed the iconodule cause.

[ 72 ] : 38, 68–69 [ 128 ] : 218 Theoktistos was later venerated as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church , listed in the Synaxarion of Constantinople .

[ 128 ] : 217–218 The last of the iconoclast emperors, Theophilos ( r.

829–842 ), was posthumously rehabilitated by the iconodule Orthodox Church on the intervention of his wife Theodora , who claimed he had had a deathbed conversion to iconodulism in the presence of Theoktistos and had given 60 Byzantine pounds of gold to each of his victims in his will.

[ 128 ] : 219 The rehabilitation of the iconoclast emperor was a precondition of his widow for convoking the Council of Constantinople in March 843, at which the veneration of icons was restored to orthodoxy and which became celebrated as the Triumph of Orthodoxy .

[ 128 ] : 219 Evaristos, a relative of Theoktistos Bryennios and a monk of the Monastery of Stoudios , was exiled to the Thracian Chersonese ( Gallipoli peninsula ) for his support of his hegumenos Nicholas and his patron the patriarch Ignatios of Constantinople when the latter was deposed by Photios I in 858.

[ 72 ] : 41, 72–73 Both Nicholas and Evaristos went into exile.

[ 72 ] : 41, 72–73 Only after many years was Evaristos allowed to return to Constantinople to found a monastery of his own.

[ 72 ] : 41, 72–73 The hegumenos Nicholas, who had accompanied Evaristos to the Chersonese, was restored to his post at the Stoudios Monastery.

[ 72 ] : 72–73 A partisan of Ignatios of Constantinople and a refugee from the Muslim conquest of Sicily , the monk Joseph the Hymnographer was banished to Cherson from Constantinople on the elevation of Ignatios's rival Photios in 858. Only after the end of Photios's patriarchate was Joseph allowed to return to the capital and become the cathedral skeuophylax of Hagia Sophia.

[ 72 ] : 57–58 Euthymius, a monk, senator , and synkellos favored by Leo VI ( r.

870–912 ), was first made a hegumenos and then in 907 patriarch of Constantinople by the emperor. When Leo VI died and Nicholas Mystikos was recalled to the patriarchal throne, Euthymius was exiled.

[ 72 ] : 38–40 High Middle Ages (1000–1200) [ edit ] See also: History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance Fatimid Caliphate [ edit ] See also: Destruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre The caliph al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah ( r.

996–1021 ) engaged in a persecution of Christians.

[ 129 ] Al-Hakim was "half-insane", and had perpetrated the only general persecution of Christians by Muslims until the Crusades.

[ 130 ] Al-Hakim's mother was a Christian, and he had been raised mainly by Christians, and even through the persecution al-Hakim employed Christian ministers in his government.

[ 131 ] Between 1004 and 1014, the caliph produced legislation to confiscate ecclesiastical property and burn crosses; later, he ordered that small mosques be built atop church roofs, and later still decreed that churches were to be burned.

[ 131 ] The caliph's Jewish and Muslim subjects were subjected to similarly arbitrary treatment.

[ 131 ] As part of al-Hakim's persecution, thirty thousand churches were reportedly destroyed, and in 1009 the caliph ordered the demolition of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, on the pretext that the annual Holy Fire miracle on Easter was a fake.

[ 131 ] The persecution of al-Hakim and the demolition of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre prompted Pope Sergius IV to issue a call for soldiers to expel the Muslims from the Holy Land, while European Christians engaged in a retaliatory persecution of Jews, whom they conjectured were in some way responsible for al-Hakim's actions.

[ 132 ] In the second half of the eleventh century, pilgrims brought home news of how the rise of the Turks and their conflict with the Egyptians increased the persecution of Christian pilgrims.

[ 132 ] In 1013, at the intervention of the emperor Basil II ( r.

960–1025 ), Christians were given permission to leave Fatimid territory.

[ 131 ] In 1016 however, the caliph was proclaimed divine, alienating his Muslim subjects by banning the hajj and the fast of ramadan , and causing him to again favor the Christians.

[ 131 ] In 1017, al-Hakim issued an order of toleration regarding Christians and Jews, while the following year confiscated ecclesiastical property was returned to the Church, including the construction materials seized by the authorities from demolished buildings.

[ 131 ] In 1027, the emperor Constantine VIII ( r.

962–1028 ) concluded a treaty with Salih ibn Mirdas , the emir of Aleppo , allowing the emperor to repair the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and permitting the Christians forced to convert to Islam under al-Hakim to return to Christianity.

[ 131 ] Though the treaty was re-confirmed in 1036, actual building on the shrine began only in the later 1040s, under the emperor Constantine IX Monomachos ( r.

1042–1055 ).

[ 131 ] According to al-Maqdisi , the Christians seemed largely in control of the Holy Land, and the emperor himself was rumored, according to Nasir Khusraw , to have been among the many Christian pilgrims that came to the Holy Sepulchre.

[ 131 ] Seljuk Empire [ edit ] Sultan Alp Arslan pledged: “I shall consume with the sword all those people who venerate the cross, and all the lands of the Christians shall be enslaved.” [ 133 ] Alp Arslan ordered the Turks: [ 134 ] Henceforth all of you be like lion cubs and eagle young, racing through the countryside day and night, slaying the Christians and not sparing any mercy on the Roman nation It was said that “the emirs spread like locusts, over the face of the land,” [ 135 ] invading every corner of Anatolia, sacking some of ancient Christianity's most important cities, including Ephesus, home of Saint John the Evangelist; Nicaea, where Christendom's creed was formulated in 325; and Antioch, the original see of Saint Peter, and enslaved many.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Destruction and desecration of Churches became very widespread during the Turkic invasions of Anatolia which caused enormous damage to the ecclesiastical foundations throughout Asia minor: [ 139 ] Even before the battle of Manzikert, Turkish raids resulted in the pillaging of the famous churches of St. Basil at caesareia and of the Archangel Michael at Chonae. In the decade following 1071 the destruction of churches and the flight of the clergy became widespread. churches were often pillaged and destroyed. The churches of St. Phocas in Sinope and Nicholas at Myra, both important centers of pilgrimage, were destroyed. The monasteries of Mt. Latrus, Strobilus, and elanoudium on the western coast were sacked and the monks driven out during the early invasions, so that the monastic foundations in this area were completely abandoned until the Byzantine reconquest and the extensive support of successive Byzantine emperors once more reconstituted them. Greeks were forced to surround the church of St. John at Ephesus with walls to protect it from the Turks. The disruption of active religious life in the Cappadocian cave-monastic communies is also indicated for the twelfth century.

News of the great tribulation and persecutions of the eastern Christians reached European Christians in the west in the few years after the battle of Manzikert. A Frankish eyewitness says: "Far and wide they [Muslim Turks] ravaged cities and castles together with their settlements. Churches were razed down to the ground. Of the clergyman and monks whom they captured, some were slaughtered while others were with unspeakable wickedness given up, priests and all, to their dire dominion and nuns—alas for the sorrow of it!—were subjected to their lusts." [ 140 ] In a letter to count Robert of Flanders, Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos writes: [ 141 ] The holy places are desecrated and destroyed in countless ways. Noble matrons and their daughters, robbed of everything, are violated one after another, like animals. Some [of their attackers] shamelessly place virgins in front of their own mothers and force them to sing wicked and obscene songs until they have finished having their ways with them... men of every age and description, boys, youths, old men, nobles, peasants and what is worse still and yet more distressing, clerics and monks and woe of unprecedented woes, even bishops are defiled with the sin of sodomy and it is now trumpeted abroad that one bishop has succumbed to this abominable sin.

In a poem, Malik Danishmend boasts: "I am Al Ghazi Danishmend, the destroyer of churches and towers". Destruction and pillaging of churches figure prominently in his poem. Another part of the poem talks about the simultaneous conversion of 5,000 people to Islam and the murder of 5,000 others.

[ 142 ] Michael the Syrian wrote: “As the Turks were ruling the lands of Syria and Palestine, they inflicted injuries on Christians who went to pray in Jerusalem, beat them, pillaged them, and levied the poll tax [jizya]. Every time they saw a caravan of Christians, particularly of those from Rome and the lands of Italy, they made every effort to cause their death in diverse ways".

[ 143 ] Such was the fate German pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1064. According to one of the surviving pilgrims: [ 144 ] Accompanying this journey was a noble abbess of graceful body and of a religious outlook. Setting aside the cares of the sisters committed to her and against the advice of the wise, she undertook this great and dangerous pilgrimage. The pagans captured her, and the sight of all, these shameless men raped her until she breathed her last, to the dishonor of all Christians. Christ's enemies performed such abuses and others like them on the christians.

Crusades [ edit ] After the Seljuks invaded Anatolia and the Levant, every Anatolian village they controlled along the route to Jerusalem began exacting tolls on Christian pilgrims. In principle the Seljuks allowed Christian pilgrims access to Jerusalem, but they often imposed huge ransoms and condoned local attacks against Christians. Many pilgrims were seized and sold into slavery while others were tortured (seemingly for entertainment). Soon only very large, well-armed and wealthy groups would dare attempt a pilgrimage, and even so, many died and many more turned back. The pilgrims that survived these extremely dangerous journeys, “returned to the West weary and impoverished, with a dreadful tale to tell.” [ 145 ] [ 146 ] In the year 1064, 7,000 pilgrims led by Bishop Gunther of Bamberg were ambushed by Muslims near Caesarea Maritima , and two-thirds of the pilgrims were slaughtered.

[ 147 ] In the Middle Ages , the crusades were promoted as defensive response of Christianity against persecution of Eastern Christianity in the Levant.

[ 132 ] Western Catholic contemporaries believed the First Crusade was a movement against Muslim attacks on Eastern Christians and Christian sites in the Holy Land.

[ 132 ] In the mid-11th century, relations between the Byzantine Empire and the Fatimid Caliphate and between Christians and Muslims were peaceful, and there had not been persecution of Christians since the death of al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah.

[ 129 ] As a result of the migration of Turkic peoples into the Levant and the Seljuk Empire 's wars with the Fatimid Caliphate in the later 11th century, reports of Christian pilgrims increasingly mentioned persecution of Christians there.

[ 132 ] Similarly, accounts sent to the West of the Byzantines' medieval wars with various Muslim states alleged persecutions of Christians and atrocities against holy places.

[ 148 ] Western soldiers were encouraged to take up soldiering against the empire's Muslim enemies; a recruiting bureau was even established in London.

[ 132 ] After the 1071 Battle of Manzikert , the sense of Byzantine distress increased and Pope Gregory VII suggested that he himself would ride to the rescue at the head of an army, claiming Christians were being "slaughtered like cattle".

[ 148 ] In the 1090s, the emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( r.

1081–1118 ) issued appeals for help against the Seljuks to western Europe.

[ 148 ] In 1091 his ambassadors told the king of Croatia Muslims were destroying sacred sites, while his letter to Robert I, Count of Flanders , deliberately described emotively the rape and maltreatment of Christians and the sacrilege of the Jerusalem shrines.

[ 148 ] Pope Urban II , who convoked the First Crusade at the 1095 Council of Clermont , spoke of the defense of his co-religionists in the Levant and the protection of the Christian holy places, while ordinary crusaders are also known to have been motivated by the notion of persecution of Christians by Muslims.

[ 132 ] According to Fulcher of Chartres , the pope described his holy wars as being contra barbaros , 'against the barbarians', while the pope's own letters indicate that the Muslims were barbarians fanatically persecuting Christians.

[ 149 ] The same idea, expressed in similar language, was evident in the writings of the bishop Gerald of Cahors , the abbot Guibert of Nogent , the priest Peter Tudebode , and the monk Robert of Reims .

[ 149 ] Outside the clergy, the Gesta Francorum 's author likewise described the Crusaders' opponents as persecuting barbarians, language not used for non-Muslim non-Christians.

[ 149 ] These authors, together with Albert of Aix and Baldric of Dol , all referred to the Arabs, Saracens, and Turks as barbarae nationes , 'barbarian races'.

[ 149 ] Peter the Venerable , William of Tyre , and The Song of Roland all took the view that Muslims were barbarians, and in calling for the Third Crusade , Pope Gregory VIII expounded on the Muslim threat from Saladin , accusing the Muslims of being "barbarians thirsting for the blood of Christians".

[ 149 ] In numerous instances Pope Innocent III called on the Catholics to defend the Holy Land in a holy war against the impugnes barbariem paganorum , 'attacks of the pagan barbarians'.

[ 149 ] Crusaders believed that by fighting off the Muslims, the persecution of Christians would abate, in accordance to their god's will, and this ideology – much promoted by the Crusader-era propagandists – was shared at every level of literate medieval western European society.

[ 149 ] According to Guibert of Nogent, a Catholic writer, the persecution suffered by the Eastern Christians and the attacks on the empire by the Turks were caused by the Christians' own doctrinal errors. He claimed that "Since they deviate from faith in the Trinity, so that hitherto they who are in filth become filthier, gradually they have come to the final degradation of having taken paganism upon themselves as the punishment for the sin proceeding from this, they have lost the soil of their native land to invading foreigners ...".

[ 150 ] Western Christians considered the Byzantine position in the filioque controversy to be heresy and akin to Arianism ; Guibert claimed that heresy was an Eastern practice, almost unknown in the Latin West.

[ 150 ] Further blame was attached to the Eastern Christians by the crusaders for the Crusade of 1101 's defeats in Asia Minor; Alexios Komnenos was accused of having collaborated with the Turks to attack the crusaders.

[ 150 ] The Norman prince Bohemond, citing the supposed transgressions of the emperor and the Eastern Church, which the pope had declared heretic and whose doctrinal errors Bohemond blamed on Alexios, seized the Muslim-held and formerly Byzantine city of Antioch ( Antakya ) for himself after the Siege of Antioch and subsequent Battle of Antioch left Kerbogha defeated, becoming Bohemond I of the Principality of Antioch .

[ 150 ] This contravention of the agreement to return conquered lands to the emperor's control, was justified in the crusaders' letter to Pope Urban II by the statement that the Greek Christians were heretics.

[ 150 ] Later, Bohemond took the opportunity of a crusade to attack Dyrrachium ( Durrës ), justifying his attack on the Christians in a letter to Pope Paschal II enumerating Alexios's faults and blaming him for the East–West Schism and for having taken the imperial throne by force.

[ 150 ] Besides Guibert, other crusader writers to accuse Eastern Christians of sabotaging the crusade include Raymond of Aguilers , Albert of Aix, Baldric of Dol, and the author of the Gesta Francorum .

[ 150 ] Alexios's departure from the crusade, followed by the departure of his envoy Tatikios , was seen as proof of the Eastern Christians' treachery.

[ 150 ] Though Fulcher of Chartres displayed a positive assessment of Eastern Christianity, he too accused the emperor of attacking Christian pilgrims, and of being a "tyrant".

[ 150 ] When First Crusade's Siege of Jerusalem ended successfully for the crusaders, the patriarchate of Jerusalem was vacant, and the crusaders elevated a Latin patriarch without reference to either the Roman Catholic or the Eastern Orthodox churches.

[ 151 ] An Orthodox candidate for the patriarchate was forced to flee to Constantinople.

[ 151 ] Only when Saladin 's Siege of Jerusalem was concluded and the city was returned to Muslim control were the Orthodox Christians allowed to practise in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

[ 151 ] Crusade scholars continue to debate crusading, its causes, and its effects, so scholarship in this field repeatedly undergoes revision and reconsideration.

[ 152 ] : 96 Many early crusade scholars saw the source-histories as simple recitations of how events actually transpired, but by the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, scholarship was increasingly skeptical of that assumption. By 1935, Carl Erdmann published Die Entstehung des Kreuzzugsgedankens (The Origin of the Idea of Crusade), changing the direction of crusader studies more than any other single work by focusing on the ideology of crusade. This ideology indicated the crusades were essentially defensive, which meant that soldiers were there to provide protection for pilgrims and fellow Christians in the East and to reclaim formerly Christian lands lost to Islamic expansion and forced conversion. This ideology remained throughout the Middle Ages despite the failure to finalize these goals.

[ 153 ] : 3 fn 10, 6, 10, 13 Constable adds that those "scholars who see the crusades as the beginning of European colonialism and expansionism would have surprised people at the time. Crusaders would not have denied some selfish aspects... but the predominant emphasis was on the defense and recovery of lands that had once been Christian and on the self-sacrifice rather than the self-seeking of the participants".

[ 153 ] : 15 Historian Robert Irwin points out that “Christians living under Muslim rule suffered during the crusading period. They were suspected of acting as spies or fifth columns for the Franks and later the Mongols as well.” According to Coptic chronicles, Saladin had many Christians in Egypt crucified in revenge against his Crusader enemies.

[ 154 ] In 1951, Steven Runciman , a Byzantinist who saw the crusades in terms of east–west relations, wrote in the conclusion of his crusade history, that the "Holy War was nothing more than a long act of intolerance".

[ 153 ] : 3, 9–10 Giles Constable says it is this view of the crusades that is most common among the populace.

[ 153 ] : 3 The problem with this view, according to political science professor Andrew R. Murphy, [ 155 ] is that such concepts as intolerance were not part of eleventh century thinking about relationships for any of the various groups involved in or affected by the crusades, neither the Latins, the Byzantines, the Turks, the Baybars , nor others.

[ 156 ] : xii–xvii Instead, concepts of tolerance began to grow during the crusades from efforts to define legal limits and the nature of co-existence, and these ideas grew among both Christians and Muslims.

[ 156 ] : xii These wars produced multiple massacres perpetrated by both sides. According to Mary Jane Engh's definition of religious persecution, which identifies it as "the repressive action initiated or condoned by authorities against their own people on religious grounds," it is not possible to term these acts of war as religious persecution.

[ 157 ] After the collapse of the Kingdom of Jerusalem and the Fall of Acre , the last of the Crusaders' possessions in Asia in 1291, one of the main Christian military orders was suppressed from 1307 on trumped-up charges by the papacy.

[ 158 ] The Knights Templar were accused of sodomy, heresy, and corruption and the members were persecuted.

[ 158 ] In the crusades waged against non-Muslims, including Christians described as heretics, Catholic participants were promised the same spiritual rewards as were believed to be received by those who fought against Muslims in the Holy Land.

[ 159 ] Albigensian Crusade [ edit ] Pope Innocent III , with the king of France, Philip Augustus , began the military campaign known as the Albigensian Crusade between 1209 and 1226 against other Christians known as Cathars .

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] : 46, 47 Scholars disagree, using two distinct lines of reasoning, on whether the war that followed was religious persecution from the Pope or a land grab by King Philip.

[ 161 ] : 50 Historian Laurence W. Marvin says the Pope exercised "little real control over events in Occitania".

[ 162 ] : 258 Four years after the Massacre at Beziers in 1213, the Pope cancelled crusade indulgences and called for an end to the campaign.

[ 163 ] : 58 The campaign continued anyway. The Pope was not reversed until the Fourth Lateran council re-instituted crusade status two years later in 1215; afterwards, the Pope removed it yet again.

[ 164 ] [ 162 ] : 229, 235 The campaign continued in what Marvin refers to as "an increasingly murky moral atmosphere" for the next 16 years: there was technically no longer any crusade, no indulgences or dispensational rewards for fighting it, the papal legates exceeded their orders from the Pope, and the army occupied lands of nobles who were in the good graces of the church.

[ 162 ] : 216 The Treaty of Paris that ended the campaign left the Cathars still in existence, but awarded rule of Languedoc to Louis' descendants.

[ 162 ] : 235 Northern (Baltic) crusades [ edit ] The Northern (or Baltic crusades ), went on intermittently from 1147 to 1316, and the primary trigger for these wars was not religious persecution but instead was the noble's desire for territorial expansion and material wealth in the form of land, furs, amber, slaves, and tribute.

[ 165 ] : 5, 6 The princes wanted to subdue these pagan peoples and stop their raiding by conquering and converting them, but ultimately, Iben Fonnesberg-Schmidt says, the princes were motivated by their desire to extend their power and prestige, and conversion was not always an element of their plans.

[ 166 ] : 24 When it was, conversion by these princes was almost always as a result of conquest, either by the direct use of force or indirectly when a leader converted and required it of his followers as well.

[ 166 ] : 23, 24 "While the theologians maintained that conversion should be voluntary, there was a widespread pragmatic acceptance of conversion obtained through political pressure or military coercion." [ 166 ] : 24 The Church's acceptance of this led some commentators of the time to endorse and approve it, something Christian thought had never done before.

[ 167 ] : 157–158 [ 166 ] : 24 Ilkhanate [ edit ] During the Ilkhanate , massacres were perpetrated by Hulagu Khan against the Assyrians, particularly in and around the ancient Assyrian city of Arbela (modern Erbil ).

[ citation needed ] Bar Hebraeus provided this contemporary assessment of the Mongols attitudes toward their Christian subjects after their conversion to Islam: “And having seen very much modesty and other habits of this kind among Christian people, certainly the Mongols loved them greatly at the beginning of their kingdom, a time ago somewhat short. But their love hath turned to such intense hatred that they cannot even see them with their eyes approvingly, because they have all alike become Muslims".

[ 168 ] Things became worse when the khan, Mahmud Ghazan, (who converted to Islam in 1295) yielded to “popular pressure which compelled him to persecute Christians,” and culminated in the following ordinance: “The churches shall be uprooted, and the altars overturned, and the celebrations of the Eucharist shall cease, and the hymns of praise, and the sounds of calls to prayer shall be abolished; and the heads of the Christians, and the heads of the congregations of the Jews, and the great men among them, shall be killed".

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] [ 171 ] Empowered by this ordinance and believing “that everyone who did not abandon Christianity and deny his faith should be killed,” Muslim mobs ran amok, slaughtering and wreaking havoc among Christian populations. In Armenia, church services were banned and local authorities ordered to tattoo a black mark on the shoulder of every male Christian and to pluck out the beards and inflict other humiliations on every Christian man. “When few Christians defected [to Islam] in response to these measures, the Khan then ordered that all Christian men be castrated and have one eye put out which caused many deaths in this era before antibiotics, but did lead to many conversions” to Islam.

[ 172 ] [ 171 ] The consideration which the Mongols bestowed on the Christians (particularly the Nestorians) singled them out for the hatred of the Muslims. In 1261, Muslims of Mosul pillaged and killed all those who did not convert to Islam. Several monks and community leaders and others from the common people recanted. The Kurds then descended from the mountains and attacked the Christians of the region, massacring many of them; they pillaged the convent of Mar Matai, only withdrawing after extorting a heavy ransom from the monks.

[ 173 ] Late Middle Ages [ edit ] Western Europe [ edit ] Advocates of lay piety called for church reform and met with persecution from the Popes.

[ 174 ] : 248–250 John Wycliffe (1320–1384) urged the church to give up ownership of property, which produced much of the church's wealth, and to once again embrace poverty and simplicity. He urged the church to stop being subservient to the state and its politics. He denied papal authority. John Wycliff died of a stroke, but his followers, called Lollards , were declared heretics.

[ 174 ] : 249 After the Oldcastle rebellion many were killed.

[ 175 ] : 12, 13 Jan Hus (1369–1415) accepted some of Wycliff's views and aligned with the Bohemian Reform movement which was also rooted in popular piety. In 1415, Hus was called to the Council of Constance where his ideas were condemned as heretical and he was handed over to the state and burned at the stake.

[ 176 ] : 130, 135–139 [ 174 ] : 250 The Fraticelli, who were also known as the "Little Brethren" or "Spiritual Franciscans", were dedicated followers of Saint Francis of Assisi. These Franciscans honored their vow of poverty and saw the wealth of the Church as a contributor to corruption and injustice when so many lived in poverty. They criticized the worldly behavior of many churchmen.

[ 177 ] : 28, 50, 305 Thus, the Brethren were declared heretical by John XXII (1316–1334) who was called "the banker of Avignon".

[ 178 ] : 131 The leader of these brethren, Bernard Délicieux (c. 1260–1270 –  1320) was well known as he had spent much of his life battling the Dominican-run inquisitions. He confessed, after torture and threat of excommunication, to the charge of opposing the inquisitions, and was defrocked and sentenced to life in prison, in chains, in solitary confinement, and to receive nothing but bread and water. The judges attempted to ameliorate the harshness of this sentence due to his age and frailty, but Pope John XXII countermanded them and delivered the friar to Inquisitor Jean de Beaune . Délicieux died shortly thereafter in early 1320.

[ 179 ] : 191, 196–198 Mamluk Sultanate [ edit ] when Sultan Baybars took Antioch from the Crusaders he wrote a letter to Christians boasting of the atrocities they would have seen his soldiers commit had they been there: [ 180 ] You would have seen your knights prostrate beneath the horses’ hooves, your houses stormed by pillagers and ransacked by looters, your wealth weighed by the quintal, your women sold four at a time and bought for a dinar of your own money! You would have seen the crosses in your churches smashed, the pages of the false Testaments scattered, the Patriarchs’ tombs overturned. You would have seen your Muslim enemy trampling on the place where you celebrate the Mass, cutting the throats of monks, priests and deacons upon the altars, bringing sudden death to the Patriarchs and slavery to the royal princes. You would have seen fire running through your palaces, your dead burned in this world before going down to the fires of the next, your palace lying unrecognizable, the Church of St. Paul and that of the Cathedral of St. Peter pulled down and destroyed; then you would have said, “Would that I were dust, and that no letter had ever brought me such tidings!” Timurid Empire [ edit ] Timur (Tamerlane) instigated large scale massacres of Christians in Mesopotamia , Persia , Asia Minor and Syria in the 14th century AD. Most of the victims were indigenous Assyrians and Armenians , members of the Assyrian Church of the East and Orthodox Churches , which led to the decimation of the hitherto majority Assyrian population in northern Mesopotamia and the abandonment of the ancient Assyrian city of Assur .

[ 181 ] Tamerlane virtually exterminated the Church of the East , which had previously been a major branch of Christianity but afterwards became largely confined to a small area now known as the Assyrian Triangle .

[ 182 ] Early modern period [ edit ] Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation [ edit ] Main articles: Counter-Reformation , European wars of religion , and Protestant Reformation Persecution of the Servants of Christ by Maerten de Vos and engraved by Hieronymus Wierix ( Wellcome Library ). An illustration of the prophecy of persecution made during the Sermon on the Mount according to the Gospel of Luke .

"But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake." [ 183 ] [ note 2 ] The Protestant Reformation and the Roman Catholic Counter-Reformation provoked a number of persecutions of Christians by other Christians and the European wars of religion , including the Eighty Years' War , the French Wars of Religion , the Thirty Years' War , the Wars of the Three Kingdoms , the Savoyard–Waldensian wars , and the Toggenburg War . There were false allegations of witchcraft and numerous witch trials in the early modern period .

China [ edit ] An 1858 illustration from the French newspaper, Le Monde Illustré , of the torture and execution of Father Auguste Chapdelaine , a French missionary in China, by slow slicing ( lingchi ).

Beginning in the late 17th century and for at least a century, Christianity was banned in China by the Kangxi Emperor of the Qing dynasty after Pope Clement XI forbade Chinese Catholics from venerating their relatives, Confucius , the Buddha or Guanyin .

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] The Boxer rebellion targeted foreign and Chinese Christians . Beginning in 1899, Boxers spread violence across Shandong and the North China Plain , attacking or murdering Christian missionaries and Chinese Christians. They decided the "primary devils" were the Christian missionaries, and the "secondary devils" were the Chinese converts to Christianity. Both had to recant or be driven out or killed.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Boxers burned Christian churches, killed Chinese Christians and intimidated Chinese officials who stood in their way. Orthodox, Protestant, and Catholic missionaries and their Chinese parishioners were massacred throughout northern China, some by Boxers and others by government troops and authorities.

Yuxian implemented a brutal anti-foreign and anti-Christian policy. The Baptist Missionary Society , based in England, opened its mission in Shanxi in 1877. In 1900 all its missionaries there were killed, along with all 120 converts.

[ 188 ] By the summer's end, more foreigners and as many as 2,000 Chinese Christians had been put to death in the province. Journalist and historical writer Nat Brandt has called the massacre of Christians in Shanxi "the greatest single tragedy in the history of Christian evangelicalism." [ 189 ] During the Boxer Rebellion as a whole, a total of 136 Protestant missionaries and 53 children were killed, and 47 Catholic priests and nuns, 30,000 Chinese Catholics, 2,000 Chinese Protestants, and 200 to 400 of the 700 Russian Orthodox Christians in Beijing were estimated to have been killed. Collectively, the Protestant dead were called the China Martyrs of 1900 .

[ 190 ] The Muslim unit Kansu Braves which was serving in the Chinese army attacked Christians.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] During the Northern Expedition , the Kuomintang incited anti-foreign , anti-Western sentiment . Portraits of Sun Yat-sen replaced the crucifix in several churches, KMT posters proclaimed that "Jesus Christ is dead. Why not worship something alive such as Nationalism ?" Foreign missionaries were attacked and anti-foreign riots broke out.

[ 194 ] In 1926, Muslim General Bai Chongxi attempted to drive out foreigners in Guangxi , attacking American, European, and other foreigners and missionaries, and generally making the province unsafe for foreigners. Westerners fled from the province, and some Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents.

[ 195 ] From 1894 to 1938, many Uighur Muslims converted to Christianity. They were killed, tortured and jailed.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] Christian missionaries were expelled.

[ 199 ] French Revolution [ edit ] Main articles: Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution and Revolt in the Vendée September massacres , 1792 The dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution is a conventional description of a campaign, conducted by various Robespierre -era governments of France beginning with the start of the French Revolution in 1789, to eliminate any symbol that might be associated with the past, especially the monarchy .

The program included the following policies: [ 200 ] [ 201 ] [ 202 ] : 1 the deportation of clergy and the condemnation of many of them to death, the closing, desecration and pillaging of churches, removal of the word "saint" from street names and other acts to banish Christian culture from the public sphere removal of statues, plates, and other iconography from places of worship destruction of crosses, bells and other external signs of worship the institution of revolutionary and civic cults, including the Cult of Reason and subsequently the Cult of the Supreme Being , the large-scale destruction of religious monuments, the outlawing of public and private worship and religious education, forced marriages of the clergy, forced abjuration of priesthood, and the enactment of a law on 21 October 1793 making all nonjuring priests and all persons who harbored them liable to death on sight.

Mass shootings at Nantes, 1793 The climax was reached with the celebration of the Goddess "Reason" in Notre-Dame de Paris , the Parisian cathedral, on 10 November.

Under threat of death, imprisonment, military conscription or loss of income, about 20,000 constitutional priests were forced to abdicate or hand over their letters of ordination and 6,000 – 9,000 were coerced to marry, many ceasing their ministerial duties.

[ 202 ] : 10 Some of those who abdicated covertly ministered to the people.

[ 202 ] : 10 By the end of the decade, approximately 30,000 priests were forced to leave France, and thousands who did not leave were executed.

[ 203 ] Most of France was left without the services of a priest, deprived of the sacraments and any nonjuring priest faced the guillotine or deportation to French Guiana .

[ 202 ] : 11 The March 1793 conscription requiring Vendeans to fill their district's quota of 300,000 enraged the populace, who took up arms as "The Catholic Army", "Royal" being added later, and fought for "above all the reopening of their parish churches with their former priests." [ 204 ] With these massacres came formal orders for forced evacuation; also, a ' scorched earth ' policy was initiated: farms were destroyed, crops and forests burned and villages razed. There were many reported atrocities and a campaign of mass killing universally targeted at residents of the Vendée regardless of combatant status, political affiliation, age or gender.

[ 205 ] By July 1796, the estimated Vendean dead numbered between 117,000 and 500,000, out of a population of around 800,000.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] [ 208 ] Japan [ edit ] Further information: Martyrs of Japan The Christian martyrs of the 1622 Great Genna Martyrdom . 17th-century Japanese painting.

Tokugawa Ieyasu assumed control over Japan in 1600. Like Toyotomi Hideyoshi , he disliked Christian activities in Japan. The Tokugawa shogunate finally decided to ban Catholicism in 1614, and in the mid-17th century it demanded the expulsion of all European missionaries and the execution of all converts. This marked the end of open Christianity in Japan.

[ 209 ] The Shimabara Rebellion , led by a young Japanese Christian boy named Amakusa Shirō Tokisada , took place in 1637. After the Hara Castle fell, the shogunate's forces beheaded an estimated 37,000 rebels and sympathizers. Amakusa Shirō's severed head was taken to Nagasaki for public display, and the entire complex at Hara Castle was burned to the ground and buried together with the bodies of all the dead.

[ 210 ] [ full citation needed ] Many of the Christians in Japan continued for two centuries to maintain their religion as Kakure Kirishitan , or hidden Christians, without any priests or pastors. Some of those who were killed for their Faith are venerated as the Martyrs of Japan .

Christianity was later allowed during the Meiji era . The Meiji Constitution of 1890 introduced separation of church and state and permitted freedom of religion.

Kingdom of Mysore [ edit ] Further information: Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam The Jamalabad fort route. Mangalorean Catholics had traveled through this route on their way to Seringapatam .

Muslim Tipu Sultan , the ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore , took action against the Mangalorean Catholic community from Mangalore and the South Canara district on the southwestern coast of India. Tipu was widely reputed to be anti-Christian. He took Mangalorean Catholics into captivity at Seringapatam on 24 February 1784 and released them on 4 May 1799.

[ 211 ] Soon after the Treaty of Mangalore in 1784, Tipu gained control of Canara.

[ 212 ] He issued orders to seize the Christians in Canara, confiscate their estates, [ 213 ] and deport them to Seringapatam, the capital of his empire, through the Jamalabad fort route.

[ 214 ] There were no priests among the captives. Together with Fr. Miranda, all the 21 arrested priests were issued orders of expulsion to Goa, fined 20,000,000 (2 lakh) rupees, and threatened death by hanging if they ever returned.

[ citation needed ] Tipu ordered the destruction of 27 Catholic churches.

According to Thomas Munro , a Scottish soldier and the first collector of Canara, around 60,000 of them, [ 215 ] nearly 92 percent of the entire Mangalorean Catholic community, were captured. 7,000 escaped. Observer Francis Buchanan reports that 70,000 were captured, from a population of 80,000, with 10,000 escaping. They were forced to climb nearly 4,000 feet (1,200 m) through the jungles of the Western Ghat mountain ranges. It was 210 miles (340 km) from Mangalore to Seringapatam, and the journey took six weeks. According to British Government records, 20,000  of them died on the march to Seringapatam. According to James Scurry , a British officer, who was held captive along with Mangalorean Catholics, 30,000 of them were forcibly converted to Islam. The young women and girls were forcibly made wives of the Muslims living there and later distributed and sold in prostitution.

[ 216 ] The young men who offered resistance were disfigured by cutting their noses, upper lips, and ears.

[ 217 ] The British officer James Scurry , who was detained a prisoner for 10 years by Tipu Sultan along with the Mangalorean Catholics Tipu Sultan's invasion of the Malabar Coast had an adverse impact on the Saint Thomas Christian community of the Malabar coast. Many churches in Malabar and Cochin were damaged. The old Syrian Nasrani seminary at Angamaly which had been the center of Catholic religious education for several centuries was razed to the ground by Tipu's soldiers. Many centuries-old religious manuscripts were lost forever. The church was later relocated to Kottayam where it still exists to this date. The Mor Sabor church at Akaparambu and the Martha Mariam Church attached to the seminary were destroyed as well. Tipu's army set fire to the church at Palayoor and attacked the Ollur Church in 1790. Furthernmore, the Arthat church and the Ambazhakkad seminary was also destroyed. Over the course of this invasion, many Saint Thomas Christians were killed or forcibly converted to Islam. Most of the coconut, arecanut, pepper and cashew plantations held by the Saint Thomas Christian farmers were also indiscriminately destroyed by the invading army. As a result, when Tipu's army invaded Guruvayur and adjacent areas, the Syrian Christian community fled Calicut and small towns like Arthat to new centres like Kunnamkulam, Chalakudi, Ennakadu, Cheppadu, Kannankode, Mavelikkara , etc. where there were already Christians. They were given refuge by Sakthan Tamburan, the ruler of Cochin and Karthika Thirunal, the ruler of Travancore, who gave them lands, plantations and encouraged their businesses. Colonel Macqulay, the British resident of Travancore also helped them.

[ 218 ] Tipu's persecution of Christians also extended to captured British soldiers. For instance, there were a significant amount of forced conversions of British captives between 1780 and 1784. Following their disastrous defeat at the battle of Pollilur , 7,000 British men along with an unknown number of women were held captive by Tipu in the fortress of Seringapatnam. Of these, over 300 were circumcised and given Muslim names and clothes, and several British regimental drummer boys were made to wear ghagra cholis and entertain the court as nautch girls or dancing girls.

[ 219 ] According to James Scurry, who had been jailed, he gained an inability to use western cutlery, a change in his preferred clothing, a darker skin tone, and having ""broken and confused" English that no longer had "all its vernacular idiom".

[ 220 ] Scurry had a confinement period of 10 years.

[ 220 ] Ottoman Empire [ edit ] Main article: Christianity in the Ottoman Empire Historian Warren Treadgold gives a summary on the historical background highlighting the cumulative effects of the relentless Turkish Muslim depredations against the Byzantine Empire in its Anatolian heartland by the late 14th century: [ 221 ] As the Turks raided and conquered, they enslaved many Christians, selling some in other Muslim regions and hindering the rest from practicing their faith. Conversions [to islam], Turkish migration, and Greek outmigration increasingly endangered the Greek minority in central Asia Minor. When the Turks overran Western Anatolia, they occupied the countryside first, driving the Greeks into the cities, or away to Europe, or the islands. By the time the Anatolian cities fell, the land around them was already largely Turkish [and Islamic].

In accordance with the traditional custom which was practiced at the time, Sultan Mehmed II allowed his troops and his entourage to engage in unbridled pillaging and looting in the city of Constantinople for three full days shortly after it was captured . Once the three days passed, he claimed its remaining contents for himself.

[ 148 ] [ 222 ] However, at the end of the first day, he proclaimed that the looting should cease because he felt profound sadness when he toured the looted and enslaved city.

[ 223 ] [ 148 ] Hagia Sophia was not exempted from the pillage and looting and specifically became its focal point as the invaders believed it to contain the greatest treasures and valuables of the city.

[ 224 ] Shortly after the defence of the Walls of Constantinople collapsed and the Ottoman troops entered the city victoriously, the pillagers and looters made their way to the Hagia Sophia and battered down its doors before storming in.

[ 148 ] Throughout the period of the siege of Constantinople , the worshippers who were trapped in the city participated in the Divine Liturgy and they also recited the Prayer of the Hours at the Hagia Sophia and the church formed a safe-haven and a refuge for many of those worshippers who were unable to contribute to the city's defence, which comprised women, children, elderly, the sick and the wounded.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] Being trapped in the church, the many congregants and yet more refugees inside became spoils-of-war to be divided amongst the triumphant invaders. The building was desecrated and looted, with the helpless occupants who sought shelter within the church being enslaved.

[ 224 ] While most of the elderly and the infirm/wounded and sick were killed, and the remainder (mainly teenage males and young boys) were chained up and sold into slavery.

[ 148 ] The women of Constantinople also suffered from rape at the hands of Ottoman forces.

[ 227 ] According to Barbaro, "all through the day the Turks made a great slaughter of Christians through the city". According to historian Philip Mansel , widespread persecution of the city's civilian inhabitants took place, resulting in thousands of murders and rapes, and 30,000 civilians being enslaved or forcibly deported.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] [ 231 ] George Sphrantzes says that people of both genders were raped inside Hagia Sophia .

[ 232 ] Since the time of the Austro-Turkish war (1683–1699) , relations between Muslims and Christians who lived in the European provinces of the Ottoman Empire gradually deteriorated [ vague ] and this deterioration in interfaith relations occasionally resulted in calls for the expulsion or extermination of local Christian communities by some Muslim religious leaders. As a result of Ottoman oppression , the destruction of Churches and Monasteries, and violence against the non-Muslim civilian population, Serbian Christians and their church leaders, headed by Serbian Patriarch Arsenije III , sided with the Austrians in 1689 and again in 1737 under Serbian Patriarch Arsenije IV . In the following punitive campaigns, Ottoman forces conducted systematic atrocities against the Christian population in the Serbian regions, resulted in the Great Migrations of the Serbs .

[ 233 ] Ottoman Albania and Kosovo [ edit ] Main article: Islamization of Albania Before the late 16th century, Albania's population remained overwhelmingly Christian , despite the fact that it was under Ottoman rule, unlike the more diverse populations of other regions of the Ottoman Empire , such as Bosnia, Bulgaria and Northern Greece , [ 234 ] the mountainous Albania was a frequent site of revolts against Ottoman rule, often at an enormous human cost, such as the destruction of entire villages.

[ 235 ] In response, the Ottomans abandoned their usual policy of tolerating Christians in favor of a policy which was aimed at reducing the size of Albania's Christian population through Islamization , beginning in the restive Christian regions of Reka and Elbasan in 1570.

[ 236 ] The pressures which resulted from this campaign included particularly harsh economic conditions which were imposed on Albania's Christian population; while earlier taxes on the Christians were around 45 akçes a year, by the middle of the 17th century the rate had been multiplied by 27 to 780 akçes a year. Albanian elders often opted to save their clans and villages from hunger and economic ruin by advocating village-wide and region-wide conversions to Islam, with many individuals frequently continuing to practice Christianity in private.

[ 237 ] A failed Catholic rebellion in 1596 and the Albanian population's support of Austro-Hungary during the Great Turkish War , [ 238 ] and its support of the Venetians in the 1644 Venetian-Ottoman War [ 239 ] as well as the Orlov Revolt [ 240 ] [ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 243 ] [ 244 ] were all factors which led to punitive measures in which outright force was accompanied by economic incentives depending on the region, and ended up forcing the conversion of large Christian populations to Islam in Albania. In the aftermath of the Great Turkish War, massive punitive measures were imposed on Kosovo's Catholic Albanian population and as a result of them, most members of it fled to Hungary and settled around Buda , where most of them died of disease and starvation.

[ 238 ] [ 245 ] After the Orthodox Serbian population's subsequent flight from Kosovo, the pasha of Ipek (Peja/Pec) forced Albanian Catholic mountaineers to repopulate Kosovo by deporting them to Kosovo, and also forced them adopt Islam.

[ 238 ] [ 244 ] In the 17th and 18th centuries, South Albania also saw numerous instances of violence which was directed against those who remained Christian by local newly converted Muslims, ultimately resulting in many more conversions out of fear as well as flight to faraway lands by the Christian population.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] [ 240 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] Modern era (1815 to 1989) [ edit ] Communist Albania [ edit ] Main articles: Religion in Albania § Communist Albania , and Freedom of religion in Albania Religion in Albania was subordinated to the interests of Marxism during the rule of the country's communist party when all religions were suppressed. This policy was justified by the communist stance of state atheism from 1967 to 1991.

[ 250 ] The Agrarian Reform Law of August 1945 nationalized most of the property which belonged to religious institutions, including the estates of mosques, monasteries, religious orders, and dioceses. Many clergy and believers were tried and some of them were executed. All foreign Roman Catholic priests, monks, and nuns were expelled from Albania in 1946.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] The military seized churches, cathedrals and mosques and converted them into basketball courts, movie theaters, dance halls, and the like; and members of the clergy were stripped of their titles and imprisoned.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] Around 6,000 Albanians were disappeared and murdered by agents of the Communist government, and their bodies were never found or identified. Albanians continued to be imprisoned, tortured and killed for their religious practices well into 1991.

[ 255 ] Religious communities or branches of them which had their headquarters outside the country, such as the Jesuit and Franciscan orders, were henceforth ordered to terminate their activities in Albania. Religious institutions were forbidden to have anything to do with the education of the young, because that activity had been made the exclusive province of the state. All religious communities were prohibited from owning real estate and they were also prohibited from operating philanthropic and welfare institutions and hospitals.

Enver Hoxha 's overarching goal was the eventual destruction of all organized religions in Albania, despite some variance in his approach to it.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] Iraq [ edit ] Main article: Christianity in Iraq The Assyrians were subjected to another series of persecutions during the Simele massacre of 1933, with the death of approximately 3,000 Assyrian civilians in the Kingdom of Iraq at the hands of the Royal Iraqi Army .

[ citation needed ] In 1987, the last Iraqi census counted 1.4 million Christians.

[ 256 ] They were tolerated under the secular regime of Saddam Hussein , who even made one of them, Tariq Aziz his deputy. However, Saddam Hussein's government continued to persecute the Christians on an ethnic , cultural and racial basis, because the vast majority are Mesopotamian Eastern Aramaic -speaking ethnic Assyrians (aka Chaldo-Assyrians ). The Assyro-Aramaic language and script was repressed, the giving of Hebraic/Aramaic Christian names or Akkadian/Assyro-Babylonian names was forbidden (for example Tariq Aziz 's real name was Michael Youhanna), and Saddam exploited religious differences between Assyrian denominations such as Chaldean Catholics , the Assyrian Church of the East , the Syriac Orthodox Church , the Assyrian Pentecostal Church and the Ancient Church of the East , in an attempt to divide them. Many Assyrians and Armenians were ethnically cleansed from their towns and villages during the al Anfal Campaign in 1988, despite the fact that this campaign was primarily directed against the Kurds.

[ citation needed ] Madagascar [ edit ] Christian martyrs burned at the stake by Ranavalona I in Madagascar Queen Ranavalona I (reigned 1828–1861) issued a royal edict prohibiting the practice of Christianity in Madagascar , expelled British missionaries from the island, and sought to stem the growth of conversion to Christianity within her realm. Far more, however, were punished in other ways: many were required to undergo the tangena ordeal, while others were condemned to hard labor or the confiscation of their land and property, and many of these consequently died. The tangena ordeal was commonly administered to determine the guilt or innocence of an accused person for any crime, including the practice of Christianity, and involved ingestion of the poison contained within the nut of the tangena tree ( Cerbera odollam ). Survivors were deemed innocent, while those who perished were assumed guilty.

In 1838, it was estimated that as many as 100,000 people in Imerina died as a result of the tangena ordeal, constituting roughly 20% of the population.

[ 257 ] contributing to a strongly unfavorable view of Ranavalona's rule in historical accounts.

[ 258 ] Malagasy Christians would remember this period as ny tany maizina , or "the time when the land was dark". Persecution of Christians intensified in 1840, 1849 and 1857; in 1849, deemed the worst of these years by British missionary to Madagascar W.E. Cummins (1878), 1,900 people were fined, jailed or otherwise punished in relation to their Christian faith, including 18 executions.

[ 259 ] Nazi Germany [ edit ] Main articles: Nazism , Nazi Germany , Religion in Nazi Germany , Religious aspects of Nazism , Religious views of Adolf Hitler , German Christians (movement) , Positive Christianity , Kirchenkampf , Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany , and Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany Part of a series on Persecutions of the Catholic Church Overview Historical persecution of Christians Catholic Church persecutions 1939–1958 Eradication of the Church under Stalinism Eastern Catholic persecutions Persecution of Christians in the modern era Roman Empire Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire Diocletianic Persecution Neo-Persian Empire Sasanian conquest of Jerusalem Byzantine Empire Massacre of the Latins Japan Martyrs of Japan India Violence against Christians in India 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka China Martyr Saints of China Vietnam Vietnamese Martyrs Canada Canadian Martyrs United States Know Nothing Oregon Compulsory Education Act Pierce v. Society of Sisters Philadelphia nativist riots Ursuline Convent riots Norway Anti-Catholicism in Norway Great Britain and Ireland Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom List of Catholic martyrs of the English Reformation Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Irish Catholic Martyrs Dissolution of the Monasteries Penal Laws Cromwellian conquest of Ireland France Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution War in the Vendée Martyrs of Compiègne Massacre in the Rue Haxo Expulsion of congregations Spain Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Red Terror Dilectissima Nobis Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Bartolomé Blanco Innocencio of Mary Immaculate José María of Manila 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Burning of convents in Spain (1931) Germany Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany Mit brennender Sorge Kulturkampf Poland Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland Polish anti-religious campaign 1945–1990 108 Blessed Polish Martyrs Russia Martyrs of Pratulin Conversion of Chelm Eparchy Anti-Catholicism in the Soviet Union Eastern Catholic victims of Soviet persecutions Mexico Cristero War Saints Anti-clericalism in Mexico El Salvador Four U.S. missionaries 1989 murders of Jesuits Catholicism portal v t e Hitler and the Nazis received some support from certain Christian communities, in particular the German Christian movement within the German Evangelical Church . Once in power, the Nazis moved to consolidate their power over the German churches and bring them in line with Nazi ideals. Some historians say that Hitler had a general covert plan, which some of them say existed even before the Nazis' rise to power, to destroy Christianity within the Reich, which was to be accomplished through Nazi control and subversion of the churches and it would be completed after the war.

[ 260 ] The Third Reich founded its own version of Christianity which was called Positive Christianity , a Nazi version of Christianity which made major changes in the interpretation of the Bible by arguing that Jesus Christ was the son of God, but he was not a Jew, arguing that Jesus despised Jews and Judaism, and arguing that the Jews were the ones who were solely responsible for Jesus's death .

[ citation needed ] Outside mainstream Christianity, the Jehovah's Witnesses were targets of Nazi Persecution , for their refusal to swear allegiance to the Nazi government. In Nazi Germany in the 1930s and early 1940s, Jehovah's Witnesses refused to renounce their political neutrality and as a result, they were imprisoned in concentration camps . The Nazi government gave detained Jehovah's Witnesses the option of release if they signed a document which indicated their renunciation of their faith, their submission to state authority, and their support of the German military.

[ 261 ] Historian Hans Hesse said, "Some five thousand Jehovah's Witnesses were sent to concentration camps where they alone were 'voluntary prisoners', so termed because the moment they recanted their views, they could be freed. Some lost their lives in the camps, but few renounced their faith." [ 262 ] [ 263 ] Ottoman Empire [ edit ] Main articles: Christianity in the Ottoman Empire , Armenian genocide , Assyrian genocide , Greek genocide , and Late Ottoman genocides Further information: 1843 and 1846 massacres in Hakkari , Great Famine of Mount Lebanon , and Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians § Persecution in the Ottoman Empire During the modern era, relations between Muslims and Christians in the Ottoman Empire were largely shaped by broader dynamics which were related to European colonial and neo-imperialist activities in the region, dynamics which frequently (though by no means always) generated tensions between the two communities. Too often, growing European influence in the region during the nineteenth century seemed to disproportionately benefit Christians, thus, it triggered resentment on the part of many Muslims, likewise, many Muslims suspected that Christians and the European powers were plotting to weaken the Islamic world . Further exacerbating relations was the fact that Christians seemed to disproportionately benefit from efforts at reform (one aspect of which generally sought to elevate the political status of non-Muslims), likewise, the various Christian nationalist uprisings in the Empire's European territories, which often had the support of the European powers.

[ 264 ] Corpses of massacred Armenian Christians in Erzurum in 1895 Persecutions and forced migrations of Christian populations were induced by Ottoman forces during the 19th century in the European and Asian provinces of the Ottoman Empire. The Massacres of Badr Khan were conducted by Kurdish and Ottoman forces against the Assyrian Christian population of the Ottoman Empire between 1843 and 1847, resulting in the slaughter of more than 10,000 indigenous Assyrian civilians of the Hakkari region, with many thousands more being sold into slavery .

[ 265 ] [ 266 ] Adana massacre of 1909 On 17 October 1850 the Muslim majority began rioting against the Uniate Catholics – a minority that lived in the communities of Judayda, in the city of Aleppo.

[ 267 ] During the Bulgarian Uprising against Ottoman rule (1876) , and the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878) , the persecution of the Bulgarian Christian population was conducted by Ottoman soldiers. The principal locations were Panagurishte , Perushtitza , and Bratzigovo .

[ 268 ] Over 15,000 non-combatant Bulgarian civilians were killed by the Ottoman army between 1876 and 1878, with the worst single instance being the Batak massacre .

[ 268 ] [ 269 ] : 228 During the war, whole cities including the largest Bulgarian one ( Stara Zagora ) were destroyed and most of their inhabitants were killed, the rest being expelled or enslaved. The atrocities included impaling and grilling people alive.

[ 270 ] Similar attacks were undertaken by Ottoman troops against Serbian Christians during the Serbian-Turkish War (1876–1878) .

Greek-Orthodox metropolises in Asia Minor , c.

1880 . Since 1923, only the Metropolis of Chalcedon retains a small community.

The Assyrian genocide was a mass slaughter of the Assyrian population perpetrated by Ottoman forces and some Kurdish tribes during World War I .

[ 272 ] The abolition of jizya and emancipation of formerly dhimmi subjects was one of the most embittering stipulations the Ottoman Empire had to accept to end the Crimean War in 1856. Then, "for the first time since 1453, church bells were permitted to ring... in Constantinople," writes M. J. Akbar. "Many Muslims declared it a day of mourning." Indeed, because superior social standing was from the start one of the advantages of conversion to Islam, resentful Muslim mobs rioted and hounded Christians all over the empire. In 1860 up to 30,000 Christians were massacred in the Levant alone.

[ 273 ] Mark Twain recounts what took place in the levant: [ 274 ] Men, women and children were butchered indiscriminately and left to rot by hundreds all through the Christian quarter... the stench was dreadful. All the Christians who could get away fled from the city, and the Mohammedans would not defile their hands by burying the 'infidel dogs.' The thirst for blood extended to the high lands of Hermon and Anti-Lebanon, and in a short time twenty-five thousand more Christians were massacred.

Between 1894 and 1896, a series of ethno-religiously motivated anti-Christian pogroms known as the Hamidian massacres were conducted against the ancient Armenian and Assyrian Christian populations by the forces of the Ottoman Empire .

[ 275 ] The motives for these massacres were an attempt to reassert Pan-Islamism in the Ottoman Empire, resentment of the comparative wealth of the ancient indigenous Christian communities, and a fear that they would attempt to secede from the tottering Ottoman Empire.

[ 276 ] The massacres mainly took place in what is today southeastern Turkey, northeastern Syria and northern Iraq. Assyrians and Armenians were massacred in Diyarbakir , Hasankeyef , Sivas and other parts of Anatolia and northern Mesopotamia, by Sultan Abdul Hamid II. The death toll is estimated to have been as high as 325,000 people, [ 277 ] [ 278 ] with a further 546,000 Armenians and Assyrians made destitute by forced deportations of survivors from cities, and the destruction or theft of almost 2500 of their farmsteads towns and villages. Hundreds of churches and monasteries were also destroyed or forcibly converted into mosques.

[ 279 ] These attacks caused the death of over thousands of Assyrians and the forced "Ottomanisation" of the inhabitants of 245 villages. The Ottoman troops looted the remains of the Assyrian settlements and these were later stolen and occupied by south-east Anatolian tribes. Unarmed Assyrian women and children were raped, tortured and murdered.

[ 280 ] According to H. Aboona, the independence of the Assyrians was destroyed not directly by the Turks but by their neighbours under Ottoman auspices.

[ 281 ] The Adana massacre occurred in the Adana Vilayet of the Ottoman Empire in April 1909. A massacre of Armenian and Assyrian Christians in the city of Adana and its surrounds amidst the 31 March Incident led to a series of anti-Christian pogroms throughout the province.

[ 282 ] Reports estimated that the Adana Province massacres resulted in the death of as many as 30,000 Armenians and 1,500 Assyrians.

[ 283 ] [ 284 ] [ 285 ] Between 1915 and 1921 the Young Turks government of the collapsing Ottoman Empire persecuted Eastern Christian populations in Anatolia , Persia , Northern Mesopotamia , and The Levant . The onslaught by the late Ottoman army (which included Arab , Kurdish , and Circassian irregulars) resulted in an estimated 3.4 million deaths, divided between roughly 1.5 million Armenian Christians, [ 286 ] [ 287 ] 0.75 million Assyrian Christians, 0.90 million Greek Orthodox Christians , and 0.25 million Maronite Christians (see Great Famine of Mount Lebanon ); [ 288 ] groups of Georgian Christians were also killed. The massive ethno-religious cleansing expelled from the empire or killed the Assyrians , Armenians , Greeks , and Bulgarians who had not converted to Islam, [ 289 ] and it came to be known as the Armenian genocide , [ 290 ] [ 291 ] Assyrian genocide , [ 292 ] Greek genocide , [ 161 ] and Great Famine of Mount Lebanon .

[ 293 ] [ 294 ] which accounted for the deaths of Armenian, Assyrian, Greek and Maronite Christians, and the deportation and destitution of many more. The Genocide led to the devastation of ancient indigenous Christian populations who had inhabited the Middle East for thousands of years.

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] [ 297 ] [ 298 ] Benny Morris , Dror Ze'evi , Uğur Ümit Üngör , and several other historians argue that the Armenian genocide , Greek genocide , and Assyrian genocide constitute a series of extermination campaigns, usually referred to as the late Ottoman genocides , that had been carried out by the Ottoman Empire against its Christian subjects .

[ 299 ] In the aftermath of the Sheikh Said rebellion , the Syriac Orthodox Church , and the Assyrian Church of the East were subjected to harassment by Turkish authorities, on the grounds that some Assyrians allegedly collaborated with the rebelling Kurds .

[ 300 ] Consequently, mass deportations took place and Assyrian Patriarch Mar Ignatius Elias III was expelled from the Mor Hananyo Monastery which was turned into a Turkish barrack. The patriarchal seat was then temporarily transferred to Homs .

Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Christianity in Turkey The Republic of Turkey was established in 1923, after the vast majority of Christian inhabitants of Anatolia had been expelled or massacred as a result of the late Ottoman genocides .

[ 301 ] However, there still remained sizeable Greek and Armenian minorities in Istanbul. Beginning in the 1940s, the Turkish government instituted repressive policies forcing many Christians to emigrate. Examples are the labour battalions drafted among non-Muslims during World War II, as well as the Fortune Tax ( Varlık Vergisi ) levied mostly on non-Muslims during the same period. These resulted in financial ruination and death for many Christians. The exodus was given greater impetus with the Istanbul Pogrom of September 1955 and the expulsion of Istanbul Greeks which led to thousands of Greeks fleeing the city, eventually reducing the Greek population from 200,000 in 1924 to about 7,000 by 1978 and to about 2,500 by 2006.

[ 302 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Demolition of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour on 5 December 1931: The USSR's official state atheism resulted in the 1921–1928 anti-religious campaign , during which many "church institution[s] at [the] local, diocesan or national level were systematically destroyed." [ 303 ] Further information: Human rights in the Soviet Union § Freedom of religion , Operation North , Persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union , Religion in the Soviet Union , Soviet anti-religious legislation , and Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc After the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Bolsheviks undertook a massive program to remove the influence of the Russian Orthodox Church from the government, outlawed antisemitism in society, and promoted atheism . Tens of thousands of churches were destroyed or they were converted to buildings which were used for other purposes, and many members of the clergy were murdered, publicly executed and imprisoned for what the government termed "anti-government activities". An extensive educational and propaganda campaign was launched to convince people, especially children and youths, to abandon their religious beliefs. This persecution resulted in the intentional murder of 500,000 Orthodox followers by the government of the Soviet Union during the 20th century.

[ 304 ] In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.

[ 305 ] The state established atheism as the only scientific truth.

[ 306 ] [ 307 ] [ 308 ] [ 309 ] Soviet authorities forbade the criticism of atheism and agnosticism until 1936 or of the state's anti-religious policies; such criticism could lead to forced retirement.

[ 310 ] [ 311 ] [ 312 ] Militant atheism became central to the ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and a high priority policy of all Soviet leaders.

[ 313 ] Christopher Marsh, a professor at the Baylor University writes that "Tracing the social nature of religion from Schleiermacher and Feurbach to Marx, Engles, and Lenin...the idea of religion as a social product evolved to the point of policies aimed at the forced conversion of believers to atheism." [ 314 ] Under the doctrine of state atheism in the Soviet Union, a "government-sponsored program of forced conversion to atheism " was conducted by the Communists.

[ 315 ] [ 316 ] [ 317 ] The Communist Party destroyed churches, mosques and temples , ridiculed, harassed, incarcerated and executed religious leaders, flooded the schools and media with anti-religious teachings, and it introduced a belief system called " scientific atheism ", with its own rituals, promises and proselytizers.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] Many priests were killed and imprisoned; thousands of churches were closed. In 1925 the government founded the League of Militant Atheists to intensify the persecution.

[ 320 ] The League of Militant Atheists was also a "nominally independent organization established by the Communist Party to promote atheism".

[ 321 ] The Communist regime confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in the schools. Actions against particular religions, however, were determined by State interests, and most organized religions were never outlawed. It is estimated that 500,000 Russian Orthodox Christians were martyred in the gulags by the Soviet government, excluding the members of other Christian denominations who were also tortured or killed.

[ 304 ] The main target of the anti-religious campaign in the 1920s and 1930s was the Russian Orthodox Church , which had the largest number of faithful worshippers. A very large segment of its clergy, and many of its believers, were shot or sent to labor camps . Theological schools were closed, and church publications were prohibited. In the period between 1927 and 1940, the number of Orthodox Churches in the Russian Republic fell from 29,584 to less than 500. Between 1917 and 1940, 130,000 Orthodox priests were arrested. The widespread persecution and internecine disputes within the church hierarchy led to the seat of Patriarch of Moscow being vacant from 1925 to 1943.

After Operation Barbarossa , Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church in order to intensify the Soviet population's patriotic support of the war effort . By 1957, about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. But in 1959, Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced about 12,000 churches to close. By 1985, fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.

[ 305 ] In the Soviet Union, in addition to the methodical closure and destruction of churches, the charitable and social work which was formerly done by ecclesiastical authorities was taken over by the state. As with all private property, Church owned property was confiscated and converted to public use by the state. The few places of worship which were left to the Church were legally viewed as state property which the government permitted the church to use. After the advent of state funded universal education, the Church was not permitted to carry on educational, instructional activity for children. For adults, only training for church-related occupations was allowed. With the exception of sermons which could be delivered during the celebration of the divine liturgy, it could not instruct the faithful nor could it evangelize the youth. Catechism classes, religious schools, study groups, Sunday schools and religious publications were all declared illegal and banned. This caused many religious tracts to be circulated as illegal literature or samizdat .

[ 202 ] Even after the death of Stalin in 1953, the persecution continued, and it did not end until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian Orthodox Church has recognized a number of New Martyrs as saints, some of whom were executed during the Mass operations of the NKVD under directives like NKVD Order No. 00447 .

Both before and after the October Revolution of 7 November 1917 (25 October Old Calendar), there was a movement within the Soviet Union which sought to unite all of the people of the world under Communist rule (see Communist International ). This movement spread to the Eastern European bloc countries as well as the Balkan States. Since the populations of some of these Slavic countries tied their ethnic heritages to their ethnic churches, the people and their churches were both targeted for ethnic and political genocide by the Soviets and their form of State atheism .

[ 322 ] [ 323 ] The Soviets' official religious stance was one of "religious freedom or tolerance", though the state established atheism as the only scientific truth (see also the Soviet or committee of the All-Union Society for the Dissemination of Scientific and Political Knowledge or Znanie which was until 1947 called The League of the Militant Godless and various Intelligentsia groups).

[ 308 ] [ 309 ] [ 324 ] Criticism of atheism was strictly forbidden and sometimes, it resulted in imprisonment.

[ 325 ] [ 326 ] [ 327 ] [ 328 ] Some of the more high-profile individuals who were executed include Metropolitan Benjamin of Petrograd , priest and scientist Pavel Florensky .

Spain [ edit ] Main articles: Red Terror (Spain) , White Terror (Spain) , and Cristero War The Second Spanish Republic , established in 1931, attempted to establish a regime with separation between State and Church, as had been established in France in 1905. When it was established, the Republic passed legislation which prevented the Church from conducting educational activities.  The Spanish Second Republic was characterized by a process of political polarisation, as party divisions became increasingly embittered and questions of religious identity came to assume major political significance. The existence of different Church institutions was an illustration of the situation which resulted from the proclamation which denounced the 2nd Republic as an anti-Catholic, Masonic, Jewish, and Communist internationalist conspiracy which heralded a clash between God and atheism, chaos and harmony, Good and Evil.

[ 329 ] : 201–202 The Church's high-ranking officials like Isidro Goma, bishop of Tudela , reminded their Christian subjects of their obligation to vote "for the righteous", and they also reminded their priests of their obligation to "educate the consciences." [ 329 ] : 220 In the Asturian miners' strike of 1934 , during the Revolution of 1934 , 34 Catholic priests were massacred and churches were systematically burned.

[ 330 ] Anticlerical opinion accused the Catholic priesthood and religious orders of hypocrisy: clerics were guilty of taking up arms against the people, of exploiting others for the sake of wealth, and of sexual immorality all while claiming the moral authority of peacefulness, poverty, and chastity.

[ 330 ] Since the early years of the Second Spanish Republic, far-right forces, which were imbued with an ultra-Catholic spirit, attempted to overthrow the Republic.

Carlists , Africanistas, and Catholic theologians fostered an atmosphere of social and racial hatred in their speeches and writings.

[ 331 ] : 44–45 The Catholic Church endorsed the rebellion which was led by the fascist Francisco Franco , and Pope Pius XI expressed sympathy for the Nationalist side during the Spanish Civil War .

[ 330 ] The Catholic authorities described Franco's war as a "crusade" against the Second Republic, and later the Collective Letter of the Spanish Bishops, 1937 appeared, justifying Franco's attack on the Republic.

[ 330 ] A similar approach is attested in 1912, when the bishop of Almería José Ignacio de Urbina [ es ] (founder of the National Anti-Masonic and Anti-Semitic League [ es ] ) announced "a decisive battle that must be unleashed" between the "light" and "darkness".

[ 331 ] : 4 Though the official declaration of the "crusade" followed the Republican persecution of Catholic clerics, the Catholic Church was already predisposed towards Franco's position, because it was seen as the "perfect ally of fascism" while it opposed the anticlerical policies of the Second Republic.

[ 330 ] The 1936 anticlerical persecution has been seen as "final phase of a long war between clericalism and anticlericalism" [ 332 ] and "fully consistent with a Spanish history of popular anticlericalism and anticlerical populism".

[ 330 ] Stanley Payne suggested that the persecution of right-wingers and of people who were associated with the Catholic church both before and at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War involved the murder of priests and other clergy, as well as the murder of thousands of lay people, by members of nearly all leftist groups, while a killing spree was also unleashed across the Nationalist zone.

[ 333 ] During the Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939, and especially during the early months of the conflict, individual clergymen and entire religious communities were executed by leftists, some of whom were communists and anarchists . The death toll of the clergy alone included 13 bishops, 4,172 diocesan priests and seminarians, 2,364 monks and friars and 283 nuns, reaching a total of 6,832 clerical victims.

[ 330 ] The main perpetrators of the Red Terror were members of the anarchist Federación Anarquista Ibérica , the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo , and the Trotskyist Workers' Party of Marxist Unification .

[ 330 ] These organizations distanced themselves from the violence, condemned those who were responsible for it or characterized the killings as mob reprisals for acts of violence which had been perpetrated by the clerics themselves, an explanation which was readily accepted by the public.

[ 330 ] In addition to the murder of both the clergy and the faithful, the destruction of churches and the desecration of sacred sites and objects was also widespread. On the night of 19 July 1936 alone, some fifty churches were burned.

[ 334 ] : 45 In Barcelona , out of the 58 churches, only the cathedral was spared, and similar desecrations occurred almost everywhere in Republican Spain.

[ 334 ] : 46 Two exceptions were Biscay and Gipuzkoa , where the Christian Democratic Basque Nationalist Party , after some hesitation, supported the Republic and halted the persecution of Catholics in areas which were held by the Basque Government . All other Catholic churches which were located in the Republican zone were closed. The desecration was not limited to Catholic churches, because synagogues and Protestant churches were also pillaged and closed, but some small Protestant churches were spared. After Francisco Franco 's regime rose to power, it would keep Protestant churches and synagogues closed, because it only legalized the Catholic Church.

[ 335 ] : 215 Payne called the terror the "most extensive and violent persecution of Catholicism in Western History, in some way even more intense than that of the French Revolution ." [ 335 ] : 13 The persecution drove Catholics to the side of the Nationalists, even more of them sided with the Nationalists than would have been expected, because they defended their religious interests and survival.

[ 335 ] : 13 The Roman Catholic priests who were killed during the Red Terror are considered " Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War ", but the priests who were executed by the fascists are not counted among them. A group known as the " 498 Spanish Martyrs " was beatified by the Roman Catholic Church's Pope Benedict XVI in 2007. The history of the Red Terror has been obscured by the inattention of scholars and the "embarrassing partiality" of ecclesiastical historians.

[ 330 ] Some of the numerous non-fascists who were persecuted during Franco's White Terror were Protestants , because the fascists accused them of being associated with Freemasonry , and the persecution which they were subjected to during Franco's White Terror was much more intense than the persecution which they were subjected to during the Red Terror .

[ 336 ] [ 337 ] United States [ edit ] See also: Christianity in the United States , Freedom of religion in the United States , History of Christianity in the United States , History of religion in the United States , Human rights in the United States § Freedom of religion , Religion in the United States , and Religious discrimination in the United States The Latter Day Saints , ( Mormons ) have been persecuted since their founding in the 1830s. The persecution of the Mormons drove them from New York and Ohio to Missouri , where they continued to be subjected to violent attacks. In 1838, Missouri Governor Lilburn Boggs declared that Mormons had made war on the state of Missouri, so they "must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the State".

[ 338 ] At least 10,000 Mormons were expelled from the State. In the most violent altercation which occurred at that time, the Haun's Mill massacre , 17 Mormons were murdered by an anti-Mormon mob and 13 other Mormons were wounded.

[ 339 ] The Extermination Order which was signed by Governor Boggs was not formally invalidated until 25 June 1976, 137 years after being signed.

The Mormons subsequently fled to Nauvoo , Illinois, where hostilities escalated again. In Carthage, Ill., where Joseph Smith was being held on the charge of treason , a mob stormed the jail and killed him. Smith's brother, Hyrum, was also killed. After a succession crisis , most Mormons followed Brigham Young , who organized an evacuation from the United States after the federal government refused to protect them.

[ 340 ] 70,000 Mormon pioneers crossed the Great Plains to settle in the Salt Lake Valley and surrounding areas. After the Mexican–American War , the area became the US territory of Utah . Over the next 63 years, several actions by the federal government were directed against Mormons in the Mormon Corridor , including the Utah War , the Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act , the Poland Act , Reynolds v. United States , the Edmunds Act , the Edmunds–Tucker Act , and the Reed Smoot hearings .

In this 1926 cartoon, the Ku Klux Klan chases the Roman Catholic Church, personified by St Patrick , from the shores of America.

The second iteration of the Ku Klux Klan , founded in 1915 and launched in the 1920s, persecuted Catholics in both the United States and Canada . As stated in its official rhetoric which focused on the threat of the Catholic Church , the Klan was motivated by anti-Catholicism and American nativism .

[ 341 ] Its appeal was exclusively directed towards white Anglo-Saxon Protestants ; it opposed Jews , blacks , Catholics, and newly arriving Southern and Eastern European immigrants such as Italians , Russians , and Lithuanians , many of whom were either Jewish or Catholic.

[ 342 ] Warsaw Pact [ edit ] St. Teodora de la Sihla Church in Central Chișinău was one of the churches that were "converted into museums of atheism", under the doctrine of Marxist–Leninist atheism .

[ 343 ] Across Eastern Europe following World War II, the parts of the Nazi Empire which were conquered by the Soviet Red Army and Yugoslavia became one-party Communist states and the project of coercive conversion to atheism continued.

[ 344 ] [ 345 ] The Soviet Union ended its war time truce with the Russian Orthodox Church, and extended its persecutions to the newly Communist Eastern bloc : "In Poland , Hungary, Lithuania and other Eastern European countries, Catholic leaders who were unwilling to be silent were denounced, publicly humiliated or imprisoned by the Communists. Leaders of the national Orthodox Churches in Romania and Bulgaria had to be cautious and submissive", wrote Geoffrey Blainey .

[ 346 ] While the churches were generally not persecuted as harshly as they had been in the USSR, nearly all of their schools and many of their churches were closed, and they lost their formally prominent roles in public life. Children were taught atheism, and clergy were imprisoned by the thousands.

[ 347 ] In the Eastern Bloc , Christian churches, along with Jewish synagogues and Islamic mosques were forcibly "converted into museums of atheism." [ 326 ] [ 327 ] Along with executions, some other actions which were taken against Orthodox priests and believers included torture , being sent to prison camps , labour camps or mental hospitals .

[ 202 ] [ 348 ] [ 349 ] North Korea [ edit ] Main articles: Persecution of Christians in North Korea , Prison camps in North Korea , Christianity in North Korea , and Religion in North Korea Current situation (1989 to the present) [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era In 2010, Pope Benedict XVI claimed that Christians were the most persecuted religious group in the contemporary world .

[ 350 ] In a speech to the United Nations Human Rights Council 's 23rd session in May 2013, then- Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations in Geneva , Silvano Maria Tomasi claimed that "an estimate of more than 100,000 Christians are violently killed because of some relation to their faith every year".

[ 351 ] This number was supported by the Center for the Study of Global Christianity at the evangelical Gordon–Conwell Theological Seminary in Massachusetts , which published a statement in December 2016 stating that "between 2005 and 2015 there were 900,000 Christian martyrs worldwide – an average of 90,000 per year." [ 352 ] Tomasi's radio address to the council called the figures both a "shocking conclusion" and "credible research".

[ 351 ] The accuracy of this number, based on population estimates in a 1982 edition of the World Christian Encyclopedia , is disputed.

[ 353 ] [ 354 ] Almost all died in wars in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where all sides of the Second Congo War and subsequent conflicts are majority-Christian, and previous years included victims of the Rwandan genocide , an ethnic conflict and a part of the First Congo War where again most belligerents were Christian.

[ 353 ] As a result, the BBC News Magazine cautioned that "when you hear that 100,000 Christians are dying for their faith, you need to keep in mind that the vast majority – 90,000 – are people who were killed in DR Congo".

[ 353 ] Klaus Wetzel [ de ] , a German expert on religious persecution, states that there is a discrepancy in numbers of reported martyrs due to the contradiction between the definition used by Gordon-Conwell defining Christian martyrdom in the widest possible sense, and the more sociological and political definition Wetzel himself, Open Doors , and others such as The International Institute for Religious Freedom use, which is: "those who are killed, who would not have been killed , if they had not been Christians".

[ 354 ] [ verification needed ] Numbers are affected by several important factors, for example, population distribution is a factor. The United States submits an annual report on religious freedom and persecution to the Congress which recognizes restrictions on religious freedom, ranging from low to very high, in three-quarters of the world's countries including the United States. In approximately one quarter of the world's countries, there are high and very high restrictions and oppression, and some of those countries, such as China and India, Indonesia and Pakistan are among those with the highest populations.

[ 355 ] Numbers of martyrs are especially difficult to accurately identify, because religious persecution often occurs in conjunction with wider conflicts. This fact complicates the identification of acts of persecution because they may be politically rather than religiously motivated.

[ 356 ] : xii For example, the U.S. Department of State identified 1.4 million Christians in Iraq in 1991 when the Gulf War began. By 2010, the number of Christians dropped to 700,000 and by 2011 it was estimated that there were between 450,000 and 200,000 Christians left in Iraq.

[ 356 ] : 135 During that period, actions against Christians included the burning and bombing of churches, the bombing of Christian owned businesses and homes, kidnapping, murder, demands for protection money, and anti-Christian rhetoric in the media with those responsible saying that they wanted to rid the country of its Christians.

[ 356 ] : 135–138 A report which was released by the UK's Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs and prepared by Philip Mounstephen , the Bishop of Truro , in July 2019, and a report on worldwide restrictions on religious freedom by the PEW organization, both stated that the number of countries where Christians were suffering as a result of religious persecution was increasing, rising from 125 in 2015 to 144 as of 2018.

[ 357 ] [ 358 ] [ 359 ] [ note 3 ] PEW has published a caution concerning the interpretation of its numbers: "The Center's recent report ... does not attempt to estimate the number of victims in each country... it does not speak to the intensity of harassment..." [ 360 ] The Internationale Gesellschaft für Menschenrechte [ 361 ] – the International Society for Human Rights – in Frankfurt, Germany, is a non-governmental organization with 30,000 members from 38 countries who monitor human rights. In September 2009, then chairman Martin Lessenthin, [ 362 ] issued a report estimating that 80% of acts of religious persecution around the world were aimed at Christians at that time.

[ 363 ] [ 364 ] W. J. Blumenfeld says that Christianity enjoys dominant group privilege in the US and some other Western societies.

[ 365 ] Christianity is, numerically, the largest religion in the U.S.

according to PEW, with 43% of Americans identifying themselves as Protestants and one in five (20%) of Americans identifying themselves as Catholics .

[ 366 ] It remains the largest religion in the world.

[ 367 ] Roughly two-thirds of the world's countries have Christian majorities.

[ 368 ] Due to the large number of Christian majority countries, differing groups of Christians are harassed and persecuted in Christian countries such as Eritrea [ 369 ] and Mexico [ 370 ] more often than in most Muslim countries, though not in greater numbers.

[ 368 ] According to PEW, the Middle East and North Africa have experienced the highest rates of restrictions on non-favorite religions for the last decade, being higher than any other region, each year, from 2007 to 2017.

[ 371 ] But it's the gap between this region and other regions where government favoritism is concerned that is particularly large: "the average country in this region scores nearly twice as high on measures of government favoritism of one religion as the average country in any other region".

[ 371 ] The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom , a bipartisan independent federal agency which was created by the United States Congress in 1998, published a study of the predominantly Muslim countries which are located in the Middle Eastern/North African region. It concludes that, of the world's 1.3 billion Muslims, "28 percent live in ten countries that declare themselves to be Islamic states . In addition, there are 12 predominantly Muslim countries that have chosen to declare that Islam is the official state religion ... Taken together, the 22 states that declare that Islam is the official religion account for 58 percent – or just over 600 million – of the 1 billion Muslims living in 44 predominantly Muslim countries.

[ 372 ] : 6 "Several countries with constitutions establishing Islam as the state religion either do not contain guarantees of the right to freedom of religion or belief, or they contain guarantees that, on their face, do not compare favorably with all aspects of international [human rights] standards." [ 372 ] : 16 All of these countries defer to religious authorities or doctrines on legal issues in some way.

[ 371 ] For example, "when one spouse is Muslim and the other has a different religion (such as Coptic Christianity ), or if spouses are members of different Christian denominations , courts still defer to Islamic family law." [ 371 ] Grim and Finke say their studies indicate that: "When religious freedoms are denied through the regulation of religious profession or practice, violent religious persecution and conflict increase." [ 373 ] : 6 In its annual report, the USCIRF lists 14 "Countries of Particular Concern" with regard to religious rights and it also lists 15 additional countries which it has recommended be placed on the U.S. Department of State's Special Watch List (SWL), a lesser category than the CPC designation.

[ 15 ] Eleven predominantly Muslim countries are ruled by governments which proclaim that their states are secular. "These countries account for nearly 140 million Muslims, or 13.5 percent of the 1 billion Muslims living in predominantly Muslim countries. The 11 remaining predominantly Muslim countries have not made any constitutional declaration concerning the Islamic or secular nature of the state, and have not made Islam the official state religion. This group of countries, which includes Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim country, accounts for over 250 million Muslims".

[ 372 ] : 6 This demonstrates that the majority of the world's Muslim population live in countries that either proclaim the state to be secular, or that make no pronouncements concerning Islam as the official state religion.

[ 372 ] : 2 The rise of Hindutva (Hindu nationalism) in India, led by the Bharatiya Janata Party , has seen increasing persecution and violence against Christians .

[ 374 ] See also [ edit ] International Day of Prayer for the Persecuted Church Anti-Christian sentiment List of massacres in Turkey Anti-Christian ethnic discrimination in Israel Attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II Christian persecution complex Foolishness for Christ Martyrdom in Christianity Sign of contradiction Christianity and violence Christian fascism Christian fundamentalism Christian terrorism Criticism of Christianity Anti-Catholicism Anti-Mormonism Anti-Protestantism Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses Sectarian violence among Christians Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu terrorism Islam and violence Al-Qaeda Boko Haram Islamic extremism International propagation of Salafism and Wahhabism Islamic fundamentalism Islamic State Islamic terrorism Jihadism Salafi jihadism Sectarian violence among Muslims Taliban Judaism and violence Jewish fundamentalism Jewish religious terrorism Kahanism Zionist political violence Christianity portal Notes [ edit ] ^ Augustine, Civitate dei , XVIII.50: Latin : Proinde ne illud quidem temere puto esse dicendum siue credendum, quod nonnullis uisum est uel uidetur, non-amplius ecclesiam passuram persecutiones usque ad tempus Antichristi, quam quot iam passa est, id est decem, ut undecima eademque nouissima sit ab Antichristo. Primam quippe computant a Nerone quae facta est, secundam a Domitiano, a Traiano tertiam, quartam ab Antonino, a Seuero quintam, sextam a Maximino, a Decio septimam, octauam a Valeriano, ab Aureliano nonam, decimam a Diocletiano et Maximiano. Plagas enim Aegyptiorum, quoniam decem fuerunt, antequam exire inde inciperet populus Dei, putant ad hunc intellectum esse referendas, ut nouissima Antichristi persecutio similis uideatur undecimae plagae, qua Aegyptii, dum hostiliter sequerentur Hebraeos, in mari Rubro populo Dei per siccum transeunte perierunt.

^ ( Koine Greek : πρὸ δὲ τούτων πάντων ἐπιβαλοῦσιν ἐφ’ ὑμᾶς τὰς χεῖρας αὐτῶν καὶ διώξουσιν, παραδιδόντες εἰς τὰς συναγωγὰς καὶ φυλακάς, ἀπαγομένους ἐπὶ βασιλεῖς καὶ ἡγεμόνας ἕνεκεν τοῦ ὀνόματός μου· ) ^ PEW measured government restrictions and social hostilities: laws and policies restricting religious freedom (such as requiring religious groups to register in order to operate) and government favoritism of religious groups (through the funding of religious education, property and clergy, for example); government limits on religious activities and government harassment of religious groups. One category of social hostilities has substantially increased – hostilities which are related to religious norms (for example, the harassment of women for violating religious dress codes). Two other types of social hostility, harassment by individuals and social groups (ranging from small gangs to mob violence ) and religious violence by organized groups (including neo-Nazi groups such as the Nordic Resistance Movement and Islamist groups like Boko Haram ), have risen more modestly. A fourth category of social hostility is interreligious tension and violence (for instance, sectarian or communal clashes between Hindus and Muslims in India ).

^ French archaeology has shown the north African landscape of this time period became "covered with a white robe of churches" with Catholics and Donatists building multiple churches with granaries to feed the poor as they competed for the loyalty of the people.

[ 65 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Bulut, Uzay (30 August 2024).

"Turkey: Ongoing Violations against Greek Christians" .

The European Conservative . Budapest, Brussels, Rome, Vienna: Center for European Renewal .

ISSN 2590-2008 .

Archived from the original on 30 August 2024 . Retrieved 30 August 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g Morris, Benny ; Ze'evi, Dror (4 November 2021).

"Then Came the Chance the Turks Have Been Waiting For: To Get Rid of Christians Once and for All" .

Haaretz .

Tel Aviv .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 5 November 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g Morris, Benny; Ze'evi, Dror (2019).

The Thirty-Year Genocide: Turkey's Destruction of Its Christian Minorities, 1894–1924 .

Cambridge, Massachusetts : Harvard University Press . pp.

3– 5.

ISBN 978-0-674-24008-7 .

^ a b c d e f g Gutman, David (2019). "The thirty year genocide: Turkey's destruction of its Christian minorities, 1894–1924".

Turkish Studies .

21 (1).

London and New York : Routledge on behalf of the Global Research in International Affairs Center: 1– 3.

doi : 10.1080/14683849.2019.1644170 .

eISSN 1743-9663 .

ISSN 1468-3849 .

S2CID 201424062 .

^ a b c d e f g Bardakçı, Mehmet; Freyberg-Inan, Annette ; Giesel, Christoph; Leisse, Olaf (2017).

"The Ambivalent Situation of Turkey's Armenians: Between Collective Historical Trauma and Psychological Repression, Loyal Citizenship and Minority Status, Social Integration and Discrimination, Assimilation and Self-assertion" .

Religious Minorities in Turkey: Alevi, Armenians, and Syriacs and the Struggle to Desecuritize Religious Freedom .

London and New York : Palgrave Macmillan . pp. 133−154.

doi : 10.1057/978-1-137-27026-9_5 .

ISBN 978-1-137-27026-9 .

LCCN 2016961241 .

^ a b c d e f g Erol, Su (2015).

"The Syriacs of Turkey: A Religious Community on the Path of Recognition" .

Archives de sciences sociales des religions (171).

Paris , France : Éditions de l'EHESS : 59– 80.

doi : 10.4000/assr.27027 .

ISBN 9782713224706 .

ISSN 1777-5825 .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2019.

^ a b c d e f g Smith, Roger W. (Spring 2015). "Introduction: The Ottoman Genocides of Armenians, Assyrians, and Greeks".

Genocide Studies International .

9 (1).

Toronto : University of Toronto Press : 1– 9.

doi : 10.3138/GSI.9.1.01 .

ISSN 2291-1855 .

JSTOR 26986011 .

S2CID 154145301 .

^ a b c d e f g Roshwald, Aviel (2013).

"Part II. The Emergence of Nationalism: Politics and Power – Nationalism in the Middle East, 1876–1945" . In Breuilly, John (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Nationalism .

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

220– 241.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199209194.013.0011 .

ISBN 9780191750304 .

^ a b c d e f g Üngör, Uğur Ümit (June 2008). "Seeing like a nation-state: Young Turk social engineering in Eastern Turkey, 1913–50".

Journal of Genocide Research .

10 (1).

London and New York : Routledge : 15– 39.

doi : 10.1080/14623520701850278 .

ISSN 1469-9494 .

OCLC 260038904 .

S2CID 71551858 .

^ a b c d e f g İçduygu, Ahmet; Toktaş, Şule; Ali Soner, B. (February 2008).

"The politics of population in a nation-building process: Emigration of non-Muslims from Turkey" .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

31 (2).

London and New York : Routledge : 358– 389.

doi : 10.1080/01419870701491937 .

hdl : 11729/308 .

ISSN 1466-4356 .

OCLC 40348219 .

S2CID 143541451 .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 – via Academia.edu .

^ [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ PEW (19 December 2011).

"Living as Majorities and Minorities" .

Global Christianity – A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population . Pew Research Center Religion and Public Life. p. 3 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

If all these Christians were in a single country, it would have the second-largest Christian population in the world, after the United States.

^ a b c d "Annual Report 2020" (PDF) . United States Commission on International Religious Freedom. pp. 1, 11.

^ a b c d Wand 1990 , p. 13.

^ Burke, John J. (1993) [1899].

Characteristics of the Early Church . M.H. Wiltzius. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1-4086-5991-5 .

^ Lim, Kar Yong (2009).

The Sufferings of Christ Are Abundant In Us': A Narrative Dynamics Investigation of Paul's Sufferings in 2 Corinthians . A&C Black. pp.

214– 227.

ISBN 9780567635143 .

^ Setzer, Claudia (1994).

Jewish Responses to Early Christians: History and Polemics, 30–150 C.E . Minneapolis: Fortress.

^ Lieu, Judith (2003).

"The Synagogue and the Separation of the Christians" (PDF) .

Coniectanea Biblica . New Testament series 39: 189– 207.

^ Schäfer, Peter (2014).

The Jewish Jesus: How Judaism and Christianity Shaped Each Other (illustrated, reprint ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 9780691160955 .

^ von Harnack, Adolf (1908). Moffatt, James (ed.).

The Mission and Expansion of Christianity in the First Three Centuries (2 ed.). Williams and Norgate. pp.

103– 104.

^ a b Katz, Steven T. (1984).

"Issues in the Separation of Judaism and Christianity after 70 C.E.: A Reconsideration" .

Journal of Biblical Literature .

103 (1): 43– 44.

doi : 10.2307/3260313 .

JSTOR 3260313 .

^ Shaw, Brent (14 August 2015). "The Myth of the Neronian Persecution".

The Journal of Roman Studies .

105 : 73– 100.

doi : 10.1017/S0075435815000982 .

S2CID 162564651 .

^ a b Carrier, Richard (2 July 2014).

"The prospect of a Christian interpolation in Tacitus, Annals 15.44" .

Vigiliae Christianae .

68 (3).

Brill Academic Publishers : 264– 283.

doi : 10.1163/15700720-12341171 .

^ Ben Witherington III, Revelation, Cambridge 2003, p177 ^ Tertullian , Adversus Gnosticos Scorpiace , Book 15, Chapters 2-5 ^ Lactantius , De mortibus persecutorum , Book 2, Chapters 4-6 ^ Sulpicius Severus , Chronicorum , Book 3, Chapter 29.

^ Orosius , Historiarum , Book 7, Chapters 7-10 ^ Stark, Rodney (1997).

The Rise of Christianity How the Obscure, Marginal Jesus Movement Became the Dominant Religious Force in the Western World in a Few Centuries . HarperCollins. p. 7.

ISBN 9780060677015 .

^ Guy, Laurie (28 October 2011).

Introducing Early Christianity: A Topical Survey of Its Life, Beliefs Practices . InterVarsity Press. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-8308-3942-1 .

^ Green, Bernard (2010).

Christianity in Ancient Rome The First Three Centuries . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 120.

ISBN 9780567032508 .

^ González 2010 , p. 97.

^ Papandrea, James L. (2011).

The Wedding of the Lamb A Historical Approach to the Book of Revelation . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 38.

ISBN 9781498273428 .

^ a b c Scarre 1995, p. 170 ^ "IRENAEUS – The mass slaughter of Lyon's Christians" .

Christian History Project .

^ Christopher Reyes (2010).

In His Name . California: AuthorHouse. p.33 ^ Eusebius.

"Church History" .

Book 6, Chapter 28 . New Advent . Retrieved 25 April 2014 .

^ Papandrea, James L. (23 January 2012).

Reading the Early Church Fathers: From the Didache to Nicaea . Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0809147519 .

^ Graeme Clark (2005). "Third-Century Christianity". In Alan K. Bowman; Peter Garnsey; Averil Cameron (eds.).

Cambridge Ancient History . Vol. 12: The Crisis of Empire, A.D. 193–337 (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 623.

^ Justin, I Apology 31, 6; Eusebius, Chronicle , seventeenth year of the Emperor Hadrian. See: Bourgel, Jonathan, ″The Jewish-Christians in the storm of the Bar Kokhba Revolt″, in: From One Identity to Another: The Mother Church of Jerusalem Between the Two Jewish Revolts Against Rome (66-135/6 EC) . Paris: Éditions du Cerf, collection Judaïsme ancien et Christianisme primitif, (French), pp. 127–175.

^ Ide, Arthur Frederick; Smith, John Paul (1985).

Martyrdom of Women: A Study of Death Psychology in the Early Christian Church to 301 CE . Garland: Tangelwuld. p.

21 .

ISBN 978-0-930383-49-7 .

apud deMause, Lloyd (2002).

"Ch. 9. The Evolution of Psyche and Society. Part III." .

The Emotional Life of Nations . New York: Karnac.

ISBN 1-892746-98-0 .

Both Christians and Jews "engaged in a contest and reflection about the new-fangled practice of martyrdom," 191 even unto suicide...and Augustine spoke of "the mania for self-destruction" of early Christians.

192 But the Christians, following Tertullian's dicta that "martyrdom is required by God," forced their own martyrdom so they could die in an ecstatic trance: "Although their tortures were gruesome, the martyrs did not suffer, enjoying their analgesic state." 195 192. Arthur J. Droge and James D. Tabor, A Noble Death: Suicide and Martyrdom Among Christians and Jews in Antiquity. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1992, p. 5.

193. Arthur F. Ide, Martyrdom of Women: A Study of Death Psychology in the Early Christian Church to 301 CE. Garland: Tangelwuld, 1985, p. 21.

194. Ibid., p. 136.

195. Ibid., pp. 146, 138.

^ Boyarin, Daniel.

Dying for God: Martyrdom and the Making of Christianity and Judaism . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999, p. 40.

^ Droge, Arthur J.; Tabor, James D.

(November 1992).

A Noble Death: Suicide and Martyrdom Among Christians and Jews in Antiquity . San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. p.

136 .

ISBN 978-0-06-062095-0 .

Misquoted as Groge and Tabor (1992:136) by C. Douzinas in Closs Stephens, Angharad; Vaughan-Williams, Nick; Douzinas, C. (2009).

Terrorism and the Politics of Response . Oxon and New York: Routledge. p. 198.

ISBN 978-0-415-45506-0 .

^ a b c d e f Moss, Candida R. (2012).

Ancient Christian Martyrdom Diverse Practices, Theologies, and Traditions . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300154658 .

^ Moss, Candida R. "The Discourse of Voluntary Martyrdom: Ancient and Modern.” Church History, vol. 81, no. 3, 2012, pp. 531–551., www.jstor.org/stable/23252340. Retrieved 23 January 2021.

^ Boyarin, Daniel (1999).

Dying for God Martyrdom and the Making of Christianity and Judaism . Stanford University Press. p. 121.

ISBN 9780804737043 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab Nicholson, Oliver (2018), Nicholson, Oliver (ed.), "Christians, persecution of" , The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity (online ed.), Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198662778.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-866277-8 , retrieved 7 October 2020 ^ Shaw, Brent D. (2011).

Sacred Violence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of Augustine . Cambridge University Press. p. 176.

ISBN 978-0-521-19605-5 .

^ Howells, Kristina (2008).

Making Sense of Bible Prophecy . Lulu. p. 91.

ISBN 978-1409207832 .

^ W. H. C. Frend (1984).

The Rise of Christianity . Fortress Press, Philadelphia. p. 319.

ISBN 978-0-8006-1931-2 .

^ Brown, Peter. "Christianization and religious conflict". The Cambridge Ancient History 13 (1998): 337–425.

^ a b c Shaw, Brent D. (2011).

Sacred Violence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of Augustine . Cambridge University Press. pp.

598– 599.

ISBN 978-0-521-19605-5 .

^ MacMullen, Ramsay (1997) Christianity & Paganism in the Fourth to Eighth Centuries , Yale University Press, p.4 quote: "non Christian writings came in for this same treatment, that is destruction in great bonfires at the center of the town square. Copyists were discouraged from replacing them by the threat of having their hands cut off ^ a b c d Leithart, Peter J. (2010).

Defending Constantine The Twilight of an Empire and the Dawn of Christendom . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 9780830827220 .

^ a b c d e Tilley, Maureen A., ed. (1996).

Donatist Martyr Stories The Church in Conflict in Roman North Africa . Liverpool University Press. pp. ix, xiv.

ISBN 9780853239314 .

^ a b c Shean, John F. (2010).

Soldiering for God Christianity and the Roman Army . Brill.

ISBN 9789004187337 .

^ Cairns, Earle E. (1996). "Chapter 7:Christ or Caesar". Christianity Through the Centuries: A History of the Christian Church (Third ed.). Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan.

ISBN 978-0-310-20812-9 .

^ Olson, Roger E. (1999).

The Story of Christian Theology: Twenty Centuries of Tradition and Reform . Downer's Grove, In.: InterVarsity Press. p. 172.

ISBN 978-0-8308-1505-0 .

^ a b c d e f g Shaw, Brent D. (2011).

Sacred Violence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of Augustine . Cambridge University Press. pp.

458– 460.

ISBN 978-0-521-19605-5 .

^ Shaw, Brent D. (2011).

Sacred Violence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of Augustine . Cambridge University Press. pp.

460– 466.

ISBN 978-0-521-19605-5 .

^ Peter Heather & John Matthews, Goths in the Fourth Century , pp. 96ff ^ MacMullen, Ramsay (2019).

Changes in the Roman Empire: Essays in the Ordinary . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691655246 .

^ a b c d e Brown, P. (1964). "St. Augustine's Attitude to Religious Coercion".

Journal of Roman Studies .

54 ( 1– 2): 107– 116.

doi : 10.2307/298656 .

JSTOR 298656 .

S2CID 162757247 .

^ Frend, W.H.C. (2020).

The Donatist Church . Wipf and Stock.

ISBN 9781532697555 .

^ a b R. A. Markus, Saeculum: History and Society in the Theology of St.Augustine (Cambridge, 1970), pp. 149–153 ^ a b c Russell, Frederick H. (1999). "Persuading the Donatists: Augustine's Coercion by Words".

The Limits of Ancient Christianity: Essays on Late Antique Thought and Culture in Honor of R.A. Markus . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 0-472-10997-9 .

^ Pollmann, Karla (2005). "Poetische Paraphrasen der Actio Acaunensium Martyrum des Eucherius von Lyon". In Wermelinger, Otto; Bruggisser, Philippe; Näf, Beat; Roessli, Jean-Michel (eds.).

Mauritius und die Thebäische Legion: Akten des internationalen Kolloquiums: Freiburg, Saint-Maurice, Martigny, 17.-20. September 2003 [ Mauritius and the Thebaic Legion: files of the international colloquium: Freiburg, Saint-Maurice, Martigny, 17–20 September 2003 ]. Academic Press Fribourg. pp.

227– 254.

ISBN 3-7278-1527-2 .

OCLC 62901044 .

^ Marcos, Mar. "The Debate on Religious Coercion in Ancient Christianity." Chaos e Kosmos 14 (2013): 1–16.

^ Herbermann, Charles George, ed. (1912). "Toleration, History of".

The Catholic Encyclopedia An International Work of Reference on the Constitution, Doctrine, Discipline, and History of the Catholic Church . University of Michigan. pp.

761– 772.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be Kazhdan, Alexander P.

; Talbot, Alice-Mary , eds. (1998).

"Dumbarton Oaks Hagiography Database" (PDF) .

doaks.org . Dumbarton Oaks: Harvard University . Retrieved 11 April 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Skjærvø, Oktor (2018), Nicholson, Oliver (ed.), "Christians, persecution of, Persian Empire" , The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198662778.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-866277-8 , retrieved 7 October 2020 ^ Bowman, Alan; Peter Garnsey; Averil Cameron, eds. (2005).

The Cambridge Ancient History: Volume 12, The Crisis of Empire, AD 193–337 . Cambridge University Press. p. 474.

ISBN 9780521301992 .

^ a b Joel Thomas Walker (2006).

The Legend of Mar Qardagh: Narrative and Christian Heroism in Late Antique Iraq . University of California Press. p. 111.

ISBN 9780520932197 .

^ Ehsan Yarshater (1983).

The Cambridge History of Iran: Seleucid Parthian . Cambridge University Press. p. 929.

ISBN 9780521246934 .

^ Sebastian P. Brock, Fire from Heaven: Studies in Syriac Theology and Liturgy , (Ashgate, 2006), 72.

^ D. T. Potts, The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State , (Cambridge University Press, 1999), 422.

^ Jacob Neusner (1997).

History of the Jews in Babylonia . Brill. pp. 24, 25.

ISBN 9004021469 .

^ Mehrdad Kia (2016).

The Persian Empire: A Historical Encyclopedia [2 volumes]: A Historical Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. p. 280.

ISBN 9781610693912 .

^ Jacob Neusner (1965).

A History of the Jews in Babylonia, Part V: Later Sasanian Times . Brill. p. 44.

^ Krzysztof Stopka (2016).

Armenia Christiana: Armenian Religious Identity and the Churches of Constantinople and Rome (4th–15th Century) .

Wydawnictwo UJ . p. 61.

ISBN 9788323395553 .

^ Elton L. Daniel (2012).

The History of Iran . ABC-CLIO. p. 59.

ISBN 9780313375095 .

^ Richard E. Payne (2015).

A State of Mixture: Christians, Zoroastrians, and Iranian Political Culture in Late Antiquity . University of California Press. pp. 49, 55– 56.

ISBN 9780520961531 .

^ Philip Wood (2013).

History and Identity in the Late Antique Near East . Oxford University Press. pp.

39– 40.

ISBN 9780199915408 .

^ Joel Thomas Walker (2006).

The Legend of Mar Qardagh: Narrative and Christian Heroism in Late Antique Iraq . University of California Press. p. 112.

ISBN 9780520245785 .

^ a b Abrahamson; Katz; et al. (2004).

"The Persian conquest of Jerusalem in 614 compared with Islamic conquest of 638" (PDF) .

alsadiqin.org .

^ R. W. Thomson (1999).

The Armenian History Attributed to Sebeos . Historical commentary by James Howard-Johnston. Assistance from Tim Greenwood. Liverpool University Press.

ISBN 9780853235644 .

^ Gideon Avi (2010).

"The Persian Conquest of Jerusalem (614 CE) ––An Archaeological Assessment" .

The Bible and Interpretation . University of Arizona.

^ Idinopulos, Thomas A. (1991).

Jerusalem blessed, Jerusalem cursed: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in the Holy City from David's time to our own . Chicago: I.R. Dee . p.

152 .

^ Horowitz, Elliott S.

(2006).

Reckless Rites: Purim and the Legacy of Jewish Violence . p.

229 .

^ a b c "Massacre at Mamilla" .

Jerusalem Post . 2 March 2006.

^ Nagar, Yossi.

"Human Skeletal Remains from the Mamilla cave, Jerusalem" . Israel Antiquities Authority . Retrieved 8 January 2014 .

^ Mordechai Aviam [in Hebrew] (2004).

Jews, Pagans and Christians in the Galilee: 25 Years of Archaeological Excavations and Surveys : Hellenistic to Byzantine Periods . Harvard University Press. p. 239.

ISBN 9781580461719 .

^ "Historians back BBC over Jewish massacre claim" .

The Jewish Chronicle . Archived from the original on 5 April 2017 . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .

^ Jacques Ryckmans [ ar ] , La persécution des chrétiens himyarites au sixième siècle Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Inst. in het Nabije Oosten, 1956 pp. 1–24 ^ Bowesock, Glen (2013). The Throne of Adulis: Red Sea Wars on the Eve of Islam. Oxford University Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0199739325 .

^ a b c Richards, Julian D . (1991). Viking Age England. London: B. T. Batsford and English Heritage. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-7134-6520-4.

^ a b c Blair, Peter Hunter (2003). An Introduction to Anglo-Saxon England (3rd ed.). Cambridge and New York City: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53777-3. page 55 ^ Hall 2010 , p. 13.

^ Graham-Campbell and Batey 1998 . p. 24.

^ a b c d e Stillman, Norman A.

(1998) [1979].

"Under the New Order" .

The Jews of Arab Lands: A History and Source Book .

Philadelphia : Jewish Publication Society . pp.

22– 28.

ISBN 978-0-8276-0198-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Runciman, Steven (1987) [1951].

"The Reign of Antichrist" .

A History of the Crusades, Volume 1: The First Crusade and the Foundation of the Kingdom of Jerusalem .

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . pp.

20– 37.

ISBN 978-0-521-34770-9 .

^ a b c d e Sahner, Christian C. (2020) [2018].

"Introduction: Christian Martyrs under Islam" .

Christian Martyrs under Islam: Religious Violence and the Making of the Muslim World .

Princeton, New Jersey and Woodstock, Oxfordshire : Princeton University Press . pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 978-0-691-17910-0 .

LCCN 2017956010 .

^ a b c d e f Fierro, Maribel (January 2008).

"Decapitation of Christians and Muslims in the Medieval Iberian Peninsula: Narratives, Images, Contemporary Perceptions" .

Comparative Literature Studies .

45 (2: Al-Andalus and Its Legacies ).

Philadelphia , Pennsylvania: Penn State University Press : 137– 164.

doi : 10.2307/complitstudies.45.2.0137 .

ISSN 1528-4212 .

JSTOR 25659647 .

S2CID 161217907 .

^ a b c d e Trombley, Frank R. (Winter 1996). " The Martyrs of Córdoba: Community and Family Conflict in an Age of Mass Conversion (review)".

Journal of Early Christian Studies .

4 (4).

Baltimore , Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press : 581– 582.

doi : 10.1353/earl.1996.0079 .

ISSN 1086-3184 .

S2CID 170001371 .

^ Pipes, Daniel (1981).

Slave Soldiers and Islam: The Genesis of a Military System . Daniel Pipes. pp.

142– 43.

ISBN 9780300024470 .

^ Kennedy, Hugh (2007).

The Great Arab Conquests: How the Spread of Islam Changed the World We Live In . Da Capo Press. p. 206.

ISBN 9780306815850 .

^ The History of the Conquest of Egypt, North Africa and Spain: Known as the Futuh . Cosimo. January 2010. p. 170.

ISBN 9781616404352 .

^ Barbarians, Marauders, And Infidels . Basic Books. 26 May 2004. p. 144.

ISBN 9780813391533 .

^ Ibn Abd-el-Hakem's History of the conquest of Spain, ed. [with text and] tr. by J.H. Jones . 1858. p. 205.

^ The Myth of the Andalusian Paradise . Open Road Media. 9 February 2016. p. 12.

ISBN 9781504034692 .

^ Elmali-Karakaya, Ayse (2020). "Being Married to a Non-Muslim Husband: Religious Identity in Muslim Women's Interfaith Marriages". In Hood, Ralph W.; Cheruvallil-Contractor, Sariya (eds.).

Research in the Social Scientific Study of Religion: A Diversity of Paradigms . Vol. 31.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

388– 410.

doi : 10.1163/9789004443969_020 .

ISBN 978-90-04-44348-8 .

ISSN 1046-8064 .

S2CID 234539750 .

^ Leeman, A. B. (Spring 2009).

"Interfaith Marriage in Islam: An Examination of the Legal Theory Behind the Traditional and Reformist Positions" (PDF) .

Indiana Law Journal .

84 (2). Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Maurer School of Law : 743– 772.

ISSN 0019-6665 .

S2CID 52224503 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 November 2018 . Retrieved 25 August 2021 .

^ "The Pact of Umar" .

Christian History . Retrieved 24 March 2015 .

^ The Disappearance of Christianity from North Africa in the Wake of the Rise of Islam C. J. Speel, II Church History, Vol. 29, No. 4 (Dec. 1960), pp. 379–397 ^ Graves, Coburn V. (November 1964).

" The Martyrs of Cordoba, 850–859. A Study of the Sources (review)" .

The Hispanic American Historical Review .

44 (4). Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press on behalf of the Conference on Latin American History : 644.

doi : 10.1215/00182168-44.4.644 .

ISSN 1527-1900 .

S2CID 227325750 .

^ Naudeighth, François [in French] (13 November 2013).

Le'Expansion Nestorienne en Asie . Gorgias Press, LLC. pp.

106– 13.

ISBN 9781611438321 .

^ Gil, Moshe (27 February 1997).

A History of Palestine, 634-1099 . Cambridge University Press. p. 473.

ISBN 9780521599849 .

^ Ladjal, Tarek (2017).

"The Christian presence in North Africa under Almoravids Rule (1040–1147 CE): Coexistence or eradication?" .

Cogent Arts & Humanities .

4 .

doi : 10.1080/23311983.2017.1334374 .

S2CID 159473596 .

^ a b The Myth of the Andalusian Paradise: Muslims, Christians, and Jews Under Islamic Rule in Medieval Spain . ISI Books. 2016.

ISBN 9781610170956 .

^ Historia de los mozárabes de España: Bajo el gobierno de los virreyes (Años 711 a 756) . Ediciones Turner. 1983.

ISBN 9788475060859 .

^ Reinhart Dozy (12 January 2017).

Spanish Islam: A History of the Moslems in Spain . Routledge.

ISBN 9781315304694 .

^ Lewis, Bernard (1987).

Islam from the Prophet Muhammad to the Capture of Constantinople, Volume 2 . Oxford University Press. pp.

158– 65.

ISBN 978-0-19-505088-2 .

^ Maqrīzī, Aḥmad ibn ʻalī (1873).

A Short History of the Copts and Their Church . p. 86.

^ Wood, Philip (20 April 2021).

The Imam of the Christians: The World of Dionysius of Tel-Mahre, C. 750–850 . Princeton University Press. p. 169.

ISBN 9780691219950 .

^ Profile of Eustratios of Agauros , johnsanidopoulos.com. Accessed 8 November 2024.

^ a b c d Prieto Dominguez, Oscar (2019). "The iconoclast saint: Emperor Theophilos in Byzantine hagiography". In Tougher, Shaun (ed.).

The Emperor in the Byzantine World: Papers from the Forty-Seventh Spring Symposium of Byzantine Studies . London: Routledge. pp.

216– 234.

doi : 10.4324/9780429060984 .

hdl : 10366/155274 .

ISBN 978-0-429-06098-4 .

S2CID 194332235 .

^ a b Runciman, Steven (1999) [1951].

A History of the Crusades: Volume 1 . Cambridge University Press. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-521-34770-9 .

^ Baldwin, Marshall W. (1969) [1955]. Setton, Kenneth Meyer (ed.).

A History of the Crusades, Volume 1: the First Hundred Years (2nd ed.). University of Wisconsin Press. p. 159.

ISBN 978-0-299-04834-1 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Runciman, Steven (1999) [1951].

A History of the Crusades: Volume 1 . Cambridge University Press. pp.

35– 36.

ISBN 978-0-521-34770-9 .

^ a b c d e f g Holt, Andrew (2019). " "Defensive wars," crusades as".

The World of the Crusades: A Daily Life Encyclopedia: Volume 2 . ABC-CLIO. pp.

444– 446.

ISBN 978-1-4408-5462-0 .

^ Hillenbrand, Carole (21 November 2007).

Turkish Myth and Muslim Symbol: The battle of Mazikert . p. 244.

ISBN 9780748631155 .

^ Nicolle, David (20 August 2013).

Manzikert 1071: The Breaking of Byzantium . Bloomsbury. p. 92.

ISBN 9781780965055 .

^ Vryonis, Speros (26 March 1975).

"Nomadization and Islamization in Asia Minor" .

Dumbarton Oaks Papers .

29 : 50.

doi : 10.2307/1291369 .

JSTOR 1291369 .

^ Vryonis, Speros (2008).

The Decline of Medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor and the Process of Islamization from the Eleventh Through the Fifteenth Century . American Council of Learned Societies.

ISBN 9781597404761 .

^ Miszczak, Izabela (2020).

The Secrets of Ephesus . ASLAN Publishing House.

ISBN 9788395654039 .

^ Miszczak, Izabela (2016).

Around Ephesus and Kuşadası . ASLAN Publishing House.

ISBN 9788394426903 .

^ Vryonis, Speros (1971).

The Decline of Medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor and the Process of Islamization from the Eleventh through the Fifteenth Century . University of California Press. pp.

194– 95.

ISBN 9780520015975 .

^ Frankopan, Peter (2013).

The First Crusade: The Call from the East . Vintage. pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 9780099555032 .

^ Frankopan, Peter (2013).

The First Crusade: The Call from the East . Vintage. p. 61.

ISBN 9780099555032 .

^ Ellenblum, Ronnie (2 August 2012).

The Collapse of the Eastern Mediterranean: Climate Change and the Decline of the East, 950-1072 . Cambridge University Press. p. 245.

ISBN 9781139560986 .

^ Der Islam: Zeitschrift für geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients, Volume 83, Issues 1-2 . 2006. p. 101.

^ Rubenstein, Jay Carter (26 December 2014).

The First Crusade: A Brief History with Documents . Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 56.

ISBN 9781457629105 .

^ A History of the Crusades . Cambridge University Press. 3 December 1987. p. 1:79.

ISBN 978-0-521-34770-9 .

^ A History of the Crusades. Vol. 1. The First Hundred Years . Univ of Wisconsin Press. 1969. pp.

68– 78.

ISBN 978-0-299-04834-1 .

^ The First Crusaders, 1095-1131 . Cambridge University Press. 1997. p. 37-38.

ISBN 978-0-521-64603-1 .

^ a b c d e f g h Runciman, Steven (1965).

The Fall of Constantinople 1453 . Cambridge University Press. pp.

145– 148.

ISBN 978-0-521-39832-9 .

^ a b c d e f g Holt, Andrew (2013). "Crusading against Barbarians: Muslims as Barbarians in Crusades Era Sources".

East Meets West in the Middle Ages and Early Modern Times: Transcultural Experiences in the Premodern World . Berlin: De Gruyter. pp.

443– 456.

doi : 10.1515/9783110321517.443 .

ISBN 978-3-11-032151-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Ní Chléirigh, Léan (2010). "The Impact of the First Crusade on Western Opinion Toward the Byzantine Empire: The Gesta Dei per Francos of Guibert of Nogent and the Historia Hierosolymitana of Fulcher of Chartres". In Kostick, Conor (ed.).

The Crusades and the Near East: Cultural Histories . Abingdon: Routledge. pp.

161– 188.

ISBN 9781136902475 .

^ a b c Angold, Michael (2016). "The fall of Jerusalem (1187) as viewed from Byzantium". In Boas, Adrian (ed.).

The Crusader World . Routledge Worlds. Oxford and New York: Routledge. pp.

289– 308.

doi : 10.4324/9781315684154 .

ISBN 978-1-315-68415-4 .

^ Darius von Güttner-Sporzyński (2017). "chapter 6". In Cassidy-Welch, Megan (ed.).

Remembering the Crusades and Crusading . Routledge.

ISBN 9781138811140 .

^ a b c d Giles Constable (2001). "The Historiography of the crusades". In Laiou, Angeliki E.

; Mottahedeh, Roy P.

(eds.).

The Crusades from the Perspective of Byzantium and the Muslim World . Washington D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection.

ISBN 9780884022770 .

^ The Oxford Illustrated History of the Crusades . Oxford University Press. 2001.

ISBN 978-0-19-285428-5 .

^ "Andrew R Murphy" . academia.edu.

Virginia Commonwealth University, Political Science, Faculty Member Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Political Science, Faculty Member ^ a b Murphy, Andrew R. (1997). "Tolerance, Toleration, and the Liberal Tradition".

Polity .

29 (4). The University of Chicago Press Journals: 593– 623.

doi : 10.2307/3235269 .

JSTOR 3235269 .

S2CID 155764374 .

^ Engh, Mary Jane (2010).

In the Name of Heaven 3000 Years of Religious Persecution . Prometheus. p. 8.

ISBN 9781615925490 .

^ a b Tyerman, Christopher (2005).

The Crusades: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 101.

ISBN 978-0-19-157811-3 .

^ a b Nicholson, Helen J. (2004).

The Crusades . Westport, CN and London: Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

53– 76.

ISBN 978-0-313-32685-1 .

^ Kienzle, Beverly Mayne (2001).

Cistercians, Heresy, and Crusade in Occitania, 1145–1229: Preaching in the Lord's Vineyard . U.K.: Boydell Press.

ISBN 9781903153000 .

^ a b Rummel, Rudolph (1994), Death by Government ^ a b c d Marvin, Laurence W.. The Occitan War: A Military and Political History of the Albigensian Crusade, 1209–1218. N.p., Cambridge University Press, 2008.

^ Graham-Leigh, Elaine (2005).

The Southern French Nobility and the Albigensian Crusade . Rochester, NY: The Boydell Press.

ISBN 1-84383-129-5 .

^ Jones, Chris (1 March 2009).

"09.03.20, Marvin, The Occitan War" .

The Medieval Review .

Indiana University : no page #s available.

ISSN 1096-746X . baj9928.0903.020.

^ Dragnea, Mihai (2020).

The Wendish Crusade, 1147: The Development of Crusading Ideology in the Twelfth Century . NY: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-367-36696-4 .

^ a b c d Fonnesberg-Schmidt, Iben (2007).

The popes and the Baltic crusades, 1147–1254 . Brill.

ISBN 9789004155022 .

^ Haverkamp, Alfred . Medieval Germany: 1056–1273. Trans. Helga Braun and Richard Mortimer. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988. p.g. 157–158 ^ "The Laws of Chingiz Khân" .

The Chronography of Bar Hebraeus . Gorgias Press. 2003. pp.

354– 355.

doi : 10.31826/9781463209179-020 .

ISBN 9781463209179 .

^ Browne, Laurence E. (September 1967).

The Eclipse of Chrostianity in Asia . p. 163.

^ Christian Van Gorder, A. (2010).

Christianity in Persia and the Status of Non-Muslims in Modern Iran . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 82.

ISBN 9780739136096 .

^ a b Stark, Rodney (25 October 2011).

The Triumph of Christianity: How the Jesus Movement Became the World's Largest Religion . Harper Collins. p. 210.

ISBN 9780062098702 .

^ Browne, Laurence E. (September 1967).

The Eclipse of Chrostianity in Asia . p. 167.

^ Masters, Bruce (25 March 2004).

Christians and Jews in the Ottoman Arab World: The Roots of Sectarianism . Cambridge University Press. pp.

46– 47.

ISBN 9780521005821 .

^ a b c Roy T. Matthews; F. DeWitt Platt (1992).

The Western Humanities . Mountain View, California: MayfieldPublishing.

ISBN 0-87484-785-0 .

^ Crompton, James.

"Leicestershire Lollards" (PDF) .

^ Kuhns, Oscar, and Dickie, Robert. Jan Hus: Reformation in Bohemia. United Kingdom, Reformation Press, 2017.

^ Wakefield, Walter; Evans, Austin, eds. (1991).

Heresies of The High Middle Ages . Columbia.

ISBN 9780231096324 .

^ Chamberlin, Eric Russell. The bad Popes. United States, Dorset Press, 1986.

^ Burr, David. The Spiritual Franciscans: From Protest to Persecution in the Century After Saint Francis. United States, Penn State University Press, 2001.

^ Madden, Thomas F. (2005).

The New Concise History of the Crusades . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

181– 182.

ISBN 9780742538221 .

^ Khanbaghi, Aptin (2006).

The fire, the star and the cross: minority religions in medieval and early modern Iran . I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 9781845110567 .

^ "Nestorianism | Definition, History, & Churches | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2 June 2023.

^ Luke 21:12 ^ Ye Xiaowen (19 February 2001).

"China's Religions Retrospect and Prospect" . Hong Kong: China Internet Information Center . Retrieved 29 June 2011 .

^ Hsia, R. Po-Chia (14 May 2018).

"Christianity and Empire: The Catholic Mission in Late Imperial China" .

Studies in Church History .

54 : 208– 224.

doi : 10.1017/stc.2018.1 .

S2CID 165314911 .

Retrieved 2023-02-14 .

^ Victor Purcell (2010).

The Boxer Uprising: A Background Study . Cambridge University Press. p. 125.

ISBN 9780521148122 .

^ Diana Preston (2000).

The Boxer Rebellion: The Dramatic Story of China's War on Foreigners That Shook the World in the Summer of 1900 . Walker. p.

25 .

ISBN 9780802713612 .

^ R. G. Tiedemann (2009).

Reference Guide to Christian Missionary Societies in China: From the Sixteenth to the Twentieth Century . M.E. Sharpe. p. 125.

ISBN 9780765640017 .

^ Brandt, Nat (1994).

Massacre in Shansi . Syracuse University Press. p. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-8156-0282-8 .

^ Thompson, Larry Clinton (2009).

William Scott Ament and the Boxer Rebellion: Heroism, Hubris, and the "Ideal Missionary" . Jefferson, NC: McFarland. p. 184.

ISBN 9780786453382 .

^ Stephen G. Haw (2003).

A traveller's history of China . Interlink Books. p. 172.

ISBN 1-56656-486-7 .

^ Henry McAleavy (1967).

The modern history of China . Praeger. p. 165.

ISBN 9780297176619 .

^ Sterling Making of America Project (1914).

The Atlantic monthly, Volume 113 By Making of America Project . Atlantic Monthly Co. p. 80.

^ Jonathan Fenby (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 126.

ISBN 0-7867-1484-0 .

^ Diana Lary (1974).

Region and nation: the Kwangsi clique in Chinese politics, 1925–1937 . Cambridge University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 0-521-20204-3 .

^ Missionary Review of the World; 1878-1939. Princeton Press. 1939. p. 130. vol.62.

^ Claydon, David (2005).

A New Vision, a New Heart, a Renewed Call . William Carey Library. p. 385.

ISBN 978-0-87808-363-3 .

^ Uhalley, Stephen; Wu, Xiaoxin (2015).

China and Christianity: Burdened Past, Hopeful Future . Routledge. p. 274.

ISBN 978-1-317-47501-9 .

^ Forbes, Andrew D. W. (1986).

Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: A Political History of Republican Sinkiang 1911-1949 . Cambridge University Press. pp. 84, 87.

ISBN 978-0-521-25514-1 .

^ Latreille, A. FRENCH REVOLUTION, New Catholic Encyclopedia v. 5, pp. 972–973 (Second Ed. 2002 Thompson/Gale) ISBN 0-7876-4004-2 ^ Spielvogel, Jackson Western Civilization: Combined Volume p. 549, 2005
Thomson Wadsworth ^ a b c d e f Tallett, Frank (1991). "Dechristianizing France: The year II and the revolutionary experience". In Tallett, Frank; Atkin, Nicholas (eds.).

Religion, Society and Politics in France Since 1789 . A&C Black. pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 978-1-85285-057-9 .

^ Lewis, Gwynne (1993).

The French Revolution: Rethinking the Debate . Routledge. p. 96.

ISBN 0-415-05466-4 .

^ Joes, Anthony James (2006).

Resisting Rebellion . University Press of Kentucky. pp.

52– 53.

ISBN 9780813191706 .

^ "Jones, Adam Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction" (PDF) . Routledge/Taylor & Francis Publishers Forthcoming. 2006. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 27 October 2008 .

^ "Three State and Counterrevolution in France by Charles Tilly" . cdlib.org . Retrieved 29 June 2011 .

^ Furlaud, Alice (9 July 1989).

"Vive la Contre-Revolution!" .

The New York Times .

^ McPhee, Peter (March 2004).

"Review of Reynald Secher, A French Genocide: The Vendée" .

H-France Review . Vol. 4, no. 26. Archived from the original on 20 April 2012.

^ Mullins, Mark R. (1990).

"Japanese Pentecostalism and the World of the Dead: a Study of Cultural Adaptation in Iesu no Mitama Kyokai" .

Japanese Journal of Religious Studies .

17 (4): 353– 374.

doi : 10.18874/jjrs.17.4.1990.353-374 .

^ Naramoto, p. 401.

^ Jerald Sequeira.

"Deportation & The Konkani Christian Captivity at Srirangapatna (1784 Feb. 24th Ash Wednesday)" .

Daijiworld Media Pvt Ltd Mangalore . Archived from the original on 29 January 2008.

^ Forrest 1887 , pp. 314–316 ^ The Gentleman's Magazine 1833 , p.

388 ^ "Christianity in Mangalore" .

Diocese of Mangalore . Archived from the original on 22 June 2008.

^ Bowring 1997 , p.

126 ^ Scurry & Whiteway 1824 , p. 103.

^ Scurry & Whiteway 1824 , p. 104.

^ K.L. Bernard, Kerala History , p. 79 ^ William Dalrymple White Mughals (2006) p. 28 ^ a b Colley, Linda (9 November 2002).

"Your country needs you. And your beard" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ Treadgold, Warren T. (October 1997).

A History of the Byzantine State and Society . Stanford University Press. pp.

813– 814.

ISBN 9780804726306 .

^ Nicol, Donald MacGillivray (1979).

The End of the Byzantine Empire . London: Edward Arnold. p. 88.

ISBN 978-0-7131-6250-9 .

^ Inalcik, Halil (1969). "The Policy of Mehmed II toward the Greek Population of Istanbul and the Byzantine Buildings of the City".

Dumbarton Oaks Papers . 23/24: 229– 249.

doi : 10.2307/1291293 .

ISSN 0070-7546 .

JSTOR 1291293 .

^ a b Nicol.

The End of the Byzantine Empire , p. 90.

^ Runciman.

The Fall of Constantinople , pp. 133–34.

^ Nicol, Donald M. (1972).

The Last Centuries of Byzantium 1261–1453 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 389.

ISBN 9780521439916 .

^ Smith, Cyril J. (1974).

"History of Rape and Rape Laws" .

Women Law Journal . No. 60. p. 188.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2020 . Retrieved 12 October 2020 .

^ Mansel, Philip (1995).

"One: The Conqueror" .

Constantinople: City of the World's Desire 1453–1924 . St. Martin's Press.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 August 2020 – via The Washington Post.

^ Roger Crowley (6 August 2009).

Constantinople: The Last Great Siege, 1453 . Faber & Faber. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-571-25079-0 .

The vast majority of the ordinary citizens - about 30,000 - were marched off to the slave markets of Edirne, Bursa and Ankara.

^ M.J Akbar (3 May 2002).

The Shade of Swords: Jihad and the Conflict Between Islam and Christianity . Routledge. p. 86.

ISBN 978-1-134-45259-0 .

Some 30,000 Christians were either enslaved or sold.

^ Jim Bradbury (1992).

The Medieval Siege . Boydell & Brewer. p. 322.

ISBN 978-0-85115-312-4 .

^ Preface to the Chronicle ; translated by Marios Philippides , The Fall of the Byzantine Empire: A Chronicle by George Sphrantzes, 1401–1477 (Amherst: University of Massachusetts, 1980), p. 21 ^ Pavlowitch 2002 , pp. 19–20.

^ Anton Minkov (2004).

Conversion to Islam in the Balkans: Kisve Bahası Petitions and Ottoman Social Life, 1670–1730 . The Ottoman Empire and its Heritage, Volume: 30. Brill. pp.

41– 42.

doi : 10.1163/9789047402770_008 .

ISBN 978-90-47-40277-0 .

S2CID 243354675 .

^ Zhelyazkova, Antonina. ‘'Albanian Identities'’. pp. 15–16, 19.

^ Zhelyazkova, Antonina. ‘'Albanian Identities'’. Sofia, 2000: International Center for Minority Studies and Intercultural Relations. pp. 15–16 ^ Zhelyazkova, Antonina (2000).

"Albanian Identities" (PDF) . International Centre for Minority Studies and Intercultural Relation.

If the tax levied on the Christians in the Albanian communities in the 16th century amounted to about 45 akçes, in the middle of the 17th century it ran up to 780 akçes a year. In order to save the clans from hunger and ruin, the Albanian elders advised the people in the villages to adopt Islam...Nevertheless, the willingness of the Gegs to support the campaigns of the Catholic West against the Empire, did not abate.... men in Albania, Christians, but also Muslims, were ready to take up arms, given the smallest help from the Catholic West.... the complex dual religious identity of the Albanians become clear. Emblematic is the case of the Crypto-Christians inhabiting the inaccessible geographical area...

^ a b c Pahumi, Nevila (2007).

The Consolidation of Albanian Nationalism .

Department of History (Bachelor of Arts thesis). University of Michigan. p. 18.

hdl : 2027.42/55462 .

The pasha of Ipek forcibly moved the Catholic inhabitants of northern Albania into the plains of southern Serbia after a failed Serb revolt forced many Serbs to flee to the Habsburg Empire in 1689. The transferred villagers were forced to convert to Islam.

^ Ramet 1998 , p. 210: "Then, in 1644, war broke out between Venice and the Ottoman empire. At the urging of the clergy, many Albanian Catholics sided with Venice. The Ottomans responded to this by severely repressing them, which in turn drove many Catholics to embrace Islam (although a few of them elected to join the Orthodox Church)... Within the span of twenty-two years (1649–71) the number of Catholics in the diocese of Alessio fell by more than 50 percent, while in the diocese of Pulati (1634–71) the number of Catholics declined from more than 20,000 to just 4,045. In general, Albanian insurrections which occurred during the Ottoman-Venetian wars of 1644–69 resulted in stiff Ottoman reprisals against Catholics in northern Albania and significant acceleration of Islamization... In general, a pattern emerged. When the Ottoman empire was attacked by Catholic powers, local Catholics were pressured to convert, and when Orthodox Russia attacked the Ottoman empire, local Orthodox Christians were also pressured to change their faith. In some cases however, their Islamization was only superficial and as a result, many villages and some districts were still "crypto-Catholic" in the nineteenth century, despite their adoption of the externals of Islamic culture." ^ a b Ramet 1998 , p. 203: "The Ottoman conquest between the end of the fourteenth century and the mid-fifteenth century introduced a third religion – Islam – but at first the Turks did not use force during their expansion, and it was only in the 1600s that large-scale conversion to Islam began – at first, it chiefly occurred among Albanian Catholics."; p.204. "The Orthodox community enjoyed broad toleration at the hands of the Sublime Porte until the late eighteenth century."; p. 204. "In the late eighteenth century Russian agents began stirring the Orthodox subjects of the Ottoman empire against the Sublime Porte. In the Russo-Turkish wars of 1768–74 and 1787–91, Orthodox Albanians rose up against the Turks. In the course of the second revolt, the "New Academy" in Voskopoje was destroyed (1789), and at the end of the second Russo-Turkish war, more than a thousand Orthodox fled to Russia on Russian warships. In the aftermath of these revolts, the Porte now applied pressure in order to Islamize the Albanian Orthodox population, adding economic incentives in order to stimulate this process. In 1798, Ali Pasha of Janina led Ottoman forces against Christian believers who were assembled in their churches in order to celebrate Easter in the villages of Shen Vasil and Nivica e Bubarit. The bloodbath which was unleashed against these believers frightened Albanian Christians who lived in other districts and inspired a new wave of mass conversions to Islam." ^ Skendi 1967a , pp. 10–13.

^ Skendi 1956 , pp. 321–323.

^ Vickers 2011 , p. 16.

^ a b Koti 2010 , pp. 16–17.

^ Malcolm, Noel (1998).

Kosovo: a short history . Macmillan. p. 162.

ISBN 978-0-333-66612-8 .

^ Kallivretakis 2003 , p. 233.

^ Hammond 1967 , p. 30.

^ Hammond 1976 , p. 62.

^ Koukoudis 2003 , pp. 321–322. "Particularly interesting is the case of Vithkuq, south of Moschopolis... It may well have had Vlach inhabitants before 1769, though the Arvanites were certainly far more numerous, if not the largest population group. This is further supported by the linguistic identity of the refugees who fled Vithkuq and accompanied the waves of departing Vlachs..." p. 339. "As the same time as, or possibly shortly before or after, these events in Moschopolis, unruly Arnauts also attacked the smaller Vlach and Arvanitic communities round about. The Vlach inhabitants of Llengë, Niçë, Grabovë, Shipckë, and the Vlach villages on Grammos, such as Nikolicë, Linotopi, and Grammousta, and the inhabitants of Vithkuq and even the last Albanian speaking Christian villages on Opar found themselves at the mercy of the predatory Arnauts, whom no-one could withstand. For them too, the only solution was to flee... During this period, Vlach and Arvanite families from the surrounding ruined market towns and villages settled alongside the few Moscopolitans who had returned. Refugee families came from Dushar and other villages in Opar, from Vithkuq, Grabovë, Nikolicë, Niçë, and Llengë and from Kolonjë..." ^ Hall, Derek R. (1999). "Representations of Place: Albania".

The Geographical Journal .

165 (2): 161– 172.

Bibcode : 1999GeogJ.165..161H .

doi : 10.2307/3060414 .

ISSN 0016-7398 .

JSTOR 3060414 .

^ a b Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress (April 1992).

"Albania – Hoxha's Antireligious Campaign" .

country-data.com .

^ a b Zickel, Raymond; Iwaskiw, Walter R., eds. (1994).

Albania : a country study (Area Handbook for Albania) (2nd ed.). Library of Congress; Federal Research Division; Department of the Army.

ISBN 0-8444-0792-5 .

^ Jordan, Mary (18 April 2007).

"Albania finds religion after decades of atheism" .

The Chicago Tribune .

^ Hargitai, Quinn (3 November 2016).

"The country that's famous for tolerance" .

(BBC Travel) bbc.com .

BBC .

^ Brunwasser, Matthew (26 February 2017).

"As Albania Reckons With Its Communist Past, Critics Say It's Too Late" .

The New York Times .

^ "Christians live in fear of death squads" . IRIN. 19 October 2006.

^ Campbell, Gwyn (October 1991). "The state and pre-colonial demographic history: the case of nineteenth century Madagascar".

Journal of African History .

23 (3): 415– 445.

doi : 10.1017/S0021853700031534 .

^ Laidler (2005) ^ Cousins, W.E. "Since 1800 in Madagascar; 1877–1878".

The Sunday Magazine for Family Reading . Vol. 1. London: Daldy, Isbister & Co. pp.

405– 410.

^ Griffin, Roger (2006). Blamires, Cyprian; Jackson, Paul (eds.).

World Fascism: A-K . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 10.

ISBN 9781576079409 .

There is no doubt that in the long run Nazi leaders such as Hitler and Himmler intended to eradicate Christianity just as ruthlessly as they intended to eradicate any other rival ideology, even if in the short term they had to be content to make compromises with it.

Mosse, George Lachmann (2003).

Nazi Culture: Intellectual, Cultural and Social Life in the Third Reich . University of Wisconsin Press. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-299-19304-1 .

Had the Nazis won the war, their ecclesiastical policies would have gone beyond those of the German Christians , to the utter destruction of both the Protestant and Catholic Churches.

Bendersky, Joseph W. (2007).

A Concise History of Nazi Germany . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 147.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5363-7 .

Consequently, it was Hitler's long range goal to eliminate the churches once he had consolidated his control over his European empire.

Fischel, Jack R.

(2010).

Historical Dictionary of the Holocaust . Scarecrow Press. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7485-5 .

The objective was to either destroy Christianity and restore the German gods of antiquity or turn Jesus into an Aryan .

Dill, Marshall (1970).

Germany: A Modern History . University of Michigan Press. p. 365.

ISBN 0472071017 .

It seems no exaggeration to insist that the greatest challenge the Nazis had to face was their effort to eradicate Christianity in Germany or at least subjugate it to their general world outlook.

^ Michael Berenbaum (October 2000).

"Persecution and Resistance of Jehovah's Witnesses During the Nazi-Regime 1938–1945" .

Holocaust Teacher Resource Center .

^ Hesse, Hans (2001).

Persecution and resistance of Jehovah's Witnesses during the Nazi regime, 1933–1945 . Berghahn Books. p. 10.

ISBN 978-3-86108-750-2 .

^ "Jehovah's Witnesses in Germany: From the 1890s to 1945" .

Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Erik Freas (2016).

Muslim-Christian Relations in Late-Ottoman Palestine: Where Nationalism and Religion Intersect . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1137570413 .

^ Aboona, H (2008).

Assyrians, Kurds, and Ottomans: intercommunal relations on the periphery of the Ottoman Empire . Cambria Press.

ISBN 978-1-60497-583-3 .

^ Gaunt & Beṯ-Şawoce 2006 , p. 32.

^ Masters, Bruce. "The 1850 Events in Aleppo: An Aftershock of Syria's Incorporation into the Capitalist World System".

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

22 .

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Bulgaria § Political History" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 871.

^ Kelbecheva, Evelina (2011). "The Short History of Bulgaria for Export". In Jørgen S. Nielsen (ed.).

Religion, Ethnicity and Contested Nationhood in the Former Ottoman Space . Brill. pp.

223– 247.

doi : 10.1163/9789004216570_013 .

ISBN 978-9004211339 .

^ Miller, William (1896).

"Chapter 5: Bulgaria under the Turks" .

The Balkans . Archived from the original on 16 October 2019.

^ Bruinessen, Martin van (1992).

Agha, Shaikh and State: The Social and Political Structures of Kurdistan . Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 25, 271.

ISBN 9781856490184 .

^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 271 ] ^ Akbar, M.J. (2003).

The Shade of Swords: Jihad and the Conflict Between Islam and Christianity . Lotus Collection.

ISBN 9788174362919 .

^ Mark Twain (1869).

The Innocents Abroad . Collins Clear-Type Press.

ISBN 9781495902291 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Adalian, Rouben Paul (2010) [2002].

Historical Dictionary of Armenia (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. p. 154.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6096-4 .

^ Morris, Benny; Ze'evi, Dror (2019), The Thirty-Year Genocide , Harvard University Press, p. 672, ISBN 9780674916456 ^ Akçam, Taner (2006) A Shameful Act: The Armenian Genocide and the Question of Turkish Responsibility p. 42, Metropolitan Books , New York ISBN 978-0-8050-7932-6 ^ Angold, Michael (2006), O'Mahony, Anthony, ed., Cambridge History of Christianity, 5. Eastern Christianity, Cambridge University Press, p. 512, ISBN 978-0-521-81113-2 .

^ Cleveland, William L. (2000). A History of the Modern Middle East (2nd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview. p. 119.

ISBN 0-8133-3489-6 .

^ de Courtois, S (2004).

The forgotten genocide: eastern Christians, the last Arameans . Gorgias Press LLC. pp.

105– 107.

ISBN 978-1-59333-077-4 .

^ Aboona, H (2008). Assyrians and Ottomans: intercommunal relations on the periphery of the Ottoman Empire. Cambria Press.

ISBN 978-1-60497-583-3 . p.284 ^ Raymond H. Kévorkian, "The Cilician Massacres, April 1909" in Armenian Cilicia , eds.

Richard G. Hovannisian and Simon Payaslian. UCLA Armenian History and Culture Series: Historic Armenian Cities and Provinces, 7. Costa Mesa, California: Mazda Publishers, 2008, pp. 339–69.

^ Adalian, Rouben Paul (2012).

"The Armenian genocide" . In Totten, Samuel; Parsons, William S. (eds.).

Century of Genocide . Routledge. pp.

117– 56.

ISBN 9780415871914 .

^ Adalian, Rouben Paul (2010).

"Adana Massacre" .

Historical Dictionary of Armenia . Scarecrow Press. pp.

70– 71.

ISBN 9780810874503 .

^ Gaunt, David (18 April 2009).

"The Assyrian Genocide of 1915" .

Assyrian Genocide Research Center . Archived from the original on 18 October 2013.

^ "Tsitsernakaberd Memorial Complex" .

Armenian genocide Museum-Institute .

^ Kifner, John (7 December 2007).

"Armenian Genocide of 1915: An Overview" .

The New York Times .

^ Hatzidimitriou, Constantine G., American Accounts Documenting the Destruction of Smyrna by the Kemalist Turkish Forces: September 1922 , New Rochelle, NY : Caratzas, 2005, p. 2.

^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ Kieser, Hans-Lukas; Schaller, Dominik J (2002), Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah [ The Armenian Genocide and the Shoah ] (in German), Chronos, p. 114, ISBN 3-0340-0561-X ^ Christopher J. Walker (1980).

Armenia, the Survival of a Nation . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-312-04944-7 .

* Akçam, Taner (2007).

A Shameful Act: The Armenian Genocide and the Question of Turkish Responsibility . p. 327.

– Profile at Google Books ^ Aprim, Frederick A. (January 2005).

Assyrians: the continuous saga . F.A. Aprim. p. 40.

ISBN 9781413438574 .

^ Ghazal, Rym (14 April 2015). "Lebanon's dark days of hunger: The Great Famine of 1915–18". The National. Retrieved 24 January 2016.

^ Harris 2012, p. 174 ^ The Plight of Religious Minorities: Can Religious Pluralism Survive? – p. 51 by United States Congress ^ The Armenian Genocide: Wartime Radicalization Or Premeditated Continuum – p. 272 edited by Richard Hovannisian ^ Not Even My Name: A True Story – p. 131 by Thea Halo ^ The Political Dictionary of Modern Middle East by Agnes G. Korbani ^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ J. Joseph, Muslim-Christian relations and Inter-Christian rivalries in the Middle East, Albany, 1983, p. 102.

^ [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ Standpoint, Internationalist (6 September 2023).

"September 6-7, 1955: Istanbul Pogrom- a "closed chapter" in Turkish history?" .

Internationalist Standpoint . Retrieved 30 April 2025 .

^ Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia . Taylor & Francis. 2002. p. 46.

ISBN 1857431375 .

^ a b World Christian trends, AD 30-AD 2200, pp. 230–246 Tables 4–5 & 4–10 By David B. Barrett, Todd M. Johnson, Christopher R. Guidry, Peter F. Crossing NOTE: They define 'martyr' on p235 as only including Christians killed for faith and excluding other Christians killed ^ a b Ostling, Richard (24 June 2001).

"Cross meets Kremlin" .

Time . Archived from the original on 13 August 2007.

^ Daniel Peris Storming the Heavens: The Soviet League of the Militant Godless Cornell University Press 1998 ISBN 978-0-8014-3485-3 ^ Antireligioznik (The Antireligious, 1926–41), Derevenskii Bezbozhnik (The Godless Peasant, 1928–1932), and Yunye Bezbozhniki (The Young Godless, 1931–1933).

^ a b History of the Orthodox Church in the History of Russian Dimitry Pospielovsky 1998 St Vladimir's Press ISBN 0-88141-179-5 pg 291 ^ a b A History of Marxist-Leninist Atheism and Soviet Antireligious Policies, Dimitry Pospielovsky Palgrave Macmillan (December 1987) ISBN 0-312-38132-8 ^ John Anderson, Religion, State and Politics in the Soviet Union and Successor States, Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp 9 ^ Dimitry V. Pospielovsky. A History of Soviet Atheism in Theory, and Practice, and the Believer, vol 1: A History of Marxist-Leninist Atheism and Soviet Anti-Religious Policies, St Martin's Press, New York (1987). pg 84.

^ Prot. Dimitri Konstantinov, Gonimaia Tserkov' (New York:Vseslavianskoe izdatel'stvo, 1967) pp. 286–7, and (London:Macmillan, 1969) chs 4 and 5 ^ Froese, Paul. "'I am an atheist and a Muslim': Islam, communism, and ideological competition." Journal of Church and State 47.3 (2005) ^ Marsh, Christopher (2011).

Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1-4411-0284-3 .

^ Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival, by Christopher Marsh, p. 47. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011.

^ Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History, by Dilip Hiro. Penguin, 2009.

^ Adappur, Abraham (2000).

Religion and the Cultural Crisis in India and the West . Intercultural Publications.

ISBN 9788185574479 .

Forced Conversion under Atheistic Regimes: It might be added that the most modern example of forced "conversions" came not from any theocratic state, but from a professedly atheist government – that of the Soviet Union under the Communists.

^ Paul Froese. Forced Secularization in Soviet Russia: Why an Atheistic Monopoly Failed. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, Vol. 43, No. 1 (Mar. 2004), pp. 35–50 ^ Haskins, Ekaterina V. "Russia's postcommunist past: the Cathedral of Christ the Savior and the reimagining of national identity." History and Memory: Studies in Representation of the Past 21.1 (2009) ^ Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Viking; 2011; p. 494" ^ Peris, Daniel (1998).

Storming the Heavens: The Soviet League of the Militant Godless . Ithaca: Cornell University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780801434853 .

Created in 1925, the League of the Militant Godless was the nominally independent organization established by the Communist Party to promote atheism.

^ President of Lithuania: Prisoner of the Gulag a Biography of Aleksandras Stulginskis by Afonsas Eidintas Genocide and Research Center of Lithuania ISBN 9986-757-41-X / 9789986757412, pg 23 "As early as August 1920 Lenin wrote to E. M. Sklyansky , President of the Revolutionary War Soviet: "We are surrounded by the greens (we pack it to them), we will move only about 10–20 versty and we will choke by hand the bourgeoisie , the clergy and the landowners. There will be an award of 100,000 rubles for each one hanged." He was speaking about the future actions in the countries neighboring Russia.

^ Christ Is Calling You: A Course in Catacomb Pastorship by Father George Calciu Published by Saint Hermans Press April 1997 ISBN 978-1-887904-52-0 ^ Daniel Peris Storming the Heavens: The Soviet League of the Militant Godless Cornell University Press 1998 ISBN 978-0-8014-3485-3 ^ Froese, Paul (6 August 2008).

The Plot to Kill God: Findings from the Soviet Experiment in Secularization . University of California Press. p. 122.

ISBN 978-0-520-94273-8 .

Before 1937, the Soviet regime had closed thousands of churches and removed tens of thousands of religious leaders from positions of influence. By the midthirties, Soviet elites set out to conduct a mass liquidation of all religious organizations and leaders... officers in the League of Militant Atheists found themselves in a bind to explain the widespread persistence of religious belief in 1937.... The latest estimates indicate that thousands of individuals were executed for religious crimes and hundreds of thousands of religious believers were imprisoned in labor camps or psychiatric hospitals.

^ a b Franklin, Simon; Widdis, Emma (2 February 2006).

National Identity in Russian Culture .

Cambridge University Press . p. 104.

ISBN 978-0-521-02429-7 .

Churches, when not destroyed, might find themselves converted into museums of atheism.

^ a b Bevan, Robert (15 February 2016).

The Destruction of Memory: Architecture at War . Reaktion Books. p. 152.

ISBN 978-1-78023-608-7 .

Churches, synagogues, mosques and monasteries were shut down in the immediate wake of the Revolution. Many were converted to secular uses or converted into Museums of Atheism (antichurches), whitewashed and their fittings were removed.

^ Ramet, Sabrina P.

(1990).

Catholicism and Politics in Communist Societies . Duke University Press. pp.

232– 33.

ISBN 978-0822310471 .

From kindergarten onward children are indoctrinated with an aggressive form of atheism and trained to hate and distrust foreigners and to denounce parents who follow religious practices at home.

^ a b Dronda, Javier (2013).

Con Cristo o contra Cristo: Religión y movilización antirrepublicana en Navarra (1931–1936) (in Spanish). Tafalla: Txalaparta. pp.

201– 202, 220.

ISBN 978-84-15313-31-1 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j de la Cueva, Julio (1998). "Religious Persecution, Anticlerical Tradition and Revolution: On Atrocities against the Clergy during the Spanish Civil War".

Journal of Contemporary History .

33 (3): 355– 369.

ISSN 0022-0094 .

JSTOR 261121 .

^ a b Paul Preston (2013).

The Spanish Holocaust: Inquisition and Extermination in Twentieth-Century Spain . London, UK: HarperCollins. pp. 4, 44– 45.

ISBN 978-0-00-638695-7 .

^ Ranzato, Gabriele (1988). "Dies irae. La persecuzione religiosa nella zona repubblicana durante la guerra civile spagnola (1936–1939)".

Movimento Operaio e Socialista (in Spanish).

11 : 195– 220.

^ Payne, Stanley G.

"Chapter 26: The Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939" .

A History of Spain and Portugal vol. 2 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 – via The Library of Iberian Resources Online.

^ a b Mitchell, David (1983).

The Spanish Civil War . New York: Franklin Watts. pp.

45– 46.

^ a b c Payne, Stanley G. (2008).

Franco and Hitler: Spain, Germany, and World War II . Yale University Press. pp. 13, 215.

ISBN 978-0-300-12282-4 .

^ Vincent, Mary (18 December 2014).

"Ungodly Subjects: Protestants in National-Catholic Spain, 1939–53" (PDF) .

European History Quarterly .

45 (1). Sage: 108– 131.

doi : 10.1177/0265691414552782 .

ISSN 0265-6914 .

S2CID 145265537 .

^ Beevor, Antony (2006).

The Battle for Spain: The Spanish Civil War 1936-1939 . Penguin. pp.

88– 89.

ISBN 978-1-101-20120-6 .

^ Feldman, Noah (6 January 2008).

"What Is It About Mormonism?" .

The New York Times .

^ "Chapter Sixteen: Missouri Persecutions and Expulsion" , Church History in the Fulness of Times, Student manual (Religion 341, 342, and 343) , Institute of Religion , Church Educational System , LDS Church , 2003, archived from the original on 22 October 2011 ^ Smith, Joseph Fielding (1946–1949), Church History and Modern Revelation , vol. 4, Deseret Book , pp.

167– 173 ^ Thomas R. Pegram, One Hundred Percent American: The Rebirth and Decline of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s (2011), pp. 47–88.

^ Kelly J. Baker, Gospel According to the Klan: The KKK's Appeal to Protestant America, 1915–1930 (2011), p. 248.

^ Brezianu, Andrei (26 May 2010).

The A to Z of Moldova . Scarecrow Press. p. 98.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7211-0 .

Communist Atheism. Official doctrine of the Soviet regime, also called "scientific atheism". It was aggressively applied to Moldova, immediately after the 1940 annexation, when churches were profaned, clergy were assaulted, and signs and public symbols of religion were prohibited, and it was again applied throughout the subsequent decades of the Soviet regime, after 1944. … The St. Theodora Church in downtown Chişinău was converted into the city's Museum of Scientific Atheism, ^ Peter Hebblethwaite; Paul VI, the First Modern Pope; HarperCollins Religious; 1993; p. 211 ^ Norman Davies; Rising '44: the Battle for Warsaw; Viking; 2003; p.566 & 568 ^ Geoffrey Blainey ; A Short History of Christianity ; Viking; 2011; p.494 ^ Geoffrey Blainey ; A Short History of Christianity ; Viking; 2011; p.508 ^ Sullivan, Patricia (26 November 2006).

"Anti-Communist Priest Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa" .

The Washington Post .

^ The Washington Post Anti-Communist Priest Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa by Patricia Sullivan Washington Post Staff Writer Sunday, 26 November 2006; p. C09 ^ Frances D'Emillo (16 December 2010).

"Pope calls Christians the most persecuted" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 19 December 2010.

^ a b "Archbishop Silvano Tomasi's Address to the UN Human Rights Council Interactive Dialogue" .

Zenit . 29 May 2013 . Retrieved 7 October 2020 .

"Vatican to UN: 100 thousand Christians killed for the faith each year" .

Vatican Radio . Archived from the original on 8 June 2013.

^ "Persecution of Christians in 2016" .

Center for the Study of Global Christianity . 2017 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

"Status of Global Christianity, 2017, in the Context of 1900–2050" (PDF) .

Center for the Study of Global Christianity . 2017.

^ a b c Ruth Alexander (12 November 2013).

"Are there really 100,000 new Christian martyrs every year?" .

BBC News .

^ a b "Christenverfolgung auf einen Blick" .

Internationale Gesellschaft für Menschenrechte (International Society for Human rights) (in German). 14 August 2019.

^ Robert W. Boehme; et al. (eds.).

"2018 Report on International Religious Freedom" .

Office of International Religious Freedom . United States Department of State . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ a b c Grim, Brian J.; Finke, Roger (2011).

The Price of Freedom Denied: Religious Persecution and Conflict in the Twenty-First Century . UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-19705-2 .

^ Hunt, Jeremy (8 July 2019).

"Persecution of Christians review: Foreign Secretary's speech following the final report" .

Foreign & Commonwealth Office . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "How Religious Restrictions Have Risen Around the World" .

Pew Research Center . 15 July 2019.

^ Mitchell, Travis (15 July 2019).

"A Closer Look at How Religious Restrictions Have Risen Around the World" .

Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "Quotes from experts on the future of democracy" . 21 February 2020.

^ "About Us" .

International Society for Human Rights at a Glance . International Society for Human Rights.

^ Lessenthin, Martin.

"Martin Lessenthin Executive and press spokesman for the ISHR" . International Society for Human Rights (ISHR). Archived from the original on 8 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ Vallely, Paul (28 July 2014).

"Christians: The world's most persecuted people" . Independent.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2022.

^ Sherwood, Harriet (13 October 2015).

"Christianity under global threat due to persecution, says report" .

The Guardian .

^ Blumenfeld, W. J. (2006). "Christian privilege and the promotion of "secular" and not-so "secular" mainline Christianity in public schooling and in the larger society".

Equity and Excellence in Education .

39 (3): 195– 210.

doi : 10.1080/10665680600788024 .

S2CID 144270138 .

^ "In U.S., Decline of Christianity Continues at Rapid Pace" .

Pew Research Center Religion & Public Life . Pew Research Center. 17 October 2019 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ "Christians remain world's largest religious group, but they are declining in Europe" .

Factank News in the Numbers . Pew Research Center. 5 April 2017 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ a b KISHI, KATAYOUN (9 June 2017).

"Christians faced widespread harassment in 2015, but mostly in Christian-majority countries" .

PEW Research Center Facttank News in the numbers . Pew . Retrieved 3 July 2020 .

^ "2019 Report on International Religious Freedom: Eritrea" .

OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM 2019 Report . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 3 July 2020 .

^ "2019 Report on International Religious Freedom: Mexico" .

U.S. Department of State OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM Report . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 3 July 2020 .

^ a b c d "A Closer Look at How Religious Restrictions Have Risen Around the World" .

PEW Research Center Religion & Public Life . PEW research center. 15 July 2019.

^ a b c d Stahnke, Tad; Blitt, Robert C.

"The Religion-State Relationship and the Right to Freedom of Religion or Belief: A Comparative Textual Analysis of the Constitutions of Predominantly Muslim Countries" (PDF) .

The Religion-State Relationship and the Right to Freedom of Religion or Belief: A Comparative Textual Analysis of the Constitutions of Predominantly Muslim Countries . UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM.

^ Grim, Brian J.; Finke, Roger (2010).

The Price of Freedom Denied: Religious Persecution and Conflict in the Twenty-First Century . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781139492416 .

^ "Hindu extremists attack Christians in India" .

abc.net.au . 16 February 2025.

Sources [ edit ] Bowring, Lewin B. (1893), Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan and the Struggle with the Musalman Powers of the South , IDARAH-I ADABIYAT-I DELLI, ISBN 978-81-206-1299-0 , archived from the original on 17 August 2011 , retrieved 4 March 2010 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) .

Brock, Sebastian P.

(2006).

Fire from Heaven: Studies in Syriac Theology and Liturgy . Aldershot: Ashgate.

ISBN 9780754659082 .

Forrest, George W.

(1887).

Selections from the Letters, Despatches, and Other State Papers Preserved in the Bombay Secretariat . Vol. 2.

Bombay : Government Central Press.

Gaunt, D; Beṯ-Şawoce, J (2006), Massacres, resistance, protectors: Muslim-Christian relations in Eastern Anatolia during World War I , Gorgias Press LLC, ISBN 978-1-59333-301-0 The Gentleman's Magazine , vol. CIII, F. Jefferies, 1833, archived from the original on 30 October 2021 , retrieved 15 October 2008 González, Justo L. (2010).

The Story of Christianity: The Early Church to the Dawn of the Reformation . Vol. 1. New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-185588-7 .

OCLC 905489146 .

Hall, Richard (2010).

Viking Age Archaeology . Shire Publications.

ISBN 978-0-7478-0063-7 .

Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière (1967).

Epirus: the Geography, the Ancient Remains, the History and Topography of Epirus and Adjacent Areas . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 9780198142539 .

Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière (1976).

Migrations and invasions in Greece and adjacent areas . Park Ridge: Noyes Press.

ISBN 9780815550471 .

Kallivretakis, Leonidas (2003).

Νέα Πικέρνη Δήμου Βουπρασίων: το χρονικό ενός οικισμού της Πελοποννήσου τον 19ο αιώνα (και η περιπέτεια ενός πληθυσμού) [Nea Pikerni of Demos Vouprassion: The chronicle of a 19th century Peloponnesian settlement (and the adventures of a population)] (PDF) . In Panagiotopoulos, Vasilis; Kallivretakis, Leonidas; Dimitropoulos, Dimitris; Kokolakis, Mihalis; Olibitou, Eudokia (eds.).

Πληθυσμοί και οικισμοί του ελληνικού χώρου: ιστορικά μελετήματα [ Populations and settlements of the Greek villages: Historical essays ]. Tetrádia Ergasías (in Greek). Athens: Institute for Neohellenic Research. pp.

221– 242.

ISSN 1105-0845 .

Koti, Dhori (2010).

Monografi për Vithkuqin dhe Naum Veqilharxhin [A monograph of Vithkuq and Naum Veqilharxhi] . Pogradec: DIJA Poradeci.

ISBN 978-99956-826-8-2 .

Koukoudis, Asterios (2003).

The Vlachs: Metropolis and Diaspora . Thessaloniki: Zitros Publications.

ISBN 9789607760869 .

Pavlowitch, Stevan K.

(2002).

Serbia: The History behind the Name . London: Hurst & Company.

ISBN 9781850654773 .

Ramet, Sabrina (1998).

Nihil obstat: religion, politics, and social change in East-Central Europe and Russia . Durham: Duke University Press.

ISBN 9780822320708 .

Scurry, James; Whiteway, William (1824), The Captivity, Sufferings, and Escape of James Scurry, who was Detained a Prisoner During Ten Years, in the Dominions of Hyder Ali and Tippoo Saib (3, illustrated ed.), Monthly Review Press, ISBN 978-0-85345-315-4 , archived from the original on 3 January 2014 , retrieved 4 March 2010 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) .

Skendi, Stavro (1956).

"Religion in Albania during the Ottoman rule" .

Südost Forschungen .

15 : 311– 327.

Skendi, Stavro (1967a).

The Albanian national awakening . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400847761 .

Vickers, Miranda (2011).

The Albanians: a modern history . London: IB Tauris.

ISBN 9780857736550 .

Wand, John Williams Charles (1990).

A History of the Early Church to AD 500 .

Routledge . p. 320.

ISBN 9780203131145 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Most religion-based hate crimes in Turkey targeted Alevis, Christians in 2022: report" . Stockholm Center for Freedom. 8 August 2023.

External links [ edit ] External videos Christians Persecuted in Turkey (2010)- Journeyman Pictures Wikimedia Commons has media related to Persecution of Christians .

Kostos, Sofia Kontogeorge. " Before The Silence: Archival News Reports Of The Christian Holocaust That Begs To Be Remembered ", Piscataway, NJ, USA: Gorgias Press, 2011.

https://doi.org/10.31826/9781463224868 v t e Persecution of Christians Anti-Christian sentiment By incident Early Christianity New Testament Roman Empire Great Fire of Rome Persecution in Lyon Decian persecution Diocletianic Persecution Middle Ages Homs revolts (854–855) Massacre of the Latins Martyrs of Córdoba Bashmurian revolts Destruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre Kisrawan campaigns (1292–1305) Early modern French Revolution Revolt in the Vendée Martyrs of Japan Shimabara Rebellion Kakure Kirishitan Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam Modern First Serbian Uprising Constantinople massacre of 1821 1843 and 1846 massacres in Hakkari 1850 Aleppo 1876 Bulgaria 1860 Lebanon conflict Tianjin Massacre Kucheng massacre Tự Đức's Catholic persecution Hamidian massacres Diyarbekir Candia massacre Boxer Rebellion Adana massacre Great Famine of Mount Lebanon Armenian genocide Assyrian genocide Greek genocide İzmit massacres Murder of the Romanov family Cristero War Shusha massacre Red Terror (Spain) Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia Bersiap Istanbul pogrom Turkish invasion of Cyprus Black Thursday East Timor genocide Chouf massacres Damour massacre Mountain War (Lebanon) Beer Hall Putsch Eastern Bloc Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era Sumgait pogrom 1990 Dushanbe riots Maluku sectarian conflict Nag Hammadi massacre Kosheh massacres Boko Haram insurgency Maspero demonstrations 1998 attacks on Christians in southeastern Gujarat 1998 attacks on Christians in Dangs district 1998 Ramgiri-Udaygiri violence 1999 Ranalai violence 2004 unrest in Kosovo 2007 Christmas violence in Kandhamal 2008 Kandhamal violence 2008 Kandhamal nun gang rape case 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka 2010 Baghdad church siege 2010 Manila hostage crisis 2016 Lahore bombing 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings 2021 anti-Christian violence in Karnataka Owo church attack 2023 Hamburg shooting Kasindi church bombing Attack on Saint Menas church Mar Elias Church attack By persecutor Early Christianity Agrippa I Roman Empire Nero Domitian Septimius Severus Maximinus Thrax Decius Valerian Late Antiquity Diocletian Maximian Galerius Shapur II Athanaric Middle Ages Al-Mutawakkil Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah Hulagu Khan Timur Mehmed II Early modern Toyotomi Hideyoshi Tokugawa Ieyasu Kangxi Tipu Sultan Minh Mạng Tự Đức Queen Jeongsun Modern Ranavalona I Mwanga II of Buganda Plutarco Elías Calles Tomás Garrido Canabal Bai Chongxi Enver Hoxha Three Pashas Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Plutarco Elías Calles Cristero War Adolf Hitler Mao Zedong Ante Pavelić Islamic State Nicolae Ceaușescu Pol Pot Suharto Saddam Hussein Daniel Ortega Mullah Omar Kim Il-sung Abubakar Shekau Xi Jinping Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Kim Jong Un By country Afghanistan Algeria Azerbaijan Burma Cambodia China Egypt France German Empire Nazi Germany India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Laos Lebanon Madagascar Malaysia Mexico Nigeria North Korea Ottoman Empire Pakistan Palestine Saudi Arabia Somalia Soviet Union Spain Sudan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen By persecuted group Anabaptists Catholics Eastern Orthodox Mormons Violence against Mormons Oriental Orthodox Armenians Copts Protestants Martyrs ( list ) Massacre of the Innocents Saint Stephen Carthusian Martyrs Chinese Martyrs Saint Martyrs of Jasenovac Drina Martyrs Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Korean Martyrs Martyrs of Japan Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War New Martyrs North American Martyrs Saints of the Cristero War Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Eastern Catholics in the USSR 21 Martyrs of Libya Category Commons Portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persecution_of_Christians&oldid=1305140015 " Category : Persecution of Christians Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Koine Greek-language text CS1: long volume value CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1: unfit URL Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from September 2022 Use Oxford spelling from January 2025 Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2023 Articles that may be too long from February 2023 All articles that may be too long Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2025 All articles with style issues Articles containing Medieval Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2025 CS1 uses Greek-language script (el) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 08:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Christians 40 languages Add topic

