Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Expansion 1.2 Time 2 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 2.1 Tabular summary 3 Big Bang Toggle Big Bang subsection 3.1 Singularity 3.2 Planck epoch 3.3 Grand unification epoch 3.4 Electroweak epoch 4 Inflation 5 Early universe Toggle Early universe subsection 5.1 Electroweak epoch 5.1.1 Electroweak symmetry breaking 5.2 Quark epoch 5.2.1 Baryogenesis 5.3 Neutrino decoupling and cosmic neutrino background (CνB) 5.4 Lepton epoch 5.5 Photon epoch 5.6 Nucleosynthesis of light elements 5.7 Matter domination 5.8 Recombination, photon decoupling, and the cosmic microwave background (CMB) 6 Gravity builds cosmic structure Toggle Gravity builds cosmic structure subsection 6.1 Dark Ages 6.1.1 Oldest observations of stars and galaxies 6.2 Earliest structures and stars emerge 6.3 Reionization 6.4 Galaxies, clusters and superclusters 7 Present and future Toggle Present and future subsection 7.1 Universe as it appears today 7.2 Dark energy-dominated era 8 Far future and ultimate fate 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Chronology of the universe 32 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Planck epoch ) History and future of the universe This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chronology of the universe" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Physical cosmology Big Bang · Universe Age of the universe Chronology of the universe Early universe Inflation · Nucleosynthesis Backgrounds Gravitational wave (GWB) Microwave (CMB) · Neutrino (CNB) Expansion · Future Hubble's law · Redshift Expansion of the universe FLRW metric · Friedmann equations Lambda-CDM model Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Components · Structure Components Dark energy · Dark matter Photons · Baryons Structure Shape of the universe Galaxy filament · Galaxy formation Large quasar group Large-scale structure Reionization · Structure formation Experiments Black Hole Initiative (BHI) BOOMERanG Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Dark Energy Survey Planck space observatory Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey ("2dF") Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Scientists Aaronson Alfvén Alpher Copernicus de Sitter Dicke Ehlers Einstein Ellis Friedmann Galileo Gamow Guth Hawking Hubble Huygens Kepler Lemaître Mather Newton Penrose Penzias Rubin Schmidt Smoot Suntzeff Sunyaev Tolman Wilson Zeldovich List of cosmologists Subject history Discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation History of the Big Bang theory Timeline of cosmological theories Category Astronomy portal v t e The chronology of the universe describes the history and future of the universe according to Big Bang cosmology.

Research published in 2015 estimates the earliest stages of the universe's existence as taking place 13.8 billion years ago, with an uncertainty of around 21 million years at the 68% confidence level.

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Expansion [ edit ] Main article: Expansion of the universe The current accepted model of the history of the universe is based on the concept of the Big Bang : the universe started hot and dense then expanded and cooled.
Different particles interact during each major stage in the expansion; as the universe expands the density falls and some particle interactions cease to be important. The character of the universe changes. Moreover, the rate of the expansion itself is depends upon the nature of the existing particles, creating an interplay between cosmology and particle physics .

[ 2 ] : 71 Time [ edit ] The lookback time of extragalactic observations by their cosmological redshift up to z=20.

[ 3 ] Main article: Cosmic time In cosmology, time and space are connected: space expands as time increases. Time at each point in space (for example a galaxy) can be uniquely defined in terms of an imaginary clock at that point. These clocks move with the point in space as the universe expands; they are synchronized to a single point in the distance past. Light from distant galaxies is emitted in the past then travels at the speed of light: knowledge about a distant galaxy is limited to one point in time called the lookback time . During the journey from a distant point, the universe continues to expand, stretching the wavelength of the light along the way, an effect called cosmological redshift .

[ 4 ] : 72 The redshift can be measured by comparing incoming light to known spectroscopic lines and the resulting value can be related to the comoving distance to the emitter.

[ 5 ] Consequently experimental knowledge about the chronology of the universe is derived by observing distant light.

[ 4 ] : 89 Overview [ edit ] Diagram of evolution of the (observable part) of the universe from the Big Bang (left), the CMB -reference afterglow, to the present The chronology of the universe can be divided into five parts: [ 6 ] : 4.1 Inflation, the first era supported by experimental evidence, a period of exponential expansion that ends with the conversion of energy in to particles, Quark soup, the initial particles cool and coalesce, dark matter forms, Big bang nucleosynthesis, combining nucleons create the cores of the first atoms, Gravity builds cosmic structure, reduced density allows matter to dominate over radiation for control of expansion, photons decouple to form the cosmic background radiation , and gravitational attraction builds stars, galaxies, and clusters of galaxies, and Cosmic acceleration, continued expansion allows dark energy to overcome gravitational force, inhibiting larger structures.

With these large subsections are many interesting events and transitions.  Older models divided the chronology differently, using different terminology or emphasis.

Tabular summary [ edit ] Article subsection Cosmic Time [ 2 ] : 72 Redshift Temperature (Energy) [ 2 ] : 72 [ verification needed ] Description Big Bang t → → 0 {\displaystyle t\rightarrow 0} NA Name for an extrapolation to zero time.

Planck epoch ~ 10 −43 s ( ~ 10 19 GeV) The Planck scale is the physical scale beyond which current physical theories may not apply and cannot be used to reliably predict any events. During the Planck epoch, cosmology and physics are assumed to have been dominated by the quantum effects of gravity .

Grand unification epoch ~ 10 −36 s > 10 29 K (10 16 ~ 10 14 GeV) The three forces of the Standard Model are still unified (assuming that nature is described by a Grand Unified Theory , gravity not included).

Inflation Electroweak epoch < 10 −32 s 10 28 K ~ 10 22 K (10 15 ~ 10 9 GeV) Cosmic inflation expands space by a factor of the order of 10 26 over a time of the order of 10 −36 to 10 −32 seconds. The universe is supercooled from about 10 27 down to 10 22 kelvins .

[ 7 ] The strong interaction becomes distinct from the electroweak interaction .

Electroweak epoch ends 10 −12 s 10 15 K (150 GeV) Before temperature falls below 150 GeV, the average energy of particle interactions is high enough that it is more succinct to describe them as an exchange of W 1 , W 2 , W 3 , and B vector bosons (electroweak interactions) and H + , H − , H 0 , H 0⁎ scalar bosons (Higgs interaction). In this picture, the vacuum expectation value of the Higgs field is zero (therefore, all fermions are massless), all electroweak bosons are massless (they had not yet subsumed a component of the Higgs field to become massive), and photons ( γ ) do not yet exist (they will exist after a phase transition as a linear combination of B and W 3 bosons, γ = B cos θ W + W 3 sin θ W , where θ W is the Weinberg angle ). These are the highest energies directly observable in the Large Hadron Collider . The sphere of space that will become the observable universe is approximately 300 light-seconds (~0.6 au ) in radius at this time.

Quark epoch 10 −12 s ~ 10 −5 s 10 15 K ~ 10 12 K (150 GeV ~ 150 MeV) The forces of the Standard Model have reorganized into the "low-temperature" form: Higgs and electroweak interactions rearranged into massive Higgs boson H 0 , weak force carried by massive W + , W – , and Z 0 bosons, and electromagnetism carried by massless photons. Higgs field has a nonzero vacuum expectation value, making fermions massive. Energies are too high for quarks to coalesce into hadrons , instead forming a quark–gluon plasma .

Baryogenesis 10 −5 s ~ 1 s 10 12 K ~ 10 10 K (100 MeV ~ 1 MeV) Quarks are bound into hadrons. A slight matter–antimatter asymmetry from the earlier phases ( baryon asymmetry ) results in an elimination of anti-baryons. Until 0.1 s, muons and pions are in thermal equilibrium, and outnumber baryons by about 10:1. Close to the end of this epoch, only light-stable baryons (protons and neutrons) remain. Due to the sufficiently high density of leptons, protons and neutrons rapidly change into one another under the action of weak force. Due to the higher mass of neutron the neutron:proton ratio, which is initially 1:1, starts to decrease.

Neutrino decoupling 1 s 10 10 K (1 MeV) Neutrinos cease interacting with baryonic matter, and form cosmic neutrino background . Neutron:proton ratio freezes at approximately 1:6. The sphere of space that will become the observable universe is approximately 10 light-years in radius at this time.

Lepton epoch 1 s ~ 10 s 10 10 K ~ 10 9 K (1 MeV ~ 100 keV) Leptons and antileptons remain in thermal equilibrium —energy of photons is still high enough to produce electron-positron pairs.

Big Bang nucleosynthesis 10 -2 s ~ 100 s 10 9 K ~ 10 7 K (10 MeV ~ 0.1 MeV) Protons and neutrons are bound into primordial atomic nuclei : hydrogen and helium-4 . Trace amounts of deuterium , helium-3 , and lithium-7 also form. At the end of this epoch, the spherical volume of space which will become the observable universe is about 300 light-years in radius, baryonic matter density is on the order of 4 grams per m 3 (about 0.3% of sea level air density)—however, most energy at this time is in electromagnetic radiation.

Photon epoch 10 s ~ 370 ka 10 9 K ~ 4000 K (100 keV ~ 0.4 eV) The universe consists of a plasma of nuclei, electrons , and photons ; temperature is too low to create electron-positron pairs (or any other pairs of massive particles), but too high for the binding of electrons to nuclei.

Recombination 18 ka ~ 370 ka 6000 ~ 1100 4000 K (0.4 eV) Electrons and atomic nuclei first become bound to form neutral atoms . Photons are no longer in thermal equilibrium with matter and the universe first becomes transparent. Recombination lasts for about 100 ka, during which the universe is becoming more and more transparent to photons. The photons of the cosmic microwave background radiation originate at this time. The spherical volume of space that will become the observable universe is 42 million light-years in radius at this time. The baryonic matter density at this time is about 500 million hydrogen and helium atoms per cubic metre, approximately a billion times higher than today. This density corresponds to pressure on the order of 10 −17 atm.

Dark Ages 370 ka ~ 150 Ma?

(Only fully ends by about 1 Ga) 1100 ~ 20 4000 K ~ 60 K The time between recombination and the formation of the first stars . During this time, the only source of photons was hydrogen emitting radio waves at hydrogen line . Freely propagating CMB photons quickly (within about 3 million years) red-shifted to infrared , and the universe was devoid of visible light.

Star and galaxy formation and evolution Earliest galaxies: from about 300–400 Ma?

(first stars: similar or earlier) Modern galaxies: 1 Ga ~ 10 Ga (exact timings being researched) From about 20 From about 60 K The earliest known galaxies existed by about 380 Ma. Galaxies coalesce into "proto-clusters" from about 1 Ga (redshift z = 6 ) and into galaxy clusters beginning at 3 Ga ( z = 2.1) , and into superclusters from about 5 Ga ( z = 1.2 ). See: list of galaxy groups and clusters , list of superclusters .

Reionization 200 Ma ~ 1 Ga (exact timings being researched) 20 ~ 6 60 K ~ 19 K The most distant astronomical objects observable with telescopes date to this period; as of June 2025 [update] , the most remote galaxy observed is MoM-z14 , at a redshift of 14.44. The earliest "modern" Population I stars are formed in this period.

Present time 13.8 Ga 0 2.7 K Farthest observable photons at this moment are CMB photons. They arrive from a sphere with a radius of 46 billion light-years. The spherical volume inside it is commonly referred to as the observable universe.

Alternative subdivisions of the chronology (overlapping several of the above periods) Radiation-dominated era From inflation (~ 10 −32 sec) ~ 47 ka > 3600 > 10 4 K During this time, the energy density of massless and near-massless relativistic components such as photons and neutrinos, which move at or close to the speed of light , dominate both matter density and dark energy .

Matter-dominated era 47 ka ~ 9.8 Ga [ 8 ] : 96 3600 ~ 0.4 10 4 K ~ 4 K During this time, the energy density of matter dominates both radiation density and dark energy, resulting in a decelerated expansion of the universe .

Dark-energy-dominated era > 9.8 Ga [ 8 ] : 96 < 0.4 < 4 K Matter density falls below dark energy density ( vacuum energy ), and expansion of space begins to accelerate . This time happens to correspond roughly to the time of the formation of the Solar System and the evolutionary history of life .

Stelliferous Era 150 Ma ~ 100 Ta [ 9 ] 20 ~ −0.99 60 K ~ 0.03 K The time between the first formation of Population III stars until the cessation of star formation , leaving all stars in the form of degenerate remnants .

Far future > 100 Ta [ 9 ] < −0.99 < 0.1 K The stelliferous era will end as stars eventually die and fewer are born to replace them, leading to a darkening universe. Various theories suggest a number of subsequent possibilities. Assuming proton decay , the matter may eventually evaporate into a Dark Era ( heat death ). Alternatively, the universe may collapse in a Big Crunch . Other suggested ends include a false vacuum catastrophe or a Big Rip as possible ends to the universe.

Big Bang [ edit ] Main articles: Big Bang , Origin of the universe , and "Why is there anything at all?" The observed expansion of the universe led to a physical model called the Big Bang . The concept includes an early state of extreme temperature and density; a high-precision version of the Big Bang model using conventional physics, known as Lambda-CDM , agrees with a wide array of astrophysical observations.

[ 10 ] Extrapolating backwards in time to higher temperatures and densities leads to conditions where physical modeling has not resulted in quantitative predictions matching observations or into territory where the existing laws of physics are known to fail.

[ 4 ] : 305 Singularity [ edit ] Approaching infinite temperature, a scale factor of zero, or time at zero is known to be outside of our physical models. Speculating about an initial gravitational singularity is not sensible: the conditions are outside of the range of the theory.

[ 4 ] : 305 Planck epoch [ edit ] Times shorter than 10 −43 seconds ( Planck time ) See also: Planck units § In cosmology Since the standard model of cosmology predicts expansion of the universe from a very hot time in the distant past, it can be followed back to smaller and smaller scales. However, it cannot be followed back to zero space. Below distance known as a Planck length , the basis for the equations breaks down. The energy of particles in this time is so large that quantum effects take over from Einstein equations for gravity. The Planck time, 10 −43 seconds, is therefore the beginning time for the Big Bang model of cosmology.

[ 4 ] : 274 Grand unification epoch [ edit ] Between 10 −43 seconds and 10 −36 seconds after the Big Bang [ 11 ] Main article: Grand unification epoch After the Planck era, the universe could, in principle, be modeled by extensions of the Standard Model of particle physics , for example, those called grand unified theories . Many such theories have proposed, but none have been successful in producing quantitative agreement with modern astrophysical observations. Nevertheless, the time between 10 −43 and 10 −36 seconds has been called the grand unification epoch.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Before the GUT epoch, the temperature of the universe exceeded 10 15 GeV. As the universe expanded and cooled, it may have crossed a cosmological phase transition , which may have resulted in the large ratio of matter to antimatter we observe today. This phase transition is a thermodynamic effect similar to condensation of a gas or freezing of a liquid. While the transition in the GUT epoch is speculative, electroweak and quark-hadron transitions which happen later are supported by theoretical models with some successful predictions.

[ 4 ] : 305 Electroweak epoch [ edit ] Between 10 −36 seconds (or the end of inflation) and 10 −32 seconds after the Big Bang Main article: Electroweak epoch Depending on how epochs are defined, and the model being followed, the electroweak epoch may be considered to have started before or after the inflationary epoch. In some models, it is described as including the inflationary epoch. In other models, the electroweak epoch is said to have begun after the inflationary epoch ended, at roughly 10 −32 seconds.

Inflation [ edit ] Before c. 10 −32 seconds after the Big Bang Main articles: Inflation (cosmology) and Expansion of the universe At this point of the very early universe, the universe is thought to have expanded by at least a factor of 10 26 {\displaystyle 10^{26}} in time on the order of 1 × 10 −36 seconds .  All of the mass-energy in all of the galaxies currently visible started in a sphere with a radius around 4 x 10 -29 m then grew to a sphere with a radius around 0.9m by the end of inflation.

[ 8 ] : 202 This phase of the cosmic expansion history is known as inflation .

[ 13 ] : 3 Inflation explains how today's universe has concentrations of matter, like galaxies and clusters of galaxies, rather than having matter spatially uniform through the universe .

[ 4 ] : 324 Tiny quantum fluctuations in the universe, amplified by inflation, are believed to be the basis of large-scale structures that formed much later.

[ 14 ] : 2 It is not known exactly when the inflationary epoch ended, but it is thought to have been between 10 −33 and 10 −32 seconds after the Big Bang. The rapid expansion of space meant that the temperature was relatively cool [ 13 ] and any elementary particles remaining from the grand unification epoch were now distributed very thinly across the universe. However, the huge potential energy of the inflaton field was released at the end of the inflationary epoch, as the inflaton field decayed into other particles, known as "reheating". This heating effect led to the universe being repopulated with a dense, hot mixture of quarks, anti-quarks, and gluons .

After inflation ended, the universe continued to expand. A region the size of a melon at that time has since grown to be our entire observable universe .

[ 13 ] The mechanism that drove inflation remains unknown, although many models have been put forward. In several of the more prominent models, it is thought to have been triggered by the separation of the strong and electroweak interactions which ended the grand unification epoch. One of the theoretical products of this phase transition was a scalar field called the inflaton field .

[ 15 ] As this field settled into its lowest-energy state throughout the universe, it generated an enormous repulsive force that led to a rapid expansion of the universe.

Early universe [ edit ] After cosmic inflation ended, the universe was filled with a hot quark–gluon plasma , the remains of reheating. From this point onwards the physics of the early universe is much better understood, and the energies involved in the quark epoch are directly accessible in particle physics experiments and other detectors.

[ 13 ] : 5 Electroweak epoch [ edit ] Starting anywhere between 10 −22 and 10 −15 seconds after the Big Bang, until 10 −12 seconds after the Big Bang Sometime after inflation, the created particles went through thermalization , where mutual interactions lead to thermal equilibrium . Before the electroweak symmetry breaking , at a temperature of around 10 15 K , approximately 10 −15 seconds after the Big Bang, the electromagnetic and weak interaction had not yet separated , and the gauge bosons and fermions had not yet gained mass through the Higgs mechanism . This epoch ended with electroweak symmetry breaking , potentially through a phase transition . In some extensions of the Standard Model of particle physics , baryogenesis also happened at this stage, creating an imbalance between matter and antimatter (though in extensions to this model, this may have happened earlier). Little is known about the details of these processes.

Electroweak symmetry breaking [ edit ] 10 −12 seconds after the Big Bang Main article: Electroweak symmetry breaking As the universe's temperature continued to fall below 159.5 ± 1.5 GeV , electroweak symmetry breaking happened.

[ 16 ] So far as we know, it was the penultimate symmetry breaking event in the formation of the universe, the final one being chiral symmetry breaking in the quark sector. This has two related effects: Via the Higgs mechanism , all elementary particles interacting with the Higgs field became massive, having been massless at higher energy levels.

As a side-effect, the weak nuclear force and electromagnetic force, and their respective bosons (the W and Z bosons and photon) began to manifest differently in the present universe. Before electroweak symmetry breaking, these bosons were all massless particles and interacted over long distances, but at this point the W and Z bosons abruptly became massive particles only interacting over distances smaller than the size of an atom, while the photon remained massless and remained a long-distance interaction.

After electroweak symmetry breaking, the fundamental interactions we know of—gravitation, electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions—all took their present forms, and fundamental particles had their expected masses, but the temperature of the universe was still too high to allow the stable formation of many of the particles we now see in the universe, so there were no protons or neutrons, and therefore no atoms, atomic nuclei , or molecules. (More precisely, any composite particles that formed by chance almost immediately broke up again due to the extreme energies.) Quark epoch [ edit ] Between 10 −12 seconds and 10 −5 seconds after the Big Bang Main article: Quark epoch The quark epoch began approximately 10 −12 seconds after the Big Bang. This was the period in the evolution of the early universe immediately after electroweak symmetry breaking when the fundamental interactions of gravitation, electromagnetism, the strong interaction and the weak interaction had taken their present forms, but the temperature of the universe was still too high to allow quarks to bind together to form hadrons . The quark epoch ended when the universe was about 10 -5 seconds old; two non-equilibrium events must have occurred next, formation of baryons and of dark matter.

[ 6 ] : 23 Baryogenesis [ edit ] Perhaps by 10 −11 seconds [ citation needed ] Main article: Baryogenesis Further information: Leptogenesis (physics) Baryons are subatomic particles such as protons and neutrons, that are composed of three quarks . It would be expected that both baryons, and particles known as antibaryons would have formed in equal numbers. However, this does not seem to be what happened—as far as we know, the universe was left with far more baryons than antibaryons. In fact, almost no antibaryons are observed in nature. It is not clear how this came about. Any explanation for this phenomenon must allow the Sakharov conditions related to baryogenesis to have been satisfied at some time after the end of cosmological inflation . Current particle physics suggests asymmetries under which these conditions would be met, but these asymmetries appear to be too small to account for the observed baryon-antibaryon asymmetry of the universe.

Theory predicts that about 1 neutron remained for every 6 protons, with the ratio falling to 1:7 over time due to neutron decay. This is believed to be correct because, at a later stage, the neutrons and some of the protons fused , leaving hydrogen, a hydrogen isotope called deuterium, helium and other elements, which can be measured. A 1:7 ratio of hadrons would indeed produce the observed element ratios in the early and current universe.

[ 17 ] Neutrino decoupling and cosmic neutrino background (CνB) [ edit ] Around 1 second after the Big Bang Main articles: Neutrino decoupling and Cosmic neutrino background At approximately 1 second after the Big Bang neutrinos decouple and begin travelling freely through space. As neutrinos rarely interact with matter, these neutrinos still exist today, analogous to the much later cosmic microwave background emitted during recombination, around 370,000 years after the Big Bang. The neutrinos from this event have a very low energy, around 10 −10 times the amount of those observable with present-day direct detection.

[ 18 ] Even high-energy neutrinos are notoriously difficult to detect , so this cosmic neutrino background (CνB) may not be directly observed in detail for many years, if at all.

[ 18 ] However, Big Bang cosmology makes many predictions about the CνB, and there is very strong indirect evidence that the CνB exists, both from Big Bang nucleosynthesis predictions of the helium abundance, and from anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background (CMB). One of these predictions is that neutrinos will have left a subtle imprint on the CMB. It is well known that the CMB has irregularities. Some of the CMB fluctuations were roughly regularly spaced, because of the effect of baryonic acoustic oscillations . In theory, the decoupled neutrinos should have had a very slight effect on the phase of the various CMB fluctuations.

[ 18 ] In 2015, it was reported that such shifts had been detected in the CMB. Moreover, the fluctuations corresponded to neutrinos of almost exactly the temperature predicted by Big Bang theory ( 1.96 ± 0.02 K compared to a prediction of 1.95 K ), and exactly three types of neutrino, the same number of neutrino flavors predicted by the Standard Model.

[ 18 ] Cosmological models of this early time remain unsettled.
The Standard Model of particle physics is only tested up to temperatures of order 10 17 K (10 TeV) in particle colliders, such as the Large Hadron Collider . Moreover, new physical phenomena not yet covered by the Standard Model could have been important before the time of neutrino decoupling , when the temperature of the universe was about 10 10 K (1 MeV).

[ 19 ] Lepton epoch [ edit ] Between 1 second and 10 seconds after the Big Bang Main article: Lepton epoch The majority of hadrons and anti-hadrons annihilate each other leaving leptons (such as the electron , muons and certain neutrinos) and antileptons, dominating the mass of the universe.
Initially leptons and antileptons are produced in pairs. About 10 seconds after the Big Bang the temperature of the universe falls to the point at which new lepton–antilepton pairs are no longer created and most remaining leptons and antileptons quickly annihilated each other, giving rise to pairs of high-energy photons, and leaving a small residue of non-annihilated leptons.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Photon epoch [ edit ] Between 10 seconds and 370,000 years after the Big Bang Main article: Photon epoch After most leptons and antileptons are annihilated at the end of the lepton epoch, most of the mass–energy in the universe is left in the form of photons.

[ 22 ] (Much of the rest of its mass–energy is in the form of neutrinos and other relativistic particles.

[ citation needed ] ) Therefore, the energy of the universe, and its overall behavior, is dominated by its photons. These photons continue to interact frequently with charged particles, i.e., electrons, protons and (eventually) nuclei. They continue to do so for about the next 370,000 years.

Nucleosynthesis of light elements [ edit ] Between 2 minutes and 20 minutes after the Big Bang [ 23 ] Main article: Big Bang nucleosynthesis Between about 2 and 20 minutes after the Big Bang nuclear fusion reactions convert a 1/7 mixture of neutrons and protons in to a mix of protons, deuterium (a proton fused with a neutron), 3 He, 4 He, with trace amounts of 7 Li and 7 Be. These reactions end when the temperature falls below the 0.07MeV needed for nuclear fusion. The final mixture depends upon the reaction rates, the temperature, and the density of the components. The reaction rates can be measured in nuclear physics laboratories while the temperature and densities can be calculated from models of the expansion of the universe.

[ 24 ] : 313 About 25% of the protons, and all [ 17 ] the neutrons fuse to form deuterium, a hydrogen isotope, and almost all of the deuterium quickly fuses to form helium-4.

[ 24 ] Helium-4 has much higher binding energy than nuclei with 5 to 8 nucleons so only trace amounts of those nuclei are created. 
Heavier nuclei produced in stars do not appear because they require the combination of three Helium-4 nuclei and the density of Helium-4 is too low for many three way collisions to occur before the expansion cools the universe below the fusion temperature.

[ 25 ] : 65 Small amounts of tritium (another hydrogen isotope) and beryllium -7 and -8 are formed, but these are unstable and are quickly decay.

[ 17 ] A small amount of deuterium is left unfused.

[ 17 ] [ 25 ] : 70 The amounts of each light element in the early universe can be estimated from old galaxies, and is strong evidence for the Big Bang.

[ 24 ] : 313 For example, the Big Bang should produce about 1 neutron for every 7 protons, allowing for 25% of all nucleons to be fused into helium-4 (2 protons and 2 neutrons out of every 16 nucleons), and this is the amount we find today, and far more than can be explained by production in stars.

[ 17 ] [ 24 ] : 305 Similarly, deuterium fuses extremely easily; any alternative explanation must also explain how conditions existed for deuterium to form, but also left some of that deuterium unfused and not immediately fused again into helium.

[ 17 ] Any alternative must also explain the proportions of the various light elements and their isotopes. A few isotopes, such as lithium-7, were found to be present in amounts that differed from theory.

[ 26 ] Matter domination [ edit ] 47,000 years after the Big Bang Main articles: Matter-dominated era and Structure formation Until now, the universe's large-scale dynamics and behavior have been determined mainly by radiation—meaning, those constituents that move relativistically (at or near the speed of light), such as photons and neutrinos. As the universe cools, from around 47,000 years (redshift z = 3600), the universe's large-scale behavior becomes dominated by matter instead.

[ 8 ] : 96 This occurs because the energy density of matter begins to exceed both the energy density of radiation and the vacuum energy density [ 27 ] : 497 Around or shortly after 47,000 years, the densities of non-relativistic matter (atomic nuclei) and relativistic radiation (photons) become equal, the Jeans length , which determines the smallest structures that can form (due to competition between gravitational attraction and pressure effects), begins to fall and perturbations, instead of being wiped out by free streaming radiation , can begin to grow in amplitude.

According to the Lambda-CDM model , by this stage, the matter in the universe is around 84.5% cold dark matter and 15.5% "ordinary" matter. There is overwhelming evidence that dark matter exists and dominates the universe, but since the exact nature of dark matter is still not understood, the Big Bang theory does not presently cover any stages in its formation.

From this point on, and for several billion years to come, the presence of dark matter accelerates the formation of structure in the universe. In the early universe, dark matter gradually gathers in huge filaments under the effects of gravity, collapsing faster than ordinary (baryonic) matter because its collapse is not slowed by radiation pressure . This amplifies the tiny inhomogeneities (irregularities) in the density of the universe which were left by cosmic inflation. Over time, slightly denser regions become denser and slightly rarefied (emptier) regions become more rarefied. Ordinary matter eventually gathers together faster than it would otherwise do, because of the presence of these concentrations of dark matter.

The properties of dark matter that allow it to collapse quickly without radiation pressure also mean that it cannot lose energy by radiation. Losing energy is necessary for particles to collapse into dense structures beyond a certain point. Therefore, dark matter collapses into huge but diffuse filaments and haloes, and not into stars or planets. Ordinary matter, which can lose energy by radiation, forms dense objects and also gas clouds when it collapses.

Recombination, photon decoupling, and the cosmic microwave background (CMB) [ edit ] Main articles: Recombination (cosmology) and decoupling (cosmology) 9-year WMAP image of the cosmic microwave background radiation (2012).

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The radiation is isotropic to roughly one part in 100,000.

[ 30 ] : 291 About 370,000 years after the Big Bang, two connected events occurred: the ending of recombination and photon decoupling . Recombination describes the ionized particles combining to form the first neutral atoms, and decoupling refers to the photons released ("decoupled") as the newly formed atoms settle into more stable energy states.

Just before recombination, the baryonic matter in the universe was at a temperature where it formed a hot ionized plasma. Most of the photons in the universe interacted with electrons and protons, and could not travel significant distances without interacting with ionized particles. As a result, the universe was opaque or "foggy". Although there was light, it was not possible to see, nor can we observe that light through telescopes.

Starting around 18,000 years, the universe has cooled to a point where free electrons can combine with helium nuclei to form He + atoms. After around 50,000 years, as the universe cools, its behavior begins to be dominated by matter rather than radiation.

[ 8 ] : 95 At around 100,000 years, after the neutral helium atoms form, helium hydride is the first molecule .

[ 31 ] Much later, hydrogen and helium hydride react to form molecular hydrogen (H 2 ), the fuel needed for the first stars .

[ 32 ] At about 370,000 years, neutral hydrogen atoms finish forming ("recombination" of hydrogen ions and electrons), [ 33 ] : 120 greatly reducing the Thomson scattering of photons.

[ 10 ] : 22.4.1 [ 34 ] [ 8 ] : 155 . No longer scattered by free electrons, the photons were " decoupled " from the earlier plasma and propagated freely. The majority of these photons still exist as the cosmic microwave background (CMB).

[ 10 ] : 22.4.3 This is the oldest era of the universe that we can directly observe today.

Directly combining in a low energy state (ground state) is less efficient, so these hydrogen atoms generally form with the electrons still in a high-energy state, and once combined, the electrons quickly release energy in the form of one or more photons as they transition to a low energy state. This release of photons is known as photon decoupling. Some of these decoupled photons are captured by other hydrogen atoms, the remainder remain free. By the end of recombination, most of the protons in the universe have formed neutral atoms. This change from charged to neutral particles means that the mean free path photons can travel before capture in effect becomes infinite, so any decoupled photons that have not been captured can travel freely over long distances (see Thomson scattering ). The universe has become transparent to visible light , radio waves and other electromagnetic radiation for the first time in its history.

The background of this box approximates the original 4000 K color of the photons released during decoupling, before they became redshifted to form the cosmic microwave background . The entire universe would have appeared as a brilliantly glowing fog of a color similar to this and a temperature of 4000 K, at the time.

The photons released by these newly formed hydrogen atoms initially had a temperature/energy of around ~ 4000 K . This would have been visible to the eye as a pale yellow/orange tinted, or "soft", white color.

[ 35 ] Over billions of years since decoupling, as the universe has expanded, the photons have been red-shifted from visible light to radio waves (microwave radiation corresponding to a temperature of about 2.7 K). Red shifting describes the photons acquiring longer wavelengths and lower frequencies as the universe expanded over billions of years, so that they gradually changed from visible light to radio waves. These same photons can still be detected as radio waves today. They form the cosmic microwave background, and they provide crucial evidence of the early universe and how it developed.

Around the same time as recombination, existing pressure waves within the electron-baryon plasma—known as baryon acoustic oscillations —became embedded in the distribution of matter as it condensed, giving rise to a very slight preference in distribution of large-scale objects. Therefore, the cosmic microwave background is a picture of the universe at the end of this epoch including the tiny fluctuations generated during inflation (see 9-year WMAP image ), and the spread of objects such as galaxies in the universe is an indication of the scale and size of the universe as it developed over time.

[ 36 ] Gravity builds cosmic structure [ edit ] 370 thousand to about 1 billion years after the Big Bang [ 37 ] See also: Hydrogen line and List of the most distant astronomical objects Even before recombination and decoupling , matter began to accumulate around clumps of dark matter.

[ 6 ] : 4.1 Clouds of hydrogen collapsed very slowly to form stars and galaxies .

Hubble Space Telescope — Ultra Deep Field galaxies to Legacy Field zoom out (video 00:50; 2 May 2019) Dark Ages [ edit ] See also: 21 centimeter radiation After recombination and decoupling, the universe was transparent and had cooled enough to allow light to travel long distances, but there were no light-producing structures such as stars and galaxies. Stars and galaxies are formed when dense regions of gas form due to the action of gravity, and this takes a long time within a near-uniform density of gas and on the scale required, so it is estimated that stars did not exist for perhaps hundreds of millions of years after recombination.

This period, known as the Dark Ages, began at photon decoupling around 370,000 years after the Big Bang and ends over a long period of time called reionization.

[ 38 ] During the Dark Ages, the temperature of the universe cooled from some 4000 K to about 60 K (3727 °C to about −213 °C), and only two sources of photons existed: the photons released during recombination/decoupling (as neutral hydrogen atoms formed), which we can still detect today as the cosmic microwave background (CMB), and photons occasionally released by neutral hydrogen atoms, known as the 21 cm spin line of neutral hydrogen . The hydrogen spin line is in the microwave range of frequencies, and within 3 million years, [ citation needed ] the CMB photons had redshifted out of visible light to infrared ; from that time until the first stars, there were no visible light photons. Other than perhaps some rare statistical anomalies, the universe was truly dark.

The first generation of stars, known as Population III stars , formed within a few hundred million years after the Big Bang.

[ 39 ] These stars were the first source of visible light in the universe after recombination. Structures may have begun to emerge from around 150 million years, and early galaxies emerged from around 180 to 700 million years.

[ citation needed ] As they emerged, the Dark Ages gradually ended. Because this process was gradual, the Dark Ages only ended fully at around 1 billion years, as the universe took on its present appearance.

[ citation needed ] Artist's impression of the first stars, 400 million years after the Big Bang Oldest observations of stars and galaxies [ edit ] Main articles: Hubble Space Telescope , James Webb Space Telescope , and List of the most distant astronomical objects At present, the oldest observations of stars and galaxies are from shortly after the start of reionization , with galaxies such as GN-z11 ( Hubble Space Telescope , 2016) at about z≈11.1 (about 400 million years cosmic time).

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Hubble's successor, the James Webb Space Telescope , launched December 2021, is designed to detect objects up to 100 times fainter than Hubble, and much earlier in the history of the universe, back to redshift z≈20 (about 180 million years cosmic time ).

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] This is believed to be earlier than the first galaxies, and around the era of the first stars.

[ 44 ] There is also an observational effort underway to detect the faint 21 cm spin line radiation, as it is in principle an even more powerful tool than the cosmic microwave background for studying the early universe.

Earliest structures and stars emerge [ edit ] Around 150 million to 1 billion years after the Big Bang See also: Stellar formation , Dwarf galaxy , Baryon acoustic oscillations , Large-scale structure , Structure formation , and Stelliferous Era The Hubble Ultra Deep Fields often feature galaxies that are examples of what the early Stelliferous Era was like.

Another Hubble image shows an infant galaxy forming nearby, which means this happened very recently on the cosmological timescale. This shows that new galaxy formation in the universe is still occurring.

The matter in the universe is around 84.5% cold dark matter and 15.5% "ordinary" matter. Since the start of the matter-dominated era, dark matter has gradually been gathering in huge spread-out (diffuse) filaments under the effects of gravity. Ordinary matter eventually gathers together faster than it would otherwise do, because of the presence of these concentrations of dark matter. It is also slightly more dense at regular distances due to early baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) which became embedded into the distribution of matter when photons decoupled. Unlike dark matter, ordinary matter can lose energy by many routes, which means that as it collapses, it can lose the energy which would otherwise hold it apart, and collapse more quickly, and into denser forms. Ordinary matter gathers where dark matter is denser, and in those places it collapses into clouds of mainly hydrogen gas. The first stars and galaxies form from these clouds. Where numerous galaxies have formed, galaxy clusters and superclusters will eventually arise. Large voids with few stars will develop between them, marking where dark matter became less common.

The exact timings of the first stars, galaxies, supermassive black holes , and quasars, and the start and end timings and progression of the period known as reionization , are still being actively researched, with new findings published periodically. As of 2019 [update] : the earliest confirmed galaxies (for example GN-z11 ) date from around 380–400 million years, suggesting surprisingly fast gas cloud condensation and stellar birth rates; and observations of the Lyman-alpha forest , and of other changes to the light from ancient objects, allow the timing for reionization and its eventual end to be narrowed down.

Structure formation in the Big Bang model proceeds hierarchically, due to gravitational collapse, with smaller structures forming before larger ones. The earliest structures to form are the first stars (known as Population III stars), dwarf galaxies, and quasars (which are thought to be bright, early active galaxies containing a supermassive black hole surrounded by an inward-spiraling accretion disk of gas). Before this epoch, the evolution of the universe could be understood through linear cosmological perturbation theory : that is, all structures could be understood as small deviations from a perfect homogeneous universe. This is computationally relatively easy to study. At this point non-linear structures begin to form, and the computational problem becomes much more difficult, involving, for example, N -body simulations with billions of particles. The Bolshoi cosmological simulation is a high precision simulation of this era.

These Population III stars are also responsible for turning the few light elements that were formed in the Big Bang (hydrogen, helium and small amounts of lithium) into many heavier elements. They can be huge as well as perhaps small—and non-metallic (no elements except hydrogen and helium). The larger stars have very short lifetimes compared to most Main Sequence stars we see today, so they commonly finish burning their hydrogen fuel and explode as supernovae after mere millions of years, seeding the universe with heavier elements over repeated generations. They mark the start of the Stelliferous Era.

As yet, no Population III stars have been found, so the understanding of them is based on computational models of their formation and evolution. Fortunately, observations of the cosmic microwave background radiation can be used to date when star formation began in earnest. Analysis of such observations made by the Planck microwave space telescope in 2016 concluded that the first generation of stars may have formed from around 300 million years after the Big Bang.

[ 46 ] Quasars provide some additional evidence of early structure formation. Their light shows evidence of elements such as carbon, magnesium , iron and oxygen. This is evidence that by the time quasars formed, a massive phase of star formation had already taken place, including sufficient generations of Population III stars to give rise to these elements.

Reionization [ edit ] See also: Reionization , Dwarf galaxy , and Quasar Phases of the reionization As the first stars, dwarf galaxies and quasars gradually form, the intense radiation they emit reionizes much of the surrounding universe; splitting the neutral hydrogen atoms back into a plasma of free electrons and protons for the first time since recombination and decoupling.

Reionization is evidenced from observations of quasars. Quasars are a form of active galaxy, and the most luminous objects observed in the universe. Electrons in neutral hydrogen have specific patterns of absorbing ultraviolet photons, related to electron energy levels and called the Lyman series . Ionized hydrogen does not have electron energy levels of this kind. Therefore, light travelling through ionized hydrogen and neutral hydrogen shows different absorption lines. Ionized hydrogen in the intergalactic medium (particularly electrons) can scatter light through Thomson scattering as it did before recombination, but the expansion of the universe and clumping of gas into galaxies resulted in a concentration too low to make the universe fully opaque by the time of reionization. Because of the immense distance travelled by light (billions of light years) to reach Earth from structures existing during reionization, any absorption by neutral hydrogen is redshifted by various amounts, rather than by one specific amount, indicating when the absorption of then-ultraviolet light happened. These features make it possible to study the state of ionization at many different times in the past.

Reionization began as "bubbles" of ionized hydrogen which became larger over time until the entire intergalactic medium was ionized, when the absorption lines by neutral hydrogen become rare.

[ 47 ] The absorption was due to the general state of the universe (the intergalactic medium) and not due to passing through galaxies or other dense areas.

[ 47 ] Reionization might have started to happen as early as z = 16 (250 million years of cosmic time) and was mostly complete by around z = 9 or 10 (500 million years), with the remaining neutral hydrogen becoming fully ionized z = 5 or 6 (1 billion years), when Gunn-Peterson troughs that show the presence of large amounts of neutral hydrogen disappear. The intergalactic medium remains predominantly ionized to the present day, the exception being some remaining neutral hydrogen clouds, which cause Lyman-alpha forests to appear in spectra.

These observations have narrowed down the period of time during which reionization took place, but the source of the photons that caused reionization is still not completely certain. To ionize neutral hydrogen, an energy larger than 13.6 eV is required, which corresponds to ultraviolet photons with a wavelength of 91.2 nm or shorter, implying that the sources must have produced significant amounts of ultraviolet and higher energy. Protons and electrons will recombine if energy is not continuously provided to keep them apart, which also sets limits on how numerous the sources were and their longevity.

[ 48 ] With these constraints, it is expected that quasars and first generation stars and galaxies were the main sources of energy.

[ 49 ] The current leading candidates from most to least significant are currently believed to be Population III stars (the earliest stars; possibly 70%), [ 50 ] [ 51 ] dwarf galaxies (very early small high-energy galaxies; possibly 30%), [ 52 ] and a contribution from quasars (a class of active galactic nuclei ).

[ 48 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] However, by this time, matter had become far more spread out due to the ongoing expansion of the universe. Although the neutral hydrogen atoms were again ionized, the plasma was much more thin and diffuse, and photons were much less likely to be scattered. Despite being reionized, the universe remained largely transparent during reionization due how sparse the intergalactic medium was. Reionization gradually ended as the intergalactic medium became virtually completely ionized, although some regions of neutral hydrogen do exist, creating Lyman-alpha forests.

In August 2023, images of black holes and related matter in the very early universe by the James Webb Space Telescope were reported and discussed.

[ 55 ] Galaxies, clusters and superclusters [ edit ] Computer simulated view of the large-scale structure of a part of the universe about 50 million light-years across [ 56 ] See also: Galaxy formation and evolution Matter continues to draw together under the influence of gravity, to form galaxies. The stars from this time period, known as Population II stars , are formed early on in this process, with more recent Population I stars formed later. Gravitational attraction also gradually pulls galaxies towards each other to form groups, clusters and superclusters .

Hubble Ultra Deep Field observations has identified a number of small galaxies merging to form larger ones, at 800 million years of cosmic time (13 billion years ago).

[ 57 ] (This age estimate is now believed to be slightly overstated).

[ 58 ] Present and future [ edit ] Further information: Timeline of natural history , Geologic time scale , Timeline of the evolutionary history of life , and Timeline of the far future Nature timeline This box: view talk edit −13 — – −12 — – −11 — – −10 — – −9 — – −8 — – −7 — – −6 — – −5 — – −4 — – −3 — – −2 — – −1 — – 0 — Dark Ages Reionization Matter-dominated era Water on Earth Life Multicellular life Vertebrates ← Earliest stars ← Earliest galaxy ← Earliest quasar / black hole ← Omega Centauri ← Andromeda Galaxy ← Milky Way spirals ← NGC 188 star cluster ← Alpha Centauri ← Accelerated expansion ← Earth / Solar System ← Earliest known life ← Atmospheric oxygen ← Sexual reproduction ← Earliest fungi ← Earliest land plants ← Cambrian explosion ← Earliest mammals ← Earliest apes / humans ( billion years ago ) Universe as it appears today [ edit ] From 1 billion years, and for about 12.8 billion years, the universe has looked much as it does today and it will continue to appear very similar for many billions of years into the future. The thin disk of the Milky Way began to form when the universe was about 5 billion years old or 9 ± 2 Gya .

[ 59 ] The Solar System formed at about 9.2 billion years (4.6 Gya); [ 10 ] : 22.2.3 the oldest organic matter consistent with life processes dates back 4 billion years.

[ 60 ] The thinning of matter over time reduces the ability of the matter to gravitationally decelerate the expansion of the universe; in contrast, dark energy is a constant factor tending to accelerate the expansion of the universe. The universe's expansion passed an inflection point about five or six billion years ago when the universe entered the modern "dark-energy-dominated era" where the universe's expansion is now accelerating rather than decelerating. The present-day universe is quite well understood, but beyond about 100 billion years of cosmic time (about 86 billion years in the future), scientists are less sure which path the universe will take.

[ 61 ] Dark energy-dominated era [ edit ] From about 9.8 billion years after the Big Bang Main articles: Dark energy and Scale factor (cosmology) From about 9.8 billion years of cosmic time, [ 8 ] : 96 the universe's large-scale behavior is believed to have gradually changed for the third time in its history. Its behavior had originally been dominated by radiation (relativistic constituents such as photons and neutrinos) for the first 47,000 years, and since about 370,000 years of cosmic time, its behavior had been dominated by matter. During its matter-dominated era, the expansion of the universe had begun to slow down, as gravity reined in the initial outward expansion. But from about 9.8 billion years of cosmic time, observations show that the expansion of the universe slowly stops decelerating, and gradually begins to accelerate again, instead.

While the precise cause is not known, the observation is accepted as correct by the cosmologist community. By far the most accepted understanding is that this is due to an unknown form of energy which has been given the name "dark energy".

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] "Dark" in this context means that it is not directly observed, but its existence can be deduced by examining the gravitational effect it has on the universe. Research is ongoing to understand this dark energy. Dark energy is now believed to be the single largest component of the universe, as it constitutes about 68.3% of the entire mass–energy of the physical universe.

Dark energy is believed to act like a cosmological constant —a scalar field that exists throughout space. Unlike gravity, the effects of such a field do not diminish (or only diminish slowly) as the universe grows. While matter and gravity have a greater effect initially, their effect quickly diminishes as the universe continues to expand. Objects in the universe, which are initially seen to be moving apart as the universe expands, continue to move apart, but their outward motion gradually slows down. This slowing effect becomes smaller as the universe becomes more spread out. Eventually, the outward and repulsive effect of dark energy begins to dominate over the inward pull of gravity. Instead of slowing down and perhaps beginning to move inward under the influence of gravity, from about 9.8 billion years of cosmic time, the expansion of space starts to slowly accelerate outward at a gradually increasing rate.

Far future and ultimate fate [ edit ] Main articles: Ultimate fate of the universe and Timeline of the far future Further information: Future of an expanding universe and Heat death of the universe There are several competing scenarios for the long-term evolution of the universe. Which of them will happen, if any, depends on the precise values of physical constants such as the cosmological constant, the possibility of proton decay , the energy of the vacuum (meaning, the energy of "empty" space itself), and the natural laws beyond the Standard Model .

[ citation needed ] If the expansion of the universe continues and it stays in its present form, eventually all but the nearest galaxies will be carried away from us by the expansion of space at such a velocity that the observable universe will be limited to our own gravitationally bound local galaxy cluster . In the very long term (after many trillions—thousands of billions—of years, cosmic time), the Stelliferous Era will end, as stars cease to be born and even the longest-lived stars gradually die. Beyond this, all objects in the universe will cool and (with the possible exception of protons ) gradually decompose back to their constituent particles and then into subatomic particles and very low-level photons and other fundamental particles , by a variety of possible processes.

[ citation needed ] The following scenarios have been proposed for the ultimate fate of the universe: Scenario Description Heat Death As expansion continues, the universe becomes larger, colder, and more dilute; in time, all structures eventually decompose to subatomic particles and photons.

In the case of indefinitely continuing cosmic expansion, the energy density in the universe will decrease until, after an estimated time of 10 1000 years, it reaches thermodynamic equilibrium and no more structure will be possible. This will happen only after an extremely long time because first, some (less than 0.1%) [ 64 ] matter will collapse into black holes , which will then evaporate extremely slowly via Hawking radiation . The universe in this scenario will cease to be able to support life much earlier than this, after some 10 14 years or so, when star formation ceases.

[ 9 ] , §IID In some Grand Unified Theories , proton decay after at least 10 34 years will convert the remaining interstellar gas and stellar remnants into leptons (such as positrons and electrons) and photons. Some positrons and electrons will then recombine into photons.

[ 9 ] , §IV, §VF In this case, the universe has reached a high- entropy state consisting of a bath of particles and low-energy radiation. It is not known however whether it eventually achieves thermodynamic equilibrium .

[ 9 ] , §VIB, VID The hypothesis of a universal heat death stems from the 1850s ideas of William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), who extrapolated the classical theory of heat and irreversibility (as embodied in the first two laws of thermodynamics) to the universe as a whole.

[ 65 ] Big Rip Expansion of space accelerates and at some point becomes so extreme that even subatomic particles and the fabric of spacetime are pulled apart and unable to exist.

For any value of the dark energy content of the universe where the negative pressure ratio is less than −1, the expansion rate of the universe will continue to increase without limit. Gravitationally bound systems, such as clusters of galaxies, galaxies, and ultimately the Solar System will be torn apart. Eventually the expansion will be so rapid as to overcome the electromagnetic forces holding molecules and atoms together. Even atomic nuclei will be torn apart. Finally, forces and interactions even on the Planck scale —the smallest size for which the notion of "space" currently has a meaning—will no longer be able to occur as the fabric of spacetime itself is pulled apart and the universe as we know it will end in an unusual kind of singularity.

[ citation needed ] Big Crunch Expansion eventually slows and halts, then reverses as all matter accelerates towards its common centre. Currently considered to be likely incorrect.

In the opposite of the "Big Rip" scenario, the expansion of the universe would at some point be reversed and the universe would contract towards a hot, dense state. This is a required element of oscillatory universe scenarios, such as the cyclic model , although a Big Crunch does not necessarily imply an oscillatory universe. Current observations suggest that this model of the universe is unlikely to be correct, and the expansion will continue or even accelerate.

[ citation needed ] Vacuum instability Collapse of the quantum fields that underpin all forces, particles and structures, to a different form.

Cosmology traditionally has assumed a stable or at least metastable universe, but the possibility of a false vacuum in quantum field theory implies that the universe at any point in spacetime might spontaneously collapse into a lower-energy state (see Bubble nucleation ), a more stable or "true vacuum", which would then expand outward from that point with the speed of light.

[ 66 ] In this kind of protracted timescale, extremely rare quantum phenomena may also occur that are unlikely to be seen on a timescale smaller than trillions of years. These may also lead to unpredictable changes to the state of the universe which would not be likely to be significant on any smaller timescale. For example, on a timescale of millions of trillions of years, black holes might appear to evaporate almost instantly, uncommon quantum tunnelling phenomena would appear to be common, and quantum (or other) phenomena so unlikely that they might occur just once in a trillion years may occur many times.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Age of the universe – Cosmological time duration Big History – Academic discipline which examines history from the Big Bang to the present day Cosmic Calendar – Method to visualize the chronology of the universe ( age of the universe scaled to a single year) Cyclic model – Cosmological models involving indefinite, self-sustaining cycles Dark-energy-dominated era – Expansion of the universe parameter Dyson's eternal intelligence – Hypothetical concept in astrophysics Entropy (arrow of time) – Use of the second law of thermodynamics to distinguish past from future Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Illustris project – Computer-simulated universes Matter-dominated era – Expansion of the universe parameter Radiation-dominated era – Expansion of the universe parameter Timeline of the early universe – History and future of the universe Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Timeline of the far future – Scientific projections regarding the far future Ultimate fate of the universe – Theories about the end of the universe References [ edit ] ^ Planck Collaboration (October 2016). " Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological parameters".

Astronomy & Astrophysics .

594 : Article A13.

arXiv : 1502.01589 .

Bibcode : 2016A&A...594A..13P .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/201525830 .

S2CID 119262962 .

The Planck Collaboration in 2015 published the estimate of 13.799 ± 0.021 billion years ago (68% confidence interval). See PDF: page 32, Table 4, Age/Gyr, last column.

^ a b c Kolb, Edward; Turner, Michael S. (2018).

The Early Universe . Boulder: Chapman and Hall/CRC.

ISBN 978-0-201-62674-2 .

^ S.V. Pilipenko (2013–2021) "Paper-and-pencil cosmological calculator" arxiv:1303.5961, including Fortran-90 code upon which the citing charts and formulae are based.

^ a b c d e f g Peacock, J. A. (1998-12-28).

Cosmological Physics (1 ed.). Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511804533 .

ISBN 978-0-521-41072-4 .

^ Hogg, David W. (2000-12-16). "Distance measures in cosmology".

arXiv : astro-ph/9905116 .

^ a b c Turner, Michael S. (2022-09-26).

"The Road to Precision Cosmology" .

Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science .

72 (1): 1– 35.

arXiv : 2201.04741 .

Bibcode : 2022ARNPS..72....1T .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-nucl-111119-041046 .

ISSN 0163-8998 .

^ Gibbons, Gary W.

; Hawking, Stephen W.

; Siklos, Stephen T.C., eds. (1983).

The Very Early Universe: Proceedings of the Nuffield Workshop, Cambridge, 21 June to 9 July, 1982 . Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-25349-9 .

LCCN 83007330 .

OCLC 9488764 .

: 171–204, "Phase transitions in the very early Universe" by Alan H. Guth .

^ a b c d e f g Ryden, Barbara (2016-11-17).

Introduction to Cosmology (2 ed.). Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781316651087 .

ISBN 978-1-107-15483-4 .

^ a b c d e Adams, Fred C.

; Laughlin, Gregory (1 April 1997). "A dying universe: The long-term fate and evolution of astrophysical objects".

Reviews of Modern Physics .

69 (2): 337– 372.

arXiv : astro-ph/9701131 .

Bibcode : 1997RvMP...69..337A .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.69.337 .

S2CID 12173790 .

^ a b c d Navas, S.; et al. ( Particle Data Group ) (2024). "Review of Particle Physics".

Physical Review D .

110 (3): 1– 708.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.110.030001 .

hdl : 11384/149923 .

^ a b Silk, Joseph (2005-01-03).

On the Shores of the Unknown: A Short History of the Universe . Cambridge University Press. p. 87.

ISBN 978-0-521-83627-2 .

^ Baggott, Jim (2018-06-07).

Origins: The Scientific Story of Creation . Oxford University Press. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0-19-256196-1 .

^ a b c d Cox, Brian; Forshaw, J. R. (2017).

Universal: a guide to the cosmos (1 ed.). Boston, MA: Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-82270-4 .

OCLC 973019447 .

^ Durrer, Ruth (2008).

The Cosmic Microwave Background . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-84704-9 .

^ Lidsey, James E. (1997).

"Reconstructing the inflaton potential—an overview" .

Reviews of Modern Physics .

69 (2): 373– 410.

arXiv : astro-ph/9508078 .

Bibcode : 1997RvMP...69..373L .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.69.373 .

^ D'Onofrio, Michela; Rummukainen, Kari (15 January 2016). "Standard model cross-over on the lattice".

Physical Review D .

93 (2): 025003.

arXiv : 1508.07161 .

Bibcode : 2016PhRvD..93b5003D .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.93.025003 .

S2CID 119261776 .

^ a b c d e f Karki, Ravi (May 2010).

"The Foreground of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis" (PDF) .

The Himalayan Physics .

1 (1): 79– 82.

doi : 10.3126/hj.v1i0.5186 .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ a b c d Siegel, Ethan (9 September 2016).

"Cosmic Neutrinos Detected, Confirming The Big Bang's Last Great Prediction" (Blog) . Science.

Forbes .

Jersey City, NJ .

ISSN 0015-6914 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

Primary source: Follin, Brent; Knox, Lloyd; Millea, Marius; et al. (26 August 2015). "First Detection of the Acoustic Oscillation Phase Shift Expected from the Cosmic Neutrino Background".

Physical Review Letters .

115 (9): 091301.

arXiv : 1503.07863 .

Bibcode : 2015PhRvL.115i1301F .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.091301 .

PMID 26371637 .

S2CID 24763212 .

^ Allahverdi, Rouzbeh; et al. (29 January 2021). "The first three seconds: A Review of Possible Expansion Histories of the early Universe".

The Open Journal of Astrophysics .

4 (1): 1.

arXiv : 2006.16182 .

Bibcode : 2021OJAp....4E...1A .

doi : 10.21105/astro.2006.16182 .

^ Kauffmann, Guinevere .

"Thermal history of the universe and early growth of density fluctuations" (PDF) (Lecture). Garching: Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2019 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ Chaisson, Eric J.

(2013).

"First Few Minutes" .

Cosmic Evolution . Cambridge, MA: Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ a b "Timeline of the Big Bang" .

The Physics of the Universe .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

^ Wright, Edward L.

(26 September 2012).

"Big Bang Nucleosynthesis" .

Ned Wright's Cosmology Tutorial . Los Angeles: Division of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of California, Los Angeles .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ a b c d Schramm, David N.; Turner, Michael S. (1998-01-01).

"Big-bang nucleosynthesis enters the precision era" .

Reviews of Modern Physics .

70 (1): 303– 318.

arXiv : astro-ph/9706069 .

Bibcode : 1998RvMP...70..303S .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.70.303 .

^ a b Dodelson, Scott (2003).

Modern cosmology . San Diego, Calif: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-219141-1 .

^ Elcio Abdalla; Guillermo Franco Abellán; et al. (11 Mar 2022). "Cosmology Intertwined: A Review of the Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology Associated with the Cosmological Tensions and Anomalies".

Journal of High Energy Astrophysics .

34 : 49.

arXiv : 2203.06142v1 .

Bibcode : 2022JHEAp..34...49A .

doi : 10.1016/j.jheap.2022.04.002 .

S2CID 247411131 .

^ Zeilik, Michael; Gregory, Stephen A. (1998).

Introductory Astronomy & Astrophysics . Saunders Golden Sunburst Series (4th ed.). Fresno, CA: Thomson Learning .

ISBN 978-0-03-006228-5 .

LCCN 97069268 .

OCLC 813279385 .

^ Gannon, Megan (21 December 2012).

"New 'Baby Picture' of Universe Unveiled" .

Space.com . New York: Future plc .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2019 . Retrieved 10 January 2020 .

^ Bennett, Charles L.

; Larson, Davin; Weiland, Janet L.; et al. (October 2013). "Nine-Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: Final Maps and Results".

The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series .

208 (2): Article 20.

arXiv : 1212.5225 .

Bibcode : 2013ApJS..208...20B .

doi : 10.1088/0067-0049/208/2/20 .

S2CID 119271232 .

^ Wright, Edward L.

(2004). "Theoretical Overview of Cosmic Microwave Background Anisotropy". In Freedman, Wendy L.

(ed.).

Measuring and Modeling the Universe . Carnegie Observatories Astrophysics Series. Vol. 2. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press . p. 291.

arXiv : astro-ph/0305591 .

Bibcode : 2004mmu..symp..291W .

ISBN 978-0-521-75576-4 .

LCCN 2005277053 .

OCLC 937330165 .

^ Mathewson, Samantha (18 April 2019).

"Astronomers Finally Spot Universe's First Molecule in Distant Nebula" .

Space.com . New York: Future plc .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2019 . Retrieved 10 January 2020 .

^ Sunyaev, R. A.; Chluba, J. (August 2009).

"Signals From the Epoch of Cosmological Recombination" .

Astronomical Notes .

330 (7): 657– 674.

arXiv : 0908.0435 .

doi : 10.1002/asna.200911237 .

^ Mukhanov, Viatcheslav (2005).

Physical Foundations of Cosmology . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-511-79055-3 .

LCCN 2006295735 .

OCLC 859642394 .

^ Notes: Edward L. Wright 's Javascript Cosmology Calculator (last modified 23 July 2018). With a default H 0 {\displaystyle H_{0}} = 69.6 (based on WMAP 9+SPT+ACT+6dFGS+BOSS/DR11+ H 0 /Riess) parameters, the calculated age of the universe with a redshift of z = 1100 is in agreement with Olive and Peacock (about 370,000 years).

^ "Color Temperature Chart" .

MediaCollege.com . Te Awamutu: Wavelength Media . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ Amos, Jonathan (13 November 2012).

"Quasars illustrate dark energy's roller coaster ride" . Science & Environment.

BBC News . London: BBC .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ Loeb, Abraham (November 2006).

"The Dark Ages of the Universe" (PDF) .

Scientific American . Vol. 295, no. 5. pp.

46– 53.

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican1106-46 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ Galli, Daniele; Palla, Francesco (2013-08-18).

"The Dawn of Chemistry" .

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

51 (1): 163– 206.

arXiv : 1211.3319 .

Bibcode : 2013ARA&A..51..163G .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-astro-082812-141029 .

ISSN 0066-4146 .

^ Ellis, Richard .

"Searching for First Light in the Early Universe" .

Richard Ellis's Homepage . Pasadena, CA: Astronomy Department, California Institute of Technology .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2001 . Retrieved 21 January 2007 .

^ Shelton, Jim (March 3, 2016).

"Shattering the cosmic distance record, once again" .

Yale University . Retrieved March 4, 2016 .

^ "Hubble breaks cosmic distance record" .

SpaceTelescope.org . March 3, 2016. heic1604 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ Oesch, P. A.; Brammer, G.; van Dokkum, P.; et al. (March 2016).

"A Remarkably Luminous Galaxy at z =11.1 Measured with Hubble Space Telescope Grism Spectroscopy" .

The Astrophysical Journal .

819 (2). 129.

arXiv : 1603.00461 .

Bibcode : 2016ApJ...819..129O .

doi : 10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/129 .

S2CID 119262750 .

^ Atkinson, Nancy.

"Hubble Has Looked Back in Time as Far as It Can And Still Can't Find The First Stars" .

Universe Today – via ScienceAlert.

^ a b "A Deeper Sky | by Brian Koberlein" .

briankoberlein.com .

^ "FAQ for Scientists Webb Telescope/NASA" .

jwst.nasa.gov .

^ "First stars formed even later than we thought" .

ESA Science & Technology . Paris: European Space Agency . 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 29 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b Dijkstra, Mark (22 October 2014). "Lyα Emitting Galaxies as a Probe of Reionization".

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia .

31 : e040.

arXiv : 1406.7292 .

Bibcode : 2014PASA...31...40D .

doi : 10.1017/pasa.2014.33 .

S2CID 119237814 .

^ a b Madau, Piero; Haardt, Francesco; Rees, Martin J.

(1 April 1999). "Radiative Transfer in a Clumpy Universe. III. The Nature of Cosmological Ionizing Source".

The Astrophysical Journal .

514 (2): 648– 659.

arXiv : astro-ph/9809058 .

Bibcode : 1999ApJ...514..648M .

doi : 10.1086/306975 .

S2CID 17932350 .

^ Barkana, Rennan; Loeb, Abraham (July 2001). "In the Beginning: The First Sources of Light and the Reionization of the Universe".

Physics Reports .

349 (2): 125– 238.

arXiv : astro-ph/0010468 .

Bibcode : 2001PhR...349..125B .

doi : 10.1016/S0370-1573(01)00019-9 .

S2CID 119094218 .

^ Gnedin, Nickolay Y.; Ostriker, Jeremiah P. (10 September 1997). "Reionization of the Universe and the Early Production of Metals".

The Astrophysical Journal .

486 (2): 581– 598.

arXiv : astro-ph/9612127 .

Bibcode : 1997ApJ...486..581G .

doi : 10.1086/304548 .

S2CID 5758398 .

^ Lu, Limin; Sargent, Wallace L. W.

; Barlow, Thomas A.; et al. (13 February 1998). "The Metal Contents of Very Low Column Density Lyman-alpha Clouds: Implications for the Origin of Heavy Elements in the Intergalactic Medium".

arXiv : astro-ph/9802189 .

^ Bouwens, Rychard J.

; Illingworth, Garth D.; Oesch, Pascal A.; et al. (10 June 2012). "Lower-luminosity Galaxies Could Reionize the Universe: Very Steep Faint-end Slopes to the UV Luminosity Functions at z ≥ 5–8 from the HUDF09 WFC3/IR Observations".

The Astrophysical Journal Letters .

752 (1): Article L5.

arXiv : 1105.2038 .

Bibcode : 2012ApJ...752L...5B .

doi : 10.1088/2041-8205/752/1/L5 .

S2CID 118856513 .

^ Shapiro, Paul R.

; Giroux, Mark L. (15 October 1987).

"Cosmological H II Regions and the Photoionization of the Intergalactic Medium" .

The Astrophysical Journal .

321 : L107 – L112 .

Bibcode : 1987ApJ...321L.107S .

doi : 10.1086/185015 .

^ Xiaohu, Fan ; Narayanan, Vijay K.; Lupton, Robert H.; et al. (December 2001). "A Survey of z > 5.8 Quasars in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. I. Discovery of Three New Quasars and the Spatial Density of Luminous Quasars at z ~ 6".

The Astrophysical Journal .

122 (6): 2833– 2849.

arXiv : astro-ph/0108063 .

Bibcode : 2001AJ....122.2833F .

doi : 10.1086/324111 .

S2CID 119339804 .

^ Wood, Charlie (14 August 2023).

"JWST Spots Giant Black Holes All Over the Early Universe – Giant black holes were supposed to be bit players in the early cosmic story. But recent James Webb Space Telescope observations are finding an unexpected abundance of the beasts" .

Quanta Magazine .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2023 . Retrieved 5 November 2023 .

^ "Illuminating illumination: what lights up the universe?" (Press release). London: University College London . UCL Media Relations. 27 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 14 January 2020 .

^ Nemiroff, Robert J.

; Bonnell, Jerry, eds. (9 March 2004).

"The Hubble Ultra Deep Field" .

Astronomy Picture of the Day . Washington, D.C.; Houghton, MI: NASA ; Michigan Technological University . Archived from the original on 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 22 September 2018 .

^ Landau, Elizabeth (25 October 2013) [Originally published 23 October 2013].

"Scientists confirm most distant galaxy ever" .

CNN . New York: Warner Media, LLC .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ Soderblom, David R. (2010-08-01).

"The Ages of Stars" .

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

48 (1): 581– 629.

arXiv : 1003.6074 .

Bibcode : 2010ARA&A..48..581S .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-astro-081309-130806 .

ISSN 0066-4146 .

^ Javaux, Emmanuelle J. (2019-08-22).

"Challenges in evidencing the earliest traces of life" .

Nature .

572 (7770): 451– 460.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.572..451J .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1436-4 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 31435057 .

^ Bruce, Dorminey (1 February 2021).

"The Beginning to the End of the Universe: The mystery of dark energy" .

Astronomy.com . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Overbye, Dennis (20 February 2017).

"Cosmos Controversy: The Universe Is Expanding, but How Fast?" . Out There.

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 21 February 2017 .

"A version of this article appears in print on Feb. 21, 2017, Section D, Page 1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Runaway Universe." ^ Peebles, P. J. E.

; Ratra, Bharat (22 April 2003). "The cosmological constant and dark energy".

Reviews of Modern Physics .

75 (2): 559– 606.

arXiv : astro-ph/0207347 .

Bibcode : 2003RvMP...75..559P .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.75.559 .

S2CID 118961123 .

^ Siegel, Ethan.

"No, Black Holes Will Never Consume The Universe" .

Forbes .

^ Thomson, William (July 1852).

"On the Dynamical Theory of Heat, with numerical results deduced from Mr. Joule's equivalent of a Thermal Unit, and M. Regnault's Observations on Steam" .

The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science . IV (Fourth Series). §§ 1–14 . Retrieved 16 January 2020 .

Thomson, William (1857) [Read 1 May 1854].

"On the Dynamical Theory of Heat. Part V. Thermo-electric Currents" .

Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh .

XXI . §§ 99–100 . Retrieved 16 January 2020 .

^ Turner, Michael S.

; Wilczek, Frank (12 August 1982).

"Is our vacuum metastable?" (PDF) .

Nature .

298 (5875): 633– 634.

Bibcode : 1982Natur.298..633T .

doi : 10.1038/298633a0 .

S2CID 4274444 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 October 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Carroll, Sean M.

(14 January 2011).

Cosmology and the arrow of time: Sean Carroll at TEDxCaltech (Video). New York; Vancouver, British Columbia: TED Conferences LLC .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2019 . Retrieved 20 January 2020 .

Chaisson, Eric J.

(2013).

"Cosmic Evolution: From Big Bang to Humankind" . Cambridge, MA: Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics .

Archived from the original on 27 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 January 2020 .

"History of the Universe Timeline" .

Mysteries of Deep Space . Arlington, VA: PBS Online . 2000.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2019 . Retrieved 24 March 2005 .

"HubbleSite" . Baltimore, MD: Space Telescope Science Institute 's Office of Public Outreach. Archived from the original on 18 January 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2005 .

Krauss, Lawrence M.

(Speaker); Cornwell, R. Elisabeth  (Producer) (21 October 2009).

'A Universe From Nothing' by Lawrence Krauss, AAI 2009 (Video). Washington, D.C.: Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

Lucas, Tom (Director, Writer); Grupper, Jonathan (Director, Writer) (18 May 2007).

Exploring Time (Television documentary miniseries). Silver Spring, MD: Twin Cities Public Television , Red Hill Studios, and NHK for The Science Channel . Retrieved 19 January 2020 .

"Once Upon a Universe" . Swindon, UK: Science and Technology Facilities Council . 26 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 May 2019 . Retrieved 20 January 2020 .

Overbye, Dennis (17 March 2006).

"Astronomers Find the Earliest Signs Yet of a Violent Baby Universe" .

The New York Times . New York.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 19 January 2020 .

Plait, Phil (14 January 2016).

Deep Time: Crash Course Astronomy #45 (Video).

PBS Digital Studios .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 October 2016 .

"Press Pass – Photo Gallery – Graphics and Illustrations" .

Fermilab . Batavia, IL. 1 January 2004. Archived from the original on 27 December 2005 . Retrieved 19 January 2020 .

(See: "Energy time line from the Big Bang to the present" (1984) and "History of the Universe Poster" (1989).) Schulman, Eric (1997).

"The History of the Universe in 200 Words or Less" . Archived from the original on 24 November 2005 . Retrieved 24 March 2005 .

"The Universe Adventure" . Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory . 2007.

Archived from the original on 22 June 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

Wright, Edward L.

(24 May 2013).

"Frequently Asked Questions in Cosmology" . Los Angeles: Division of Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of California, Los Angeles .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 January 2020 .

External videos 3D simulation visualizes history of the Universe begins just 12 million years after the Big Bang and illustrates the formation of stars, heavy elements, galaxies, exploding super novae and dark matter over 14 billion years on YouTube // 
Discover Magazine — May 7, 2014 v t e Timeline of the Big Bang Chronology of the universe Big Bang Planck epoch Grand unification epoch Electroweak epoch Inflation Baryogenesis Quark epoch Nucleosynthesis Matter domination Recombination Dark ages Reionization Cosmological phase transition Fate of the universe Heat death of the universe Big Rip Big Crunch Big Bounce Big Slurp v t e Big History Themes and subjects Chronology of the universe Cosmic evolution Deep time Time scales Goldilocks principle Modernity Eight thresholds 1: Creation - Big Bang and cosmogony 2: Stars - creation of stars 3: Elements - creation of chemical elements inside dying stars 4: Planets - formation of planets 5: Life - abiogenesis and evolution of life 6: Humans - development of Homo sapiens Stone Age 7: Agriculture - Agricultural Revolution 8: Modernity - modern era Web-based education Big History Project ChronoZoom Notable people Walter Alvarez Cynthia Stokes Brown Eric Chaisson David Christian Carl Sagan Graeme Snooks Related Big History (2013 series) v t e Cosmology Background Age of the universe Big Bang Chronology of the universe Timeline of the universe Universe Observable universe Cosmic distance ladder Cosmogony History of cosmological theories Cosmological principle Copernican principle Discovery of cosmic microwave background History of the Big Bang theory Religious interpretations of the Big Bang Timeline of cosmological theories Past universe Cosmic background radiation Cosmic microwave background Cosmic neutrino background Gravitational wave background Inflation Nucleosynthesis Present universe FLRW metric Friedmann equations Hubble's law Expansion of the universe Accelerating expansion Redshift Future universe Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Components Dark energy Dark fluid Dark matter Quintessence Lambda-CDM model Structure formation Galaxy filament Galaxy formation Large quasar group Large-scale structure Reionization Shape of the universe Structure formation Experiments 2dF 6dF BOOMERanG COBE Illustris project Observational cosmology Planck SDSS WMAP astronomy portal Portals : Astronomy Stars Outer space Solar System NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐p4xz6
Cached time: 20250816112934
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.764 seconds
Real time usage: 2.137 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20957/1000000
Revision size: 103076/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 388303/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19203/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 57/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 367493/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.045/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 30497692/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1820.660      1 -total
 29.87%  543.763      1 Template:Reflist
 14.54%  264.672     28 Template:Cite_journal
 10.87%  197.827     12 Template:Annotated_link
 10.78%  196.255     35 Template:Rp
 10.21%  185.959     35 Template:R/superscript
  6.91%  125.777     24 Template:Cite_web
  6.76%  123.063      1 Template:Physical_cosmology
  4.92%   89.641    105 Template:R/where
  4.52%   82.233      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19167840:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816112934 and revision id 1304181639. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronology_of_the_universe&oldid=1304181639#Planck_epoch " Categories : Astronomy timelines Physical cosmology Big Bang Physics timelines Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from July 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2018 Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 13:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronology of the universe 32 languages Add topic

