Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life, education, and early career Toggle Early life, education, and early career subsection 1.1 Vietnam War 1.2 Attorney 1.3 Reagan and George H.W. Bush administrations 2 Under Secretary of State (2001–2005) Toggle Under Secretary of State (2001–2005) subsection 2.1 Weapons of mass destruction 2.2 Diplomacy 2.3 Interventions 2.4 Unsubstantiated claims about a Cuban WMD program 2.5 Criticism 3 Ambassador to the United Nations (2005–2006) Toggle Ambassador to the United Nations (2005–2006) subsection 3.1 2005 nomination, Senate confirmation hearings 3.2 Democrats' filibuster 3.3 Accusations of false statement 3.4 Recess appointment 3.5 Term at the UN 3.6 2006 nomination 3.7 Termination of service 3.8 Support for Bolton 4 National Security Advisor (2018–2019) Toggle National Security Advisor (2018–2019) subsection 4.1 Speculation on position (2016–2017) 4.2 Tenure 4.3 Trump–Ukraine scandal 5 Punditry and conservative activism Toggle Punditry and conservative activism subsection 5.1 2012 presidential election 5.2 American Enterprise Institute 5.3 John Bolton Super PAC 5.4 2024 presidential election 6 Memoir and legal concerns 7 Political positions Toggle Political positions subsection 7.1 Unilateralism and Americanism 7.1.1 Views on the United Nations 7.2 European Union 7.3 Targeted killings of terrorist leaders 7.4 Libya 7.5 Iraq 7.6 Kosovo 7.7 Western Sahara 7.8 Israel 7.9 North Korea and Iran 7.9.1 People's Mujahedin of Iran 7.10 Russia 7.11 China 7.12 Latin America 7.13 Criticism of the Obama administration 8 Alleged assassination plot 9 Personal life 10 Bibliography 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents John Bolton 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American lawyer and diplomat (born 1948) For other people named John Bolton, see John Bolton (disambiguation) .

John Bolton Bolton in 2023 26th United States National Security Advisor In office April 9, 2018 – September 10, 2019 President Donald Trump Deputy Nadia Schadlow Ricky L. Waddell Mira Ricardel Charles Kupperman Preceded by H. R. McMaster Succeeded by Robert C. O'Brien 25th United States Ambassador to the United Nations In office August 2, 2005 – December 31, 2006 President George W. Bush Preceded by John Danforth Succeeded by Zalmay Khalilzad Other Administration positions 13th Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Affairs In office May 11, 2001 – July 31, 2005 President George W. Bush Preceded by John D. Holum Succeeded by Robert Joseph 18th Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs In office May 22, 1989 – January 20, 1993 President George H. W. Bush Preceded by Richard S. Williamson Succeeded by Douglas J. Bennet United States Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Division In office July 27, 1988 – January 20, 1989 President Ronald Reagan Preceded by Richard K. Willard Succeeded by Stuart M. Gerson United States Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legislative Affairs In office December 12, 1985 – July 27, 1988 [ 1 ] President Ronald Reagan Preceded by Robert McConnell [ 2 ] Succeeded by Thomas Boyd [ 3 ] Assistant Administrator of USAID for Program and Policy Coordination In office August 2, 1982 [ 4 ] – December 30, 1983 President Ronald Reagan Preceded by Alexander Shakow [ 5 ] Succeeded by Richard Derham [ 6 ] Personal details Born John Robert Bolton ( 1948-11-20 ) November 20, 1948 (age 76) Baltimore , Maryland, U.S.

Political party Republican Spouses Christine Bolton ​ ​ ( m.

1972; div.

1983) ​ Gretchen Smith ​ ( m.

1986) ​ Children 1 Residence(s) Bethesda, Maryland , U.S.

Education Yale University ( BA , JD ) Signature Military service Allegiance United States Branch/service United States Army United States Army Reserve Maryland Army National Guard Years of service 1970–1976 [ 7 ] John Bolton's voice Bolton discusses the Hong Kong protests .

Recorded August 14, 2019 John Robert Bolton (born November 20, 1948) is an American attorney, diplomat, Republican consultant, and political commentator. He served as the 25th United States ambassador to the United Nations from 2005 to 2006, and as the 26th United States national security advisor from 2018 to 2019.

Bolton served as a United States assistant attorney general for President Ronald Reagan from 1985 to 1989. He served in the State Department as the assistant secretary of state for international organization affairs from 1989 to 1993, and the under secretary of state for arms control and international security affairs from 2001 to 2005. He was an advocate of the Iraq War as a Director of the Project for the New American Century , which favored going to war with Iraq.

[ 8 ] He was the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations from August 2005 to December 2006, as a recess appointee by President George W. Bush .

[ 9 ] He stepped down at the end of his recess appointment in December 2006 [ 10 ] [ 11 ] because he was unlikely to win confirmation in the Senate , of which the Democratic Party had control at the time.

[ 10 ] [ 12 ] Bolton later served as National Security Advisor to President Donald Trump from April 2018 to September 2019. He repeatedly called for the termination of the Iran nuclear deal , from which the U.S. withdrew in May 2018. He wrote a best-selling book about his tenure in the Trump administration , The Room Where It Happened , published in 2020.

[ 13 ] Bolton is widely considered a foreign policy hawk and advocates military action and regime change by the U.S.

in Iran, Syria, Libya, Venezuela, Cuba, Yemen, and North Korea.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 8 ] [ 16 ] A member of the Republican Party, his political views have been described as American nationalist , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] conservative , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] and neoconservative , [ 23 ] although Bolton rejects the last term.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] He is a former senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) [ 27 ] and a Fox News Channel commentator. He was a foreign policy adviser to 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney .

[ 28 ] Early life, education, and early career [ edit ] Bolton in McDonogh School 's 1966 yearbook Bolton was born on November 20, 1948, in Baltimore , Maryland, the son of Virginia Clara "Ginny" (née Godfrey), a housewife, and Edward Jackson "Jack" Bolton, a Baltimore fireman.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] : 4 He grew up in the working-class neighborhood of Yale Heights , and won a scholarship to the McDonogh School in Owings Mills, Maryland , graduating in 1966.

[ 29 ] He also ran the school's Students For Goldwater campaign in 1964.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Bolton attended Yale College , earning a Bachelor of Arts and graduating summa cum laude in 1970. He was a member of the Yale Political Union . He attended Yale Law School from 1971 to 1974, where he shared classes and student housing with his friend Clarence Thomas , earning a Juris Doctor in 1974.

[ 31 ] : 12 In 1972, Bolton was a summer intern for Vice President Spiro Agnew .

[ 31 ] : 12–13 [ 34 ] He was hired for the position by David Keene .

[ 31 ] : 12–13 Vietnam War [ edit ] Bolton was a supporter of the Vietnam War , [ 35 ] but avoided combat through a student deferment followed by enlistment in the Maryland Air National Guard .

[ 29 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] During the 1969 Vietnam War draft lottery , Bolton drew number 185. (Draft numbers were assigned by birth date. Numbers 1 to 195 were eventually called up.) [ 38 ] As a result of the Johnson and Nixon administrations' decisions to rely largely on the draft rather than on the reserve forces, joining a Guard or Reserve unit became a way to reduce the chances of service in Vietnam.

[ 39 ] Before graduating from Yale College in 1970, Bolton enlisted in the Maryland Army National Guard rather than waiting to find out if his draft number would be called.

[ 31 ] : 11 [ 40 ] [ 41 ] He attended Active Duty for Training (ADT) at Fort Polk , Louisiana, from July to November 1970.

[ 31 ] : 11 After serving in the National Guard for four years, he served in the United States Army Reserve until the end of his enlistment two years later.

[ 7 ] He wrote in his Yale 25th reunion book: "I confess I had no desire to die in a Southeast Asian rice paddy. I considered the war in Vietnam already lost." [ 36 ] In a 2007 interview, Bolton explained his comment in the reunion book saying his decision to avoid service in Vietnam was because "by the time I was about to graduate in 1970, it was clear to me that opponents of the Vietnam War had made it certain we could not prevail, and that I had no great interest in going there to have Teddy Kennedy give it back to the people I might die to take it away from." [ 35 ] [ 42 ] In his 2007 book, Surrender Is Not an Option , Bolton described his perception of the war as a "futile struggle", and that "dying for your country was one thing, but dying to gain territory that antiwar forces in Congress would simply return to the enemy seemed ludicrous to me. Looking back, I am not terribly proud of this calculation..." [ 31 ] : 11 Attorney [ edit ] From 1974 to 1981, Bolton was an associate at the Washington, D.C.

office of Covington & Burling ; he returned to the firm again from 1983 to 1985. Bolton was also a partner in the law firm of Lerner, Reed, Bolton & McManus, from 1993 to 1999.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] He was of counsel in the Washington, D.C. office of Kirkland & Ellis from 2008 until his appointment as National Security Advisor in 2018.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] In September 2015, Freedom Capital Investment Management appointed Bolton as a senior advisor.

[ 49 ] Reagan and George H.W. Bush administrations [ edit ] During the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, his governmental roles were within the State Department , the Justice Department , and the U.S. Agency for International Development . He was a protégé of conservative North Carolina Senator Jesse Helms .

[ 50 ] His Justice Department position as an assistant attorney general required him to advance Reagan administration positions, including [ 51 ] opposition to financial reparations to Japanese-Americans held in World War II-era internment camps ; [ 52 ] the insistence on Reagan's executive privilege during William Rehnquist 's chief justice confirmation hearings, when Congress asked for memos written by Rehnquist as a Nixon Justice Department official; [ 53 ] shepherding the judicial nomination process for Antonin Scalia ; [ 51 ] and the framing of a bill to control illegal immigration as an essential drug war measure.

[ 51 ] He was also involved in the Iran–Contra affair .

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Bolton's government service included positions such as: Assistant secretary for International Organization Affairs at the Department of State (1989–1993); Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Division (1988–1989); [ 57 ] Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legislative Affairs , Department of Justice (1985–1988); [ 7 ] Assistant administrator for program and policy coordination, USAID (1982–1983); and General counsel, USAID (1981–1982).

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] While working for USAID, Lynne Finney, a legal adviser for the agency, alleged that Bolton threatened to fire her for refusing to lobby for the deregulation of baby formula in developing nations; [ 58 ] Commissioner, United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (1999-2001).

[ 59 ] Under Secretary of State (2001–2005) [ edit ] Bolton joins Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld in negotiations with Rumsfeld's Russian counterpart in 2001 Bolton worked as the Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security, sworn into this position on May 11, 2001. In this role, a key area of his responsibility was the prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

Bolton negotiated so-called "Article 98" agreements with countries to prohibit them from turning Americans over to the International Criminal Court , which is not recognized by the U.S.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Bolton said the decision to pull out of the ICC was the "happiest moment" of his political career to date.

[ 60 ] [ 62 ] Weapons of mass destruction [ edit ] Bolton was instrumental in derailing a 2001 biological weapons conference in Geneva convened to endorse a UN proposal to enforce the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention . He argued that the plan would have jeopardized U.S. national security by allowing spot inspections of suspected U.S. weapons sites.

[ 63 ] In May 2002, Bolton gave a speech entitled " Beyond the Axis of Evil " in response to President Bush's State of the Union Address (where Bush characterized Iran, Iraq, and North Korea as part of an "Axis of Evil"). Bolton added three more nations to be grouped with the aforementioned rogue states : Cuba, Libya , and Syria. Bolton said they were all " state sponsors of terrorism that are pursuing or who have the potential to pursue weapons of mass destruction (WMD) or have the capability to do so in violation of their treaty obligations." [ 64 ] During his time as Under Secretary of State, Bolton "sought to block, and often succeeded in sabotaging" the negotiations that Secretary of State Colin Powell had conducted with North Korea.

[ 65 ] Also in 2002, Bolton is said to have flown to Europe to demand the resignation of Brazilian José Bustani , head of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and to have orchestrated his removal at a special session of the organization.

[ 66 ] Bustani was deemed to be an obstacle in creating the case for the invasion of Iraq.

[ 67 ] The United Nations' highest administrative tribunal later condemned the action as an "unacceptable violation" of principles protecting international civil servants. Bustani had been unanimously re-elected for a four-year term—with strong U.S. support—in May 2000, and in 2001 was praised for his leadership by Colin Powell .

[ 68 ] According to Bustani, John Bolton demanded that he step down in 24 hours, adding, "We know where your children are." [ 69 ] He also pushed for reduced funding for the Nunn–Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program to halt the proliferation of nuclear materials .

[ 70 ] At the same time, he was involved in the implementation of the Proliferation Security Initiative , working with a number of countries to intercept the trafficking in weapons of mass destruction and in materials for use in building nuclear weapons.

[ 71 ] Diplomacy [ edit ] According to an article in The New Republic , Bolton was highly successful in pushing his agenda, but his bluntness made him many enemies. "Iran's Foreign Ministry has called Bolton 'rude' and 'undiplomatic'." [ 72 ] In response to critics, Bolton says his record "demonstrates clear support for effective multilateral diplomacy." Bush administration officials have stated that his past statements would allow him to negotiate from a powerful position. "It's like the Palestinians' having to negotiate with [Israeli Prime Minister] Ariel Sharon. If you have a deal, you know you have a deal," an anonymous official told CNN .

[ 73 ] He also "won widespread praise for his work establishing the Proliferation Security Initiative, a voluntary agreement supported (at the time) by 60 countries".

[ 74 ] Interventions [ edit ] In July 2022, during an interview with CNN reporter Jake Tapper , denying that President Donald Trump 's involvement in the January 6 United States Capitol attack amounted to an attempt to overthrow the U.S. government, Bolton admitted to his personal involvement in planning unspecified coups d'état in foreign countries.

[ 75 ] "As somebody who has helped plan coups d'etat — not here but, you know, other places — it takes a lot of work, and that's not what [President Donald Trump] did" — John Bolton [ 76 ] According to Reuters , "it is highly unusual for U.S. officials to openly acknowledge their role in stoking unrest in foreign countries." [ 77 ] Unsubstantiated claims about a Cuban WMD program [ edit ] In 2002, Bolton delivered a speech at the Heritage Foundation where he accused Cuba of having a secret biological weapons program, and of collaborating with Libya and Iran.

[ 45 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Bolton asserted, "The United States believes that Cuba has at least a limited offensive biological warfare research and development effort. Cuba has provided dual-use biotechnology to other rogue states." [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Bolton made the remarks a week before former President Jimmy Carter was scheduled to meet Fidel Castro in Cuba, becoming the first U.S. president since the Cuban Revolution to visit Cuba in an effort to build bridges between the two countries.

[ 79 ] The State Department's chief bioweapons analyst refused to approve the accusation made in the speech, telling Bolton that the State Department did not have evidence to substantiate Bolton's accusation.

[ 45 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 81 ] Subsequently, Bolton berated the analyst, unsuccessfully sought to fire him, began to exclude the analyst's supervisor from meetings, and tried to transfer the analyst to a different office.

[ 45 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Bolton was also alleged to have sought to punish other intelligence officers who refused to endorse his claims about Cuba.

[ 70 ] [ 79 ] [ 82 ] Paul Pillar described Bolton's attempts to get the intelligence community to endorse his views as among the most egregious recent instances of "arm-twisting" the intelligence community, [ 81 ] while Columbia University international relations scholar Richard K. Betts described the reports about Bolton's pressure as "most blatant top-down pressure on intelligence" in the Bush administration.

[ 83 ] Bolton claims the issue was procedural rather than related to the content of his speech and that the officers, who did not work under him, behaved unprofessionally.

[ 78 ] In April 2004, Bolton again accused Cuba of being a "terrorist and (biological weapons) threat to the United States." [ 84 ] Experts at the time disputed the veracity of Bolton's claims, saying the evidence in support of the claim was weak.

[ 85 ] In September 2004 and in the wake of the failure to locate WMDs in Iraq, the Bush administration backed off claims that Cuba had an active biological weapons program.

[ 86 ] Criticism [ edit ] Democratic Congressman Henry Waxman alleged that Bolton played a role in encouraging the inclusion of the statement that British Intelligence had determined Iraq attempted to procure yellowcake uranium from Niger in Bush's 2003 State of the Union Address .

[ 87 ] These statements were claimed by critics of the President to be partly based on documents found to be forged.

[ 88 ] Waxman's allegations could not be confirmed, as they were based on classified documents.

[ 87 ] Bolton stated in June 2004 congressional testimony that Iran was lying about enriched uranium contamination: "Another unmistakable indicator of Iran's intentions is the pattern of repeatedly lying to ... the IAEA ... when evidence of uranium enriched to 36 percent was found, it attributed this to contamination from imported centrifuge parts." However, later isotope analysis supported Iran's explanation of foreign contamination for most of the observed enriched uranium.

[ 89 ] At their August 2005 meeting the IAEA's Board of Governors concluded: "Based on the information currently available to the Agency, the results of that analysis tend, on balance, to support Iran's statement about the foreign origin of most of the observed HEU [highly enriched uranium] contamination." [ 90 ] Bolton has often been accused of attempting to pressure the intelligence community to endorse his views.

[ 81 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] According to former coworkers, Bolton withheld information that ran counter to his goals from Secretary of State Colin Powell on multiple occasions, and from Powell's successor Condoleezza Rice on at least one occasion.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Ambassador to the United Nations (2005–2006) [ edit ] President George W. Bush announces Bolton's nomination as U.S. ambassador to the UN. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice looks on.

On March 7, 2005, Bolton was nominated to the post of United States Ambassador to the United Nations by President George W. Bush .

[ 73 ] [ 94 ] Bolton said previously at a forum that "there is no such thing as the United Nations" and "[i]f the U.N. secretary building in New York lost 10 stories, it wouldn't make a bit of difference".

[ 73 ] Several officials from U.N. Security Council member states were shocked that Bush would nominate someone they believed had a known antipathy toward the United Nations.

[ 73 ] As a result of a Democratic filibuster , he was recess-appointed to the post on August 1, 2005. Bolton's nomination received strong support from Republicans but faced heavy opposition from Democrats due initially to concerns about his strongly expressed views on the United Nations.

Holding a 10–8 majority in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (tasked with vetting ambassadorial nominees), the Republican leadership hoped to send Bolton's nomination to the full Senate with a positive recommendation. Concern among some Republicans on the committee, however, prompted the leadership to avoid losing such a motion and instead to send the nomination forward with no recommendation. In the full Senate, Republican support for the nomination remained uncertain, with the most vocal Republican critic, Ohio Senator George V. Voinovich , circulating a letter urging his Republican colleagues to oppose the nomination.

[ 95 ] Democrats insisted that a vote on the nomination was premature, given the resistance of the White House to share classified documents related to Bolton's alleged actions. The Republican leadership moved on two occasions to end debate, but because a supermajority of 60 votes is needed to end debate, the leadership was unable to muster the required votes with only a 55–44 majority in the body. An earlier agreement between moderates in both parties to prevent filibustering of nominees was interpreted by the Democrats to relate only to judicial nominees, [ 96 ] not ambassadorships, although the leader of the effort, Sen. John McCain, said the spirit of the agreement was to include all nominees.

On November 9, 2006, Bush, only days after losing both houses to a Democratic majority, sent the nomination [ 97 ] for Bolton to continue as representative for the United States at the UN.

[ 98 ] He said: "I believe that the leaders of both political parties must try to work through our differences. And I believe we will be able to work through differences. I reassured the House and Senate leaders that I intend to work with the new Congress in a bipartisan way to address issues confronting this country." [ 99 ] 2005 nomination, Senate confirmation hearings [ edit ] On April 11, 2005, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee reviewed Bolton's qualifications. Bolton said he and his colleagues "view the U.N. as an important component of our diplomacy" and will work to solve its problems and enhance its strengths, [ 100 ] echoing Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's words from a month earlier.

[ 101 ] On the first day of the hearings, Republican committee chairman Richard Lugar criticized Bolton for ignoring the "policy consequences" of his statements, saying diplomatic speech "should never be undertaken simply to score international debating points to appeal to segments of the U.S. public opinion or to validate a personal point of view." [ 102 ] The committee's top Democrat, Joe Biden , compared sending Bolton to the UN to sending a "bull into a china shop," and expressed "grave concern" about Bolton's "diplomatic temperament" and his record: "In my judgment, your judgment about how to deal with the emerging threats have not been particularly useful," Biden said.

[ 103 ] Republican Senator George Allen said Bolton had the "experience," "knowledge," "background," "and the right principles to come into the United Nations at this time," calling him "the absolute perfect person for the job." [ 104 ] Democratic Senator Russ Feingold asked Bolton about what he would have done had the Rwandan genocide occurred while he was ambassador to the United Nations, and criticized his answer—which focused on logistics—as "amazingly passive." [ 105 ] On the second day, April 12, 2005, the Senate panel focused on allegations discussed above that Bolton pressured intelligence analysts. Calling Bolton a "serial abuser", former State Department intelligence chief Carl W. Ford Jr.

said, "I've never seen anybody quite like Secretary Bolton ... I don't have a second, third or fourth in terms of the way that he abuses his power and authority with little people." Ford contradicted Bolton's earlier testimony, saying: "I had been asked for the first time to fire an intelligence analyst for what he had said and done." Ford also characterized Bolton as a " kiss-up, kick-down sort of guy", implying that he was always ready to please whoever had authority over him, while having very little regard for people working under him.

[ 106 ] Lugar, who criticized Bolton at his April 11 hearing, said the "paramount issue" was supporting Bush's nominee. He conceded that "bluntness ... may be required", even though it is not "very good diplomacy".

[ 107 ] Lincoln Chafee , the key member for Bolton's approval, said "the bar is very high" for rejecting the president's nominees, suggesting that Bolton would make it to the Senate.

[ 108 ] On April 19, Democrats, with support from Voinovich, forced Lugar to delay the committee vote on Bolton's nomination until May. The debate concerning his nomination raged in the Senate prior to the Memorial Day recess. Two other Republicans on the Foreign Relations Committee, Chafee and Chuck Hagel , also expressed serious concerns about the Bolton nomination.

[ 109 ] Asked on April 20 if he was now less inclined to support the nomination, Chafee said, "That would be accurate." He elaborated that Bolton's prospects were "hard to predict" but said he expected that "the administration is really going to put some pressure on Senator Voinovich. Then it comes to the rest of us [who] have had some reservations." [ 109 ] On April 20, it emerged that Melody Townsel, a former USAID contractor, had reported to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that Bolton had used inflammatory language and thrown objects in the course of her work activities in Moscow. Townsel's encounter with Bolton occurred when she served as a whistleblower against a poorly performing minority contractor for USAID, IBTCI. Townsel told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee staff that Bolton had made derogatory remarks about her sexual orientation and weight, among other workplace improprieties. In an official interview with Senate Foreign Relation Committee staff, Townsel detailed her accusations against Bolton, which were confirmed by Canadian designer Uno Ramat, who had served as an IBTCI employee and one of Townsel's AID colleagues.

Time magazine, among other publications, verified Townsel's accusations and Ramat's supporting testimony, and Townsel's story was transcribed and entered into the official Senate committee record. Townsel, who was an employee of Young & Rubicam at the time of her encounter with Bolton, continued working for the company on a variety of other USAID projects.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] On April 22, The New York Times and other media reported that Bolton's former boss, Colin Powell, personally opposed the nomination and had been in personal contact with Chafee and Hagel. The same day, Reuters reported that a spokesman for Senator Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska) had said the Senator felt the committee "did the right thing delaying the vote on Bolton in light of the recent information presented to the committee." [ 113 ] Also on May 11, Newsweek reported allegations that the American position at the 7th Review Conference in May 2005 of the Nuclear Proliferation Treaty had been undercut by Bolton's "absence without leave" during the nomination fight, quoting anonymous sources "close to the negotiations".

[ 114 ] Democrats' filibuster [ edit ] On May 26, 2005, Senate Democrats postponed the vote on Bolton's UN nomination. The Republican leadership failed to gain enough support to pass a cloture motion on the floor debate over Bolton, and minority leader Harry Reid conceded the move signaled the "first filibuster of the year." The Democrats claimed that key documents regarding Bolton and his career at the Department of State were being withheld by the Bush administration.

Scott McClellan , White House press secretary, responded by saying, "Just 72 hours after all the good will and bipartisanship (over a deal on judicial nominees), it's disappointing to see the Democratic leadership resort back to such a partisan approach." [ 115 ] The failure of the Senate to end debate on Bolton's nomination provided one surprise for some: Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tennessee) voted against cloture for procedural reasons, so he could bring up a cloture vote in the future.

[ 116 ] (Although Voinovich once spoke against confirming Bolton, he voted for cloture.) Senator John Thune (R-South Dakota) voted to end debate but announced that he would vote against Bolton in the up-or-down vote as a protest against the government's plans to close a military base ( Ellsworth ) in his home state.

On June 20, 2005, the Senate voted again on cloture. The vote failed 54–38, six votes short of ending debate. That marked an increase of two "no" votes, including the defection of Voinovich, who switched his previous "yes" vote and urged President Bush to pick another nominee (Democrats Mark Pryor , Mary Landrieu and Ben Nelson voted to end debate both times). On June 21, Frist expressed his view that attempting another vote would be pointless, but later that day, following a lunch at the White House, changed his position, saying he would continue to push for an up-or-down vote.

[ 117 ] Voinovich later recanted his opposition and stated that if Bolton were renominated he would have supported the nomination.

[ 118 ] Accusations of false statement [ edit ] On July 28, 2005, it was revealed that a statement made by Bolton on forms submitted to the Senate was false. Bolton indicated that in the prior five years he had not been questioned in any investigation, but in fact he had been interviewed by the State Department's Inspector General as part of an investigation into the sources of pre-war claims of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. After insisting for weeks that Bolton had testified truthfully on the form, the State Department reversed itself, saying Bolton had simply forgotten about the investigation.

[ 119 ] Recess appointment [ edit ] On August 1, 2005, Bush officially made a recess appointment of Bolton, installing him as Permanent U.S. Representative to the UN. A recess appointment lasts until the next session of Congress ends or until the individual is renominated and confirmed by the Senate. During the announcement, Bush said, "This post is too important to leave vacant any longer, especially during a war and a vital debate about U.N. reform." [ 120 ] Democrats criticized the appointment, and Senator Christopher Dodd (D-CT) of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said Bolton would lack credibility in the U.N. because he lacked Senate confirmation.

[ 121 ] U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan welcomed Mr. Bolton, but told reporters that the new ambassador should consult with others as the administration continued to press for changes at the United Nations.

[ 122 ] Term at the UN [ edit ] The Economist called Bolton "the most controversial ambassador ever sent by America to the United Nations." Some colleagues in the UN appreciated the goals Bolton was trying to achieve, but not his abrasive style.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] The New York Times , in its editorial The Shame of the United Nations , praised Bolton's stance on "reforming the disgraceful United Nations Human Rights Commission ", [ 125 ] saying "John Bolton, is right; Secretary-General Kofi Annan is wrong." The Times also said the commission at that time was composed of "some of the world's most abusive regimes" who used their membership as cover to continue their abusiveness.

Bolton also opposed the proposed replacement for the Human Rights Commission, the UN Human Rights Council , as not going far enough for reform, saying: "We want a butterfly. We don't intend to put lipstick on a caterpillar and call it a success." [ 126 ] 2006 nomination [ edit ] Bush announced his intention to renominate Bolton for confirmation as U.N. ambassador at the beginning of 2006, and a new confirmation hearing was held on July 27, 2006, in the hope of completing the process before the expiration of Bolton's recess appointment at the end of the 109th Congress.

[ 127 ] Voinovich, who had previously stood in opposition to Bolton, had amended his views and determined that Bolton was doing a "good job" as UN ambassador; in February 2006, he said "I spend a lot of time with John on the phone. I think he is really working very constructively to move forward." [ 128 ] Over the summer and during the fall election campaign, no action was taken on the nomination because Chafee, who was in a difficult re-election campaign, blocked a Senate Foreign Relations Committee vote.

[ 129 ] Without his concurrence, the SFRC would have been deadlocked 9–9, and the nomination could not have gone to the Senate floor for a full vote. Bush formally resubmitted the nomination on November 9, 2006, immediately following a midterm election that would give control of the 110th Congress to the Democratic party.

[ 130 ] Chafee, who had just lost his re-election bid, issued a statement saying he would vote against recommending Bolton for a Senate vote, citing what he considered to be a mandate from the recent election results: "On Tuesday, the American people sent a clear message of dissatisfaction with the foreign policy approach of the Bush administration. To confirm Mr. Bolton to the position of U.N. ambassador would fly in the face of the clear consensus of the country that a new direction is called for." [ 131 ] Termination of service [ edit ] On December 4, 2006, Bolton announced that he would terminate his work as U.S. representative to the UN at the end of the recess appointment and would not continue to seek confirmation.

[ 132 ] His letter of resignation from the Bush administration was accepted on December 4, 2006, effective when his recess appointment ended December 9 at the formal adjournment of the 109th Congress .

The announcement was characterized as Bolton's "resignation" by the Associated Press, [ 133 ] United Press International, [ 134 ] ABC News, [ 135 ] and other news sources, as well as a White House press release [ 11 ] and President Bush himself.

[ 136 ] The White House, however, later objected to the use of this language. Deputy Press Secretary Dana Perino told CBS News "it is not a resignation." [ 137 ] The actual language of the President's written acceptance was: "It is with deep regret that I accept John Bolton's decision to end his service in the administration as permanent representative of the United States to the United Nations when his commission expires." However, at a press conference, the President said, "I received the resignation of Ambassador John Bolton. I accept it. I'm not happy about it. I think he deserved to be confirmed." [ 136 ] Some news organizations subsequently altered their language to phrases such as "to step down," "to leave," or "to exit." [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] John Bolton in 2008 Support for Bolton [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( March 2018 ) During his confirmation hearings in 2005, letters with signatures of more than 64 co-workers and professional colleagues were sent to Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , in praise of Bolton and contradicting other criticisms and allegations concerning his diplomatic style and his treatment of colleagues and staff.

[ 141 ] In late 2006, when his nomination was again before the committee, another letter signed by professional colleagues supporting the renomination was sent to Senator Lugar.

[ 142 ] A Wall Street Journal op ed by Claudia Rosett on December 5, 2006, said in part, "Bolton has been valiant in his efforts to clean up UN corruption and malfeasance, and follow UN procedure in dealing with such threats as a nuclear North Korea, a Hezbollah bid to take over Lebanon, and the nuclearization of Hezbollah's terror-masters in Iran. But it has been like watching one man trying to move a tsunami of mud." [ citation needed ] National Security Advisor (2018–2019) [ edit ] Speculation on position (2016–2017) [ edit ] In an interview with conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt during the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign , Republican nominee Donald Trump named Bolton as a possible choice for Secretary of State . Appearing on Fox News' Fox and Friends on December 1, 2016, Bolton admitted he was being considered as a Secretary of State candidate for the incoming Trump administration.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] Several Trump associates claim Bolton was not chosen, in part, due to Trump's disdain for Bolton's signature mustache.

[ 145 ] May 2, 2018: (from left) Bolton, Mike Pompeo , President Trump, Vice President Pence The evening of December 10, the BBC cited NBC reports that "sources close to Mr Trump [were] ... saying that Mr Tillerson is likely to be named next week" and that former UN ambassador John Bolton "will serve as his deputy".

[ 146 ] Bolton has supported theories about the health of Hillary Clinton and about her aide Huma Abedin , and in December 2016, Bolton said the conclusion of the United States Intelligence Community that Russian hackers had intervened to help elect Donald Trump in 2016 may have been a " false flag " operation.

[ 147 ] In a subsequent interview on Fox News, Bolton criticized the Obama administration's retaliatory sanctions as insufficient and suggested that the US response should "make them [the Russians] feel pain".

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] Tenure [ edit ] In February 2017 President Trump interviewed Bolton and three others to determine who would fill the position of National Security Advisor vacated by Lt. Gen.

Michael T. Flynn .

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] The position ultimately went to H. R. McMaster .

[ 152 ] Trump "made a point on Monday of praising Mr. Bolton and saying that he would find a position for him in his administration eventually." [ 153 ] Bolton was seen at the White House on the evening of March 6, 2018, presumably to be interviewed as a candidate for national security adviser.

[ 154 ] U.S. Defense Secretary James N. Mattis greets the National Security Advisor-designate Bolton at the Pentagon in March 2018.

The New York Times reported on March 22, 2018, that John Bolton would replace National Security Adviser H. R. McMaster, which was confirmed by Trump in a tweet later that day. Bolton began his position as National Security Advisor on April 9, 2018.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] The New York Times wrote that the rise of Bolton and Mike Pompeo , coupled with the departure of Rex Tillerson and General McMaster, meant Trump's foreign policy team was now "the most radically aggressive foreign policy team around the American president in modern memory", and compared it to the foreign policy team surrounding George W. Bush , notably with Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld .

[ 157 ] On April 10, 2018, Homeland Security Advisor Tom Bossert resigned at Bolton's request, [ 158 ] [ 159 ] and Bolton said he was considering a merger of the NSC with the Homeland Security Council.

[ 160 ] During his first week in office Bolton requested and obtained the resignations of multiple National Security Council (NSC) employees including NSC spokesman Michael Anton (April 8), deputy national security adviser Nadia Schadlow (April 10), and deputy national security adviser Ricky L. Waddell (April 12).

[ 160 ] CNN reported in September 2018 that Bolton had significantly shrunk the number of NSC personnel, cutting it to under 300.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] In April 2018, Bolton pressed President Trump to withdraw from the Iran Nuclear Deal , which Trump did a month later.

[ 163 ] The Huffington Post reported that on May 8, 2018, Bolton removed Timothy Ziemer and dissolved his Global Health Security team formerly on the NSC leaving the administration's high level preparation for and ability to respond to pandemics , infectious disease, and other biological threats unclear.

[ 164 ] The choice to remove and not replace Ziemer in the midst of an emerging Ebola outbreak in The Democratic Republic of Congo was criticized in several news outlets.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] [ 167 ] December 26, 2018: Bolton and President Trump on the phone with Iraq Prime Minister Adil Abdul-Mahdi during visit to U.S. troops On September 10, 2018, in his first major address as National Security Advisor, Bolton criticized the International Criminal Court , saying it lacks checks and balances, exercises "jurisdiction over crimes that have disputed and ambiguous definitions," and has failed to "deter and punish atrocity crimes." Calling the ICC a threat to "American sovereignty and U.S. national security," Bolton said it is "superfluous," given that "domestic judicial systems already hold American citizens to the highest legal and ethical standards." He added that the U.S. would do everything "to protect our citizens" should the ICC attempt to prosecute U.S. servicemen over alleged detainee abuse in Afghanistan , and it would bar ICC judges and prosecutors from entering the U.S. and sanction their funds. He also criticized Palestinian efforts to bring Israel before the ICC over allegations of human rights abuses in the occupied West Bank and Gaza .

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] Trump, Bolton and Emmanuel Macron at the 2018 NATO summit in Brussels In 2018, Bolton requested that the Pentagon provide the White House with options for military strikes against Iran. According to the New York Times , Bolton "intensified the administration's policy of isolating and pressuring Iran—reflecting an animus against Iran's leaders that dates back to his days as an official in the George W. Bush administration. As a private citizen, he later called for military strikes on Iran, as well as regime change." [ 171 ] As National Security Advisor, Bolton eliminated the kinds of internal policy debates that his predecessor H. R. McMaster had in place.

The New York Times writes that this change in practices contributed to Trump's sudden decision to withdraw the United States from Syria in January 2019.

[ 172 ] As National Security Advisor, Bolton advanced policies skeptical and hostile toward international organizations.

[ 173 ] By his first year as National Security Advisor, Bolton had reshaped the National Security Council and become influential within the Trump Administration.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] By May 2019, Trump had undercut some of Bolton's major hard line positions, stating he was not seeking regime change in Iran and contradicting Bolton's assertion that North Korea had recently violated United Nations resolutions by testing new short-range missiles.

[ 177 ] In 2019, John Bolton, then U.S. National Security Advisor meeting United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Sajid Javid (left) at 11 Downing Street In late August 2019, Bolton met Alexander Lukashenko in Minsk , Belarus .

[ 178 ] On September 10, 2019, President Trump claimed on Twitter that he had told Bolton on September 9 his "services are no longer needed" given "many" disagreements with Trump, thus Bolton gave his resignation on September 10. Just minutes later, Bolton contradicted Trump's account, tweeting out this claim: Bolton offered to resign on September 9, with Trump replying: "Let's talk about it tomorrow." Bolton later told the media Trump "never asked" for his resignation "directly or indirectly", and that he had both offered to resign and actually resigned of his own accord. Meanwhile, the White House endorsed Trump's version of the events.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] Politico reported that Tucker Carlson had urged Trump to fire Bolton.

[ 181 ] After Bolton's departure, Trump claimed that Bolton's views were "not necessarily tougher" than his own: "in some cases, he thought it was too tough what we were doing". On Cuba and Venezuela, Trump claimed that his own views were "far stronger" than Bolton's: "He was holding me back!" Bolton himself was known for his hawkish positions, including on Cuba and Venezuela, while Trump previously in May 2019 offered a different view of Bolton: "I actually temper John, which is pretty amazing." [ 182 ] [ 183 ] Following his departure, Bolton was reappointed as a senior advisor to investment company Rhône Group , a role he had held previously.

[ 184 ] Trump–Ukraine scandal [ edit ] Main article: Trump–Ukraine scandal Part of a series on the 2019 Trump–Ukraine scandal Events First presidency of Donald Trump 2019 Ukrainian presidential election 2019 Trump–Zelenskyy phone call First impeachment of Donald Trump inquiry trial 2020 U.S. presidential election Russian interference People White House Donald Trump John Bolton Pam Bondi Tom Bossert Pat Cipollone Fiona Hill Charles Kupperman Mick Mulvaney Mike Pence Tony Sayegh Justice Department Michael Atkinson William Barr State Department Ulrich Brechbuhl Catherine Croft David Hale David Holmes George Kent Steve Linick Michael McKinley Mike Pompeo Philip Reeker Gordon Sondland Bill Taylor Kurt Volker Jennifer Williams Marie Yovanovitch Defense Department Laura Cooper Kathryn L. Wheelbarger National Security Council John Eisenberg Tim Morrison Alexander Vindman Intelligence Joseph Maguire Michael Atkinson Congress Nancy Pelosi Adam Schiff Lindsey Graham Devin Nunes Pete Sessions Kashyap Patel Elise Stefanik Jim Jordan Ukrainians Volodymyr Zelenskyy Andriy Bohdan Dmytro Firtash Serhiy Leshchenko Mykola Zlochevsky Yuriy Lutsenko Surrogates Rudy Giuliani Jay Sekulow Scholars Noah Feldman Michael Gerhardt Pamela S. Karlan Jonathan Turley Related Andrew P. Bakaj Hunter Biden Joe Biden Igor Fruman Amos Hochstein Lev Parnas Rick Perry John Solomon Russell Vought Mark Zaid Companies Burisma CrowdStrike Naftogaz Conspiracy theories Russia investigation origins Spygate United States portal Ukraine portal v t e Following Bolton's departure, Fiona Hill , who served as the National Security Council's senior director for Europe and Russia, testified before a Congressional committee that Bolton had disassociated himself from what he viewed as the Trump administration's effort to pressure Ukraine into investigating the President's political rivals.

[ 185 ] Bolton refused to attend his scheduled deposition in the impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump on November 7, 2019, and threatened to take legal action if he was subpoenaed.

[ 186 ] Bolton said he was willing to testify, but wanted a federal court to first rule on a lawsuit by his former deputy seeking a court ruling on the competing claims of the Trump administration and Congress.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] However, in a written statement obtained by NBC News on January 6, 2020, Bolton announced that he would testify during the Senate impeachment trial should he be issued a subpoena to do so.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] A 51-vote majority would be required from the Senate in order to obtain the subpoena.

[ 192 ] As the second week of opening statements was set to begin, to be followed by a vote on whether to call witnesses, The New York Times reported that Bolton wrote in his forthcoming book that the President had told him in August 2019 that he wanted to continue freezing the Ukraine aid until officials there pursued investigations into Democrats, including the Bidens.

[ 13 ] The Times also stated that "Drafts of the book outline the potential testimony of the former national security adviser if he were called as a witness in the president's impeachment trial." [ 13 ] On January 23, as Bolton was preparing for possible Senate testimony about the assertions in his manuscript, the National Security Council informed him that it contained classified information and "may not be published or otherwise disclosed without the deletion of this classified information.” [ 193 ] Bolton's attorney stated he did not believe the manuscript contained sensitive information.

[ 194 ] The dispute set the stage for a prolonged review, with Bolton's attorney asking that access to the manuscript be limited to "those career government officials and employees regularly charged with responsibility for such reviews." [ 195 ] The leaked contents from the book also resulted in Trump impeachment lawyer Jay Sekulow dismissing Bolton's claims as "inadmissible" when he argued before the Senate in defense of Trump on January 28, 2020.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] Democratic trial manager Adam Schiff later remarked that Sekulow's assertion validated the argument that Bolton should be called to testify.

[ 198 ] Punditry and conservative activism [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Bolton was executive director of the Committee on Resolutions in the Republican National Committee from 1983 to 1984.

[ 199 ] Between 1997 and 2000, Bolton worked as an assistant to James Baker when he was the UN Secretary-General envoy to the Western Sahara .

[ 200 ] Since 2006, he has been a paid Fox News contributor and a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] For 2017, he reported an income of $569,000 from Fox News.

[ 201 ] Bolton was a contributor to The Weekly Standard , an American conservative opinion magazine, from 1997 to 2000, and again from 2014 to 2016.

[ 202 ] Bolton speaks at Chatham House on foreign policy challenges facing the Obama Administration .

From 2013 until March 2018, Bolton was chairman of the far-right anti-Muslim Gatestone Institute , which is prominent for disseminating false anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim information.

[ 203 ] In 2018, the White House reported that Bolton's total income for 2017 had been $2.2 million which included $569,000 from Fox News and $747,000 in speaking fees from, among others, the Victor Pinchuk Foundation (a Ukrainian NGO), Deutsche Bank , and HSBC .

[ 201 ] 2012 presidential election [ edit ] Bolton considered running for president in the 2012 U.S. presidential election . He received attention in conservative circles, including the cover of the December 31, 2010, issue of National Review magazine. He told Politico : "As I survey the situation, I think the Republican field is wide open. I don't think the party's anywhere close to a decision. And stranger things have happened. For example, inexperienced senators from Illinois have gotten presidential nominations." [ 204 ] In September 2011, Bolton said he would not run for president in 2012.

[ 205 ] During the Republican primary, Republican presidential-hopeful Newt Gingrich said he would ask Bolton to serve as his Secretary of State .

[ 206 ] In January 2012, Bolton endorsed Mitt Romney for the 2012 Republican Nomination.

[ 207 ] American Enterprise Institute [ edit ] Bolton was senior vice president of the American Enterprise Institute , a conservative think tank , [ 208 ] from 1997 to 2001. At the time, he frequently wrote columns criticizing the Clinton administration's foreign policy. Bolton said Clinton's policy on Iraq was "worse than incompetent", his policy on North Korea was "egregiously wrong", and his Libya policy was a "catastrophic loss of U.S. credibility." [ 61 ] After leaving the George W. Bush Administration in 2006, Bolton returned to the American Enterprise Institute as a Senior Fellow. From 2010 until 2018, Bolton served as Director, Foreign and Defense Policy Studies for AEI.

[ 208 ] In Bolton's time at the American Enterprise Institute, he spoke against the policy of rewarding North Korea for ending its nuclear weapons program. He said the policy would encourage others to violate nuclear non-proliferation rules so they could then be rewarded for following the rules they'd already agreed to.

[ 209 ] In July 2013, Bolton was identified as a key member of Groundswell , a secretive coalition of right-wing activists and journalists attempting to advance political change behind the scenes through lobbying of high-level contacts.

[ 210 ] John Bolton Super PAC [ edit ] In 2013, Bolton set up the John Bolton Super PAC . It raised $11.3 million for Republican candidates in the 2014 and 2016 elections and spent $5.6 million, paying Cambridge Analytica at least $650,000 for voter data analysis and digital video ad targeting in support of the campaigns of Senators Thom Tillis (R-N.C.), Tom Cotton (R-Ark.), and Richard Burr (R-N.C.), and of former U.S. Senator (R-MA) Scott Brown 's unsuccessful 2014 bid for a U.S. Senate seat for New Hampshire.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] [ 213 ] In September 2016, Bolton announced that his Super PAC would spend $1 million on (R-N.C.) Senator Richard Burr 's reelection effort by targeting ads at "social media users and Dish Network and Direct TV subscribers".

[ 214 ] The Center for Public Integrity analysed the John Bolton Super PAC's campaign finance filings and found that they had paid Cambridge Analytica more than $1.1 million since 2014 for "research" and "survey research".

[ 215 ] According to Federal Election Commission filings, Cambridge Analytica was paid more than $811,000 by them in the 2016 presidential election; [ 216 ] in the same election cycle, the Super PAC spent around $2.5 million in support of Republican U.S. Senate candidates.

[ 215 ] Bolton said he aims to raise and spend $25 million for up to 90 Republican candidates in the 2018 midterm elections.

[ 217 ] In January 2018, Bolton announced a $1 million advertising campaign in support of Kevin Nicholson's bid for the Republican nomination to run against incumbent Democratic Senator Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin.

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] The Super PAC ran an ad campaign in the Green Bay area in January 2018; on March 19, 2018, the Super PAC announced a two-week $278,000 television and radio ad campaign in the Milwaukee area.

[ 219 ] Major donors to the John Bolton Super PAC are Robert Mercer , who gave $4 million from 2012 to 2016; Home Depot co-founder Bernard Marcus , and Los Angeles real estate developer Geoffrey Palmer .

[ 211 ] After Bolton was appointed National Security Advisor in March 2018, the John Bolton Super PAC and the John Bolton PAC announced that their political activities were suspended temporarily, effective March 31, 2018. The Super PAC's FEC filings showed a balance of $2.6 million in unspent donations at the end of March 2018.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] 2024 presidential election [ edit ] Bolton had openly considered the idea of running for president in the 2024 United States presidential election in order to secure the Republican nomination against former President Donald Trump.

[ 222 ] However, he had been widely ridiculed for proposing running for president, due to bipartisan opposition to him and his policies.

[ 223 ] [ 224 ] Memoir and legal concerns [ edit ] On June 16, 2020, the Trump Justice Department attempted to block publication of Bolton's memoir, The Room Where It Happened , seeking to confiscate Bolton's $2 million advance for breach of contract, asserting he had not completed the prepublication security review as he had agreed to receive his security clearance. Bolton had submitted the book for security review in December 2019, and after months of discussions, was told on April 27 by Ellen Knight—the National Security Council's senior director for prepublication review—that no other classification issues remained. However, the White House did not provide Bolton written notice that he could proceed with publication, and in May another NSC official was asked to further review the manuscript.

[ 225 ] On June 17, the Justice Department asked a federal judge to issue an injunction to block publication of the book, which had already been printed, bound and shipped to distribution warehouses for its official release the following week. By that day, media outlets had acquired copies of the book and begun publishing articles about its contents.

In its brief filed with the court, the Justice Department provided six examples of what it asserted were classified items that remained in the book. Trump had previously asserted that any conversation with him is "highly classified." During a hearing on June 19, federal judge Royce Lamberth castigated Bolton for proceeding to publish his book without formal clearance, but ruled that publication of the book could proceed.

[ 226 ] Bolton's attorney asserted that the White House was slow-walking the review process to prevent the book, which contained extensive harsh criticism of Trump, from being released during the 2020 election campaign. According to reporting, Trump claimed that the book contained "highly classified" information but also characterized the book as "pure fiction." [ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] On June 21, a pirated copy of the book appeared online.

[ 230 ] The book was released on June 23.

[ 231 ] Later that summer, the Justice Department opened a criminal investigation into whether the book revealed classified information, empaneling a grand jury that subpoenaed the publisher's communications records.

[ 232 ] The Justice Department dropped its criminal inquiry of Bolton in June 2021 and moved to end efforts to confiscate proceeds from his book.

[ 233 ] In a 2023 edition of his memoirs, Bolton criticizes Trump as a man who punishes "personal enemies and appease[s] adversaries Russia and China".

[ 234 ] Political positions [ edit ] Bolton, President Trump and Kim Jong-un in Singapore on June 12, 2018 Bolton with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg in September 2018 Bolton speaking at the 2017 Conservative Political Action Conference ( CPAC ) in National Harbor , Maryland , on February 24, 2017 He declared himself in an interview with Edward Luce of the Financial Times in 2007 to be a " Goldwater conservative", as opposed to being a neoconservative .

[ 235 ] He also pointed out that he was a follower of Edmund Burke . He also said "I have always been a conservative. The idea of big-government conservatism has more neocon adherents than from unmodified conservatives." Unilateralism and Americanism [ edit ] Americanism is Bolton's core belief, according to The New York Times : Long before Mr. Trump popularized his "America First" slogan, Mr. Bolton termed himself an "Americanist" who prioritized a cold-eyed view of national interests and sovereignty over what they both saw as a starry-eyed fixation on democracy promotion and human rights. They shared a deep skepticism of globalism and multilateralism, a commonality that empowered Mr. Bolton to use his time in the White House to orchestrate the withdrawal of the United States from arms control treaties and other international agreements.

[ 236 ] Bolton is skeptical of international organizations and international law, believing them to endanger American sovereignty , and does not believe they have legitimate authority under the U.S. Constitution.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] He criticized the Obama administration's foreign policy for what he perceived as surrendering U.S. sovereignty.

[ 239 ] He also prefers unilateralism over multilateralism .

[ 237 ] In a 2000 article in the Chicago Journal of International Law , Bolton described himself as a "convinced Americanist", favoring it over what he described as " globalism ".

[ 240 ] In his roles in the U.S. government, however, Bolton has been more pragmatic in his actions toward international organizations, [ 241 ] though according to Foreign Policy , he effectively advanced his views on this subject during his tenure in the Trump Administration.

[ 173 ] Bolton has criticized the International Criminal Court , seeing it as a threat to U.S. sovereignty.

[ 242 ] Bolton said: "If the court comes after us, Israel or other US allies, we will not sit quietly. We will ban its judges and prosecutors from entering the United States. We will sanction their funds in the US financial system, and we will prosecute them in the US criminal system." [ 243 ] Views on the United Nations [ edit ] Ambassador Bolton briefing on "The Human Rights Commission and UN Management Reform" at the New York Foreign Press Center Bolton has been a strong critic of the United Nations for much of his career.

[ 244 ] Bolton's opposition to the UN was rooted in a disdain for international organizations, which he believed infringed on the sovereignty of the United States.

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] He also opposed the International Criminal Court .

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] In 1994, he stated, "There is no United Nations. There is an international community that occasionally can be led by the only real power left in the world, and that's the United States, when it suits our interests and when we can get others to go along." [ 247 ] He also stated that "The Secretariat Building in New York has 38 stories. If you lost ten stories today, it wouldn't make a bit of difference." [ 248 ] When pressed on the statement during the confirmation process, he responded, "There's not a bureaucracy in the world that couldn't be made leaner." [ 249 ] However, in a paper on U.S. participation in the UN, Bolton stated "the United Nations can be a useful instrument in the conduct of American foreign policy." [ 250 ] European Union [ edit ] Bolton is a critic of the European Union . In his book Surrender Is Not an Option , he criticized the EU for pursuing "the endless process of diplomatic mastication" rather than satisfactorily solving problems, and he labeled the organization's diplomats as "EUroids".

[ 251 ] He has also criticized the EU for advancing what he considers liberal policies.

[ 252 ] Bolton campaigned in Ireland against further EU integration in 2008, and he criticized the Treaty of Lisbon for expanding EU powers.

[ 253 ] In 2016, Bolton praised the UK's referendum vote to leave the EU, [ 254 ] and Axios reported in January 2019 that Bolton continued to advocate for a hard Brexit as National Security Advisor.

[ 255 ] In a March 2019 interview with Sky News , Bolton criticized the UK "political class" for not implementing the Brexit vote.

[ 256 ] Bolton, President Trump and German Chancellor Angela Merkel at the G20 Summit in Buenos Aires, December 1, 2018 Targeted killings of terrorist leaders [ edit ] In September 2011, when the Obama administration declared the death of Al Qaeda target and American-born radical Anwar al-Awlaki in Yemen , Bolton commented "I think it's important as individual Al Qaeda figures and other terrorists are killed that we not read more into it than there is. Consider this analogy if you were around in the 1920s and somebody said, my God, Vladimir Lenin is dead. The Bolsheviks will never recover from this...So while Al-Awlaki's death is significant, I would not read cosmic consequences into it." [ 257 ] Libya [ edit ] Bolton opposed the deal that George W. Bush made with then Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi to eliminate the country's weapons of mass destruction program.

[ 23 ] He was in a key role during initial negotiations but his role became limited over time. According to a 2005 study, Bolton was intentionally kept out of the loop so a final agreement could be reached: "Bolton reportedly was unaware of the December 19 WMD agreement until very shortly before its public announcement. And after initially being given a lead role in implementing it, he pushed so hard to backtrack from the agreement that the British convinced the Bush administration to restrict his involvement in the Libya matter." [ 23 ] Bolton supported the NATO-led military intervention in Libya that toppled the regime of Muammar Gaddafi .

[ 258 ] [ 259 ] Iraq [ edit ] Bolton is regarded to be an "architect" of the Iraq War .

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] [ 262 ] In 1998, he was a signatory to a letter sent to President Bill Clinton urging him to remove Saddam Hussein from power using U.S. diplomatic, political and military power.

[ 263 ] He supported the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq that toppled the regime of Saddam Hussein and continued to stand by his support of the invasion by 2018.

[ 264 ] [ 265 ] In 2007, Bolton said the only mistake the United States made with regard to Iraq was to not leave earlier after the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and tell the Iraqis "Here's a copy of the Federalist Papers . Good luck." [ 266 ] In March 2023, Bolton defended the decision to invade Iraq, claiming that there were concerns that Saddam Hussein would pursue nuclear weapons and provide them to terrorist groups .

[ 267 ] Kosovo [ edit ] During 2008, Bolton opposed the declaration of independence by Kosovo .

[ 268 ] In 2018 he said, "US policy is that if the two parties can work it out between themselves and reach agreement, we don't exclude territorial adjustments," and that the US or Europe would not "stand in the way if the two parties to the dispute reached a mutually satisfactory settlement." [ 268 ] Western Sahara [ edit ] In July 2025, Bolton suggested that Algeria offer Donald Trump a gift so that he would abandon American recognition of Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.

[ 269 ] Israel [ edit ] Bolton greeting Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in August 2018 Bolton with Israeli President Reuven Rivlin in August 2018 President Trump, joined by Bolton and Netanyahu behind, signs the proclamation recognizing Israel's 1981 annexation of the Golan Heights , March 25, 2019.

Bolton is known for his strong support for Israel .

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] Bolton opposes the two-state solution of creating an independent Palestinian state alongside the existing state of Israel.

[ 272 ] Bolton supported moving the U.S. embassy in Israel to Jerusalem in accordance with the Jerusalem Embassy Act , [ 273 ] and he testified in front of Congress in 2017 on the matter.

[ 274 ] In 2010, Bolton co-founded the Friends of Israel Initiative with 12 other international figures.

[ 275 ] Bolton supports what he calls the "Three State Solution" in order to determine the political status of Gaza and the West Bank. Under Bolton's Three State Solution, Israel would annex settlements it has built in the West Bank since the conclusion of the Six-Days War in 1967, Egypt would annex and administer the Gaza Strip, and Jordan would annex and administer the remaining portion of the West Bank not annexed by Israel. Bolton's Three State proposal would not result in the creation of an independent Palestinian state.

[ 276 ] Bolton opposed the 2023 Gaza war ceasefire .

[ 277 ] In December 2023, he proposed resettling Palestinians from Gaza .

[ 278 ] In April 2024, Bolton said that the Gaza war "is an Iranian war against Israel, fought through terrorist proxies", and the only way to end the suffering of the people of Gaza "is to eliminate Hamas, which is the cause of the suffering." [ 279 ] North Korea and Iran [ edit ] Bolton has advocated for pre-emptive strikes against North Korea and Iran . In March 2018, he suggested that South Korea take North Korea and terminate the North Korean regime as the only "diplomatic option", and said that the war between the two countries is their problem and not the United States' problem.

[ 280 ] In 2006, Bolton attempted to bring prosecution against Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad for incitement to genocide in the International Court of Justice , along with Alan Dershowitz , Dore Gold , and other experts from the United States, Canada, and Israel, based on Ahmadinejad's comments that " Israel must be wiped off the map ".

[ 281 ] In 2008, Bolton said: "The idea here is not to have much larger hostilities, but to stop the Iranians from engaging in the hostilities that they're already doing against us inside Iraq. And they're doing much the same by aiding the Taliban in Afghanistan. So this is not provocative or preemptive, this is entirely responsive on our part." [ 280 ] In 2018, Bolton stated: "Russia, China, Syria, Iran, North Korea. These are regimes that make agreements and lie about them. A national security policy that is based on the faith that regimes like that will honor their commitments is doomed to failure." [ 282 ] He also said, "Our goal should be regime change in Iran." [ 272 ] The New Yorker , described the people who have worked with Bolton as saying "he is focused less on North Korea than on Iran". H. R. McMaster has reportedly told Dexter Fikins that Bolton has had "[the] anal focus on Iran for twenty years".

[ 283 ] Unlike several of President Trump's early national security officials like National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson , Bolton campaigned to press President Trump for a complete withdrawal from the 2015 nuclear deal with Iran (the JCPOA) and rejected the idea it could be fixed. Unable at the time to directly present his position to President Trump, Bolton published his proposal on how to withdraw from the Iran deal in an August 28, 2017 National Review Online article.

[ 284 ] After he was named to succeed McMaster as Nation Security Adviser in April 2018, Bolton pressed the President to withdraw from the Iran nuclear deal , a decision President Trump announced a month later.

[ 163 ] Bolton has been one of the biggest anti-Iran hawks in the Trump administration.

[ 285 ] Speaking to a meeting of Iranian exile group Mujahedin-e-Khalq in March 2018, Bolton said the Trump administration should follow the goal of regime change in Iran and that "before 2019, we here will celebrate in Tehran!" [ 286 ] In 2019, Bolton, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo successfully sabotaged Trump's attempts to open diplomatic channels with Iran.

[ 287 ] [ 288 ] On January 3, 2020, the high-level Iranian General, Qasem Soleimani , was killed in a U.S. drone strike , which considerably heightened the existing tensions between the two countries. In a tweet, Bolton called the airstrike a "long in the making, this was a decisive blow against Iran's malign Quds Force activities worldwide. Hope this is the first step to regime change in Tehran." [ 289 ] People's Mujahedin of Iran [ edit ] Prior to it being de-listed by the U.S. as a Foreign Terrorist Organization in 2012, Bolton spoke in favor of the People's Mujahedin of Iran (also known as the Mujahedin-e Khalq, or MEK), [ 290 ] [ 291 ] MEK has opposed the Iranian theocratic state since shortly after the 1979 Iranian Revolution .

[ 292 ] [ 293 ] According to his financial disclosure, he was given $40,000 for his 2016 speech to MEK.

[ 283 ] According to the 5 U.S.C. app. § 101 -required 'US Public Financial Disclosure Report' (2018) for Bolton, released by Al-Monitor , he has received $40,000 of speaking fee for "Global Events–European Iranian Events" on June 1, 2017, [ 294 ] the same day he made a speech for the MEK in a gathering in Paris, France.

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] [ 297 ] In May 2018, Joanne Stocker, a journalist and researcher studying the MEK, told Richard Engel of MSNBC that she estimates Bolton was paid "on the low-end, $180,000". Bolton's office has refused to comment on the matter.

[ 298 ] Russia [ edit ] Bolton with Russian President Vladimir Putin in June 2018 In 2013, after NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden had been granted asylum in Russia , Bolton said: "I think in order to focus Putin's thinking, we need to do things that cause him pain as well. And while I know that not having a chance to have a bilateral meeting with his buddy Barack Obama will cause Putin to lose sleep, it's not damaging Russian interests." [ 282 ] Russian Senator Aleksey Pushkov , former chairman of the State Duma Committee on International Affairs, said after Bolton's appointment: "Bolton, along with Bush, Cheney and Rumsfeld, was an ardent supporter of the war in Iraq. A supporter of jihadists for the sake of overthrowing [Syrian President Bashar al-Assad]. A great specialist in interventions and aggression, and adept at the use of force. McMaster is a general. Bolton is the ideologue of a new cold war , a convinced opponent of Russia." [ 299 ] Bolton meets with Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu in Moscow in October 2018.

In a June 2017 article entitled "Vladimir Putin looked Trump in the eye and lied to him. We negotiate with Russia at our peril," Bolton called Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections "a true act of war." [ 300 ] As Trump's national security advisor in July 2018, Bolton referred to the investigation into the Russian interference as "the Russia witch hunt".

[ 301 ] In a December 2021 article entitled "Now Is the Time for NATO to Stand Up to Russia," Bolton called for an aggressive response to Moscow's troops build-up along the Ukraine border , before the full-scale invasion commenced in February 2022.

[ 302 ] On July 6, 2023, U.S. President Joe Biden approved the provision of cluster munitions to Ukraine.

[ 303 ] Bolton hailed the decision as "an excellent idea".

[ 304 ] China [ edit ] Bolton, President Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping at the G20 Summit in Osaka, June 28, 2019 In 2018, Bolton criticized Washington's One-China policy , under which Taiwan , officially known as the Republic of China, is not recognized as an independent nation, with recognition being given only to the People's Republic of China .

[ 270 ] On China's notoriety in intellectual property matters, he remarked in 2018 that "There's simply no excuse for the stealing of intellectual property, forced technology transfers it's sometimes called." [ 270 ] Bolton said in October 2018 that the United States' need to counter a Chinese arms buildup in the Pacific , including within South China Sea , was one of the reasons for their move to withdraw from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty with Russia, because China is not a signatory to the treaty.

[ 305 ] [ 306 ] On January 20, 2021, the Chinese government imposed sanctions against Bolton and 27 other Trump administration officials that "planned, promoted and executed a series of crazy moves, gravely interfered in China's internal affairs, undermined China's interests, offended the Chinese people, and seriously disrupted China-U.S. relations". The sanctions ban them from entering China, including Hong Kong and Macau, and restrict companies and institutions associated with them from doing business in China.

[ 307 ] Latin America [ edit ] Bolton with Brazil's president-elect Jair Bolsonaro in Rio de Janeiro in November 2018 In a speech as National Security Advisor on November 1, 2018, Bolton praised Brazil 's president-elect Jair Bolsonaro and Colombia 's president Iván Duque Márquez , both right-wing conservatives, calling them "like-minded" partners. In the speech, he also framed Bolsonaro's election victory as a "positive sign" for Latin America, and he criticized Cuba , Venezuela , and Nicaragua as a " troika of tyranny ." [ 308 ] [ 309 ] [ 310 ] [ 311 ] Criticism of the Obama administration [ edit ] In December 2012, Bolton suggested that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had faked a concussion to avoid testifying before Congress regarding the attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya. Bolton stated "When you don't want to go to a meeting or conference or an event you have a ' diplomatic illness '. And this is a diplomatic illness to beat the band." [ 312 ] [ 313 ] [ 314 ] In 2010, he wrote a foreword for the book The Post-American Presidency: The Obama Administration's War on America , authored by far-right anti-Muslim commentators Pamela Geller and Robert Spencer .

[ 315 ] [ 316 ] Bolton endorsed their book, writing: "This book carries forward the ongoing and increasingly widespread critique of Barack Obama as our first post-American president. What it recounts is disturbing, and its broader implications are more disturbing still." [ 317 ] Alleged assassination plot [ edit ] On August 10, 2022, an Iranian national and member of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps , Shahram Poursafi, was charged by the United States Department of Justice in an October 2021 plot to allegedly murder Bolton , likely in retaliation for the January 2020 death of Qasem Soleimani.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] In response to the plot, Bolton was granted a protective detail from the United States Secret Service on the orders of President Joe Biden .

[ 320 ] This protection was later rescinded by President Trump upon his return to office on January 20, 2025.

[ 321 ] [ 322 ] [ 323 ] Personal life [ edit ] Bolton married Christina Bolton in 1972; they divorced in 1983.

[ 324 ] He has been married to Gretchen Smith Bolton, a financial planner with AXA Advisors , since January 1986.

[ 324 ] She was born in Kansas City in 1945 and had been married once before, divorcing in 1973. Together they have a daughter, Jennifer, and have resided in Bethesda, Maryland since 1986.

[ 325 ] [ 326 ] Bolton is a Lutheran .

[ 327 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Surrender Is Not an Option: Defending America at the United Nations and Abroad . Threshold Editions, Simon & Schuster. 2007.

ISBN 978-1416552840 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

How Barack Obama Is Endangering Our National Sovereignty . Encounter Books. 2010.

ISBN 978-1594034916 .

The Room Where It Happened . Simon & Schuster. 2020.

ISBN 978-1982148034 References [ edit ] ^ "PN1250 – Nomination of Thomas M. Boyd for Department of Justice, 100th Congress (1987–1988)" . October 14, 1988.

^ "PN690 – Nomination of John R. Bolton for Department of Justice, 99th Congress (1985–1986)" .

congress.gov . December 16, 1985.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2018 .

^ "PN1250 – Nomination of Thomas M. Boyd for Department of Justice, 100th Congress (1987–1988)" .

congress.gov . October 14, 1988.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2018 .

^ "PN908 - Nomination of John R. Bolton for U. S. International Development Cooperation Agency, 97th Congress (1981–1982)" . February 8, 1982.

^ "Ronald Reagan: Nomination of John R. Bolton To Be an Assistant Administrator of the Agency for International Development" .

presidency.ucsb.edu . Retrieved July 22, 2018 .

^ "Ronald Reagan: Nomination of Richard A. Derham To Be an Assistant Administrator of the Agency for International Development" .

presidency.ucsb.edu . Retrieved July 22, 2018 .

^ a b c "Ex. Rept. 109-1 – The Nomination of John R. Bolton to be U.S. Representative to the United Nations with Rank of Ambassador and U.S. Representative to the United Nations Security Council and U.S. Representative to the United Nations General Assembly During His Tenure of Service as U.S. Representative to the United Nations" .

congress.gov .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved November 16, 2016 .

^ a b Crowley, Michael; Bender, Bryan (March 22, 2018).

"Bolton pick underscores Trump's foreign policy confusion" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ Senior, Jennifer (January 1, 2006).

"Bolton in a China Shop" .

New York .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 .

^ a b Cooper, Helene (December 4, 2006).

"John Bolton resigns as ambassador to U.N." The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 12, 2014 . Retrieved March 19, 2009 .

^ a b "President Bush Accepts John Bolton's Resignation as U.S. Representative to the United Nations" . White House, Office of the Press Secretary. December 4, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2018 . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

^ "John Bolton resigns as ambassador to U.N." NBC News .

Associated Press . December 4, 2006.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 19, 2009 .

^ a b c Haberman, Maggie; Schmidt, Michael S. (January 26, 2020).

"Trump Tied Ukraine Aid to Inquiries He Sought, Bolton Book Says" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2020 . Retrieved January 26, 2020 .

^ Kelemen, Michele; Taylor, Jessica (March 22, 2018).

"Bolton Brings Hawkish Perspective To North Korea, Iran Strategy" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2018 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ "John Bolton: Bush-era war hawk makes comeback" .

BBC News . March 22, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2018 . Retrieved July 21, 2018 .

^ Fang, Marina (March 22, 2018).

"Trump's Next National Security Adviser, John Bolton, Is As Dangerous As You Remembered" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2019 . Retrieved February 3, 2020 .

^ Ignatieff, Michael (2009).

American Exceptionalism and Human Rights . New Jersey: Princeton University Press . p.

22 .

ISBN 978-0691116488 .

Beginning in the 1980s, a conservative legal counterattack gained ground, taking a strongly Americanist or nationalist view of international law. Academic lawyers like John Bolton ...

^ "Background: John Bolton's Nomination to the U.N." NPR . June 3, 2005.

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

Over the past 30 years, John Bolton has advertised himself as an unadulterated nationalist and opponent of multilateralism. He's not a healthy skeptic about the United Nations, but widely known as a committed, destructive opponent and ideological lone ranger.

^ Mousavian, Seyed (2012).

The Iranian Nuclear Crisis: A Memoir . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0870032684 .

Conservative John Bolton ...

^ Baker, Peter (March 13, 2018).

"As White House's Revolving Door Whirls, Chaos Is the Only Constant" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2018 . Retrieved March 15, 2018 .

^ "US Democrats hail return to power" .

BBC . March 10, 2006.

Archived from the original on December 6, 2006 . Retrieved November 10, 2006 .

^ David Ramm, "Bolton, John R.", Current Biography Yearbook , 2006.

^ a b c Jentleson, Bruce W.; Whytock, Christopher A. (March 30, 2006).

"Who 'Won' Libya? The Force-Diplomacy Debate and Its Implications for Theory and Policy" .

International Security .

30 (3): 47– 86.

doi : 10.1162/isec.2005.30.3.47 .

S2CID 57572461 . Archived from the original on April 26, 2021 . Retrieved April 26, 2021 .

^ Heilbrunn, Jacob (2009).

They Knew They Were Right: The Rise of the Neocons . Knopf Doubleday Publishing. p. 266.

ISBN 978-0307472489 .

^ Bolton, John (December 18, 2007).

" 'Bush's Foreign Policy Is in Free Fall' " .

Der Spiegel .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2012 . Retrieved April 8, 2009 .

^ "Transcript" .

Hardball with Chris Matthews . November 21, 2007.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2020 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

MATTHEWS: The trouble with neoconservatives... BOLTON: I'm not a neoconservative.

^ "John R. Bolton" .

AEI .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ Rosenthal, Andrew (September 28, 2012).

"Bolton Calls Obama's Benghazi Response 'Limp-Wristed' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2018 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ a b c Shane, Scott (May 1, 2005).

"Never Shy, Bolton Brings a Zeal to the Table" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ Nordlinger, Jay (November 7, 2007).

"A book and a half, &c" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g Bolton, John (2007).

Surrender Is Not an Option: Defending America at the United Nations and Abroad .

Threshold Editions , Simon & Schuster . p.

12 .

ISBN 978-1416552840 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ "Bolton's path began in Baltimore" .

Baltimore Sun . March 13, 2005 . Retrieved February 20, 2023 .

^ Goldberg, Ross; Kahn, Sam (April 28, 2005).

"Bolton's conservative ideology has roots in Yale experience" .

Yale Daily News . Retrieved February 20, 2023 .

^ DeYoung, Karen (March 23, 2018).

"John Bolton, famously abrasive, is an experienced operator in the 'swamp' " .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 25, 2018 .

^ a b Urquhart, Brian (March 6, 2008).

"One Angry Man" .

New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ a b Goldberg, Ross; Kahn, Sam (April 28, 2005).

"Bolton's conservative ideology has roots in Yale experience" .

Yale Daily News . Archived from the original on September 24, 2010.

^ Daly, Michael (April 13, 2018).

"The Fallen Heroes Who Went to Vietnam in John Bolton's Place" .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2018 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Vietnam Extra (November 25, 2009).

"What's Your Number? The Vietnam War Selective Service Lottery" .

Vietnam Magazine . History Net.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved November 16, 2016 .

^ Schmidt, William E. (August 20, 1988).

"Some Now in Congress Joined Reserve or Guard" .

The New York Times . New York.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved February 9, 2017 .

It has also recalled the complex, changing and often criticized system by which young men, particularly those who were white, from the upper and middle classes and college educated, were able to avoid military service altogether by using student deferments or other exclusions, or to ease their service by seeking haven from possible combat duty in the Reserves or National Guard.

^ United States Senate (2005).

"The Nomination of John R. Bolton to be U.S. Representative to the United Nations" . United States Congress.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved November 15, 2016 .

^ "Called to Serve: Stories of the Men and Women Confronted by the Vietnam War Draft" . Called to Serve Vietnam.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved November 15, 2016 .

The Results of the First Draft Lottery, December 1, 1969: The highest number drafted in this group of men was 195.

^ "John Bolton: "Surrender Is Not An Option" " .

The Diane Rehm Show . November 12, 2007.

Archived from the original on December 6, 2007 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ a b "John Bolton – Department of State" .

Results.gov . November 20, 2008. Archived from the original on November 20, 2008.

^ a b "Biography: Bolton, John R." State.gov . Archived from the original on August 15, 2005.

^ a b c d Filkins, Dexter (April 29, 2019).

"John Bolton on the Warpath" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ "Kirkland & Ellis LLP > Bolton, John R." Kirkland.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ a b McLaughlin, Elizabeth (December 12, 2016).

"Everything You Need to Know About John Bolton, Trump's Expected Pick for Deputy Secretary of State" .

ABC News . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ a b Wadhams, Nick (March 23, 2018).

"Trump Takes Hawkish Turn in Picking Bolton as National Security Adviser" .

Bloomberg Politics .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2018 . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ Dwyer, Sean (September 30, 2015).

"Freedom Capital Appoints Bolton as Senior Advisor" .

BusinessWire (Press release).

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Heilbrunn, Jacob (2009).

They Knew They Were Right: The Rise of the Neocons . Knopf Doubleday Publishing. p. 230.

ISBN 978-0307472489 .

^ a b c Vest, Jason (January 22, 2008).

"Wanted: Complete Asshole for U.N. Ambassador" . Villagevoice.com.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ Houston, Paul (April 29, 1986).

"Japanese-Americans Ask Reparations" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Taylor, Stewart Jr.

(August 1, 1986).

"President Asserts He Will Withhold Rehnquist Memos" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Volz, Joseph (June 21, 1987).

" 'Walsh-bashing' Could Spell Ouster Of Special Prosecutor" .

New York Daily News . Archived from the original on July 29, 2012 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Grandin, Greg (October 20, 2006).

"Remember Ollie" .

Houston Chronicle .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Corn, David (March 30, 2005).

"John Bolton: Ally of Drugrunners" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ United States Department of Justice (March 26, 2018).

"Former Assistant Attorneys General" . justice.gov.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Slavin, Barbara (April 24, 2005).

"U.N. nominee faces new allegations of verbal abuse" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2016 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ "Former Commissioners" . Retrieved March 16, 2025 .

^ a b Bosco, David (2014).

Rough Justice: The International Criminal Court's Battle to Fix the World, One Prosecution at a Time . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

73– 74.

ISBN 978-0199844135 .

^ a b Bosco, David (July 2005). "The World According to Bolton".

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

61 (4): 24– 31.

Bibcode : 2005BuAtS..61d..24B .

doi : 10.1080/00963402.2005.11460899 .

ISSN 0096-3402 .

S2CID 143469288 .

^ "Let the child live" .

The Economist . January 25, 2007.

Archived from the original on August 26, 2007 . Retrieved August 16, 2007 .

^ Slavin, Barbara; Bill Nichols (November 30, 2003).

"Bolton a 'guided missile' " .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on June 13, 2006 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Bolton, John R. (May 6, 2002).

"Beyond the Axis of Evil: Additional Threats from Weapons of Mass Destruction" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019 . Retrieved September 21, 2015 .

^ Clemens, Walter C. Jr. (2016).

North Korea and the World: Human Rights, Arms Control, and Strategies for Negotiation . University Press of Kentucky. p. 208.

ISBN 978-0813167633 .

^ "Bolton Linked to Firing of U.N. Arms Monitor" .

Los Angeles Times .

Associated Press . June 5, 2005.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ Simons, Marlise (October 13, 2013).

"To Ousted Boss, Arms Watchdog Was Seen as an Obstacle in Iraq" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2019 . Retrieved April 24, 2019 .

^ "Bolton said to orchestrate unlawful firing" .

USA Today .

AP . June 4, 2005.

Archived from the original on June 9, 2011 . Retrieved April 25, 2011 .

^ Hasan, Mehdi (March 29, 2018).

" 'We Know Where Your Kids Live': How John Bolton Once Threatened an International Official" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2019 . Retrieved April 24, 2019 .

^ a b Ivins, Molly (April 21, 2005).

"John Bolton Vote Delay" .

Columbus Free Press .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2020 . Retrieved February 3, 2020 .

^ Joseph, Jofi (June 2004).

"The Proliferation Security Initiative: Can Interdiction Stop Proliferation?" .

armscontrol.org .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Kaplan, Lawrence F. (March 29, 2004).

"The secrets of John Bolton's success" .

The New Republic . Archived from the original on January 20, 2018.

^ a b c d "Bush nominates Bolton as U.N. ambassador" .

CNN . March 8, 2005. Archived from the original on March 14, 2005 . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ "Profile: John Bolton" .

BBC News . August 1, 2005.

Archived from the original on June 13, 2006 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Former US official John Bolton admits to having planned coups in foreign countries , Middle East Monitor , July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022.

^ Former US official John Bolton said he planned foreign coups. The global outcry was swift.

, Washington Post , July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 23, 2022.

^ Singh, Kanishka (July 13, 2022).

"Former senior U.S. official John Bolton admits to planning attempted foreign coups" .

Reuters . Retrieved August 8, 2022 .

^ a b c d Babington, Charles; Linzer, Dafna (April 12, 2005).

"Bolton Assures Senators Of Commitment to U.N." The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2018 . Retrieved September 1, 2017 .

^ a b c d e f LeoGrande, William M.

; Kornbluh, Peter (2015).

Back Channel to Cuba: The Hidden History of Negotiations between Washington and Havana . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-1469626611 . Retrieved January 4, 2020 .

^ "U.S.: Cuba Has Biological Weapons" .

cbsnews.com .

Associated Press . May 11, 2002.

Archived from the original on June 19, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ a b c Pillar, Paul R. (2011).

Intelligence and U.S. Foreign Policy: Iraq, 9/11, and Misguided Reform . Columbia University Press. pp.

153– 154.

ISBN 978-0231527804 .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ O'Rourke, Lawrence M. (April 11, 2005).

"Bolton faces tough questioning from Democrats" .

McClatchy . Archived from the original on January 11, 2009 – via knoxstudio.com.

^ Betts, Richard K. (2007).

Enemies of Intelligence: Knowledge and Power in American National Security . Columbia University Press. p. 92.

ISBN 978-0231511131 .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2018 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ "Cuba rejects US accusation over biological weapons" .

The Irish Times . April 1, 2004 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ Calamur, Krishnadev (April 6, 2004).

"U.S. knew of Cuba bioweapons effort" .

UPI . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ Weisman, Steven R.; Times, New York (September 18, 2004).

"Administration backing off on Cuba's germ warfare ability / New intelligence report says bio-weapons program uncertain" .

SFGate .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ a b "Letter to Christopher Shays, Charman, Subcommittee on National Security, Emerging Threats, and International Relations" (PDF) .

Democrats.reform.house.gov . March 1, 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 27, 2006.

^ "Cooperativesearch.org" . Archived from the original on October 29, 2013.

^ Linzer, Dafna (August 23, 2005).

"No Proof Found of Iran Arms Program" .

The Washington Post . p. A01.

Archived from the original on May 20, 2019 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Islamic Republic of Iran (PDF) (Report). Iaea.org. September 2, 2005. p. 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 13, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ Jervis, Robert (2010).

Why Intelligence Fails: Lessons from the Iranian Revolution and the Iraq War . Cornell Studies in Security Affairs. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. p. 215.

ISBN 978-0801478062 .

^ a b Linzer, Dafna (April 18, 2005).

"Bolton Often Blocked Information, Officials Say" .

The Washington Post . p. A04.

Archived from the original on October 7, 2006 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Ahmad, Muhammad Idrees (2014).

The Road to Iraq . Edinburgh University Press Books. p. 131.

ISBN 978-0748693047 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ Watson, Roland (March 8, 2005).

"Bush deploys hawk as new UN envoy" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on January 7, 2006 . Retrieved January 19, 2018 .

^ Jehl, Douglas (May 25, 2005).

"G.O.P. Senator Issues Letter Urging Vote Against Bolton" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ "Memorandum of Understanding on Judicial Nominations – Gang of Fourteen Agreement" .

United States Congressional Serial Set, Serial No. 15017, Senate Reports Nos. 356-369 . Government Printing Office. pp.

104– 105.

^ "Nominations Sent to the Senate" . Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov. November 9, 2006.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ "Press Conference by the President" . Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov. November 8, 2006.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ Rutenberg, Jim (November 27, 2006).

"In Need of New Moves, but in Which Direction?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved February 9, 2017 .

^ Buncombe, Andrew (April 12, 2005).

"Bolton fights for UN nomination, promising American leadership" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on June 14, 2018 . Retrieved February 5, 2020 .

^ Miles, Donna (March 8, 2005).

"Defense.gov News Article: Administration, U.N. Ambassador Nominee Affirm U.N.s Importance" .

archive.defense.gov . Archived from the original on September 30, 2017 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ Borger, Julian (April 12, 2005).

"Democrats try to block Bush's man for UN job" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ "Bush U.N. Pick Faces Detractors" .

cbsnews.com .

CBS News / AP News . April 11, 2005.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ "Bolton Pledges to 'Work With All' " .

Fox News . April 11, 2005.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Kaplan, Fred (April 11, 2005).

"It's Time To Write a Dear John: Bolton's appalling confirmation-hearings performance" .

Slate.com .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Slavin, Barbara (April 12, 2005).

"Bolton hearings continue" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2010 . Retrieved May 7, 2010 .

^ "Bolton closer to confirmation" .

Deseret News .

Associated Press . April 13, 2005.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ "Bush Stands by His Controversial Man: John Bolton" .

mindfully.com .

The Economist . Archived from the original on November 15, 2016.

^ a b Jehl, Douglas; Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (April 21, 2005).

"Doubts on U.N. Nominee's Confirmation Are Growing" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2018 . Retrieved February 9, 2017 .

^ Jehl, Douglas; Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (April 21, 2005).

"Doubts on U.N. Nominee's Confirmation on Growing" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2018 . Retrieved February 9, 2017 .

^ Wilonsky, Robert (May 5, 2005).

"Undiplomatic: A whistleblower in the Bolton nomination learns the power of the blogosphere" .

Dallas Observer .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

^ United States Congressional Serial Set, Serial No. 14948, Senate Executive Reports, Nos. 1-8 . p. 316 – via books.google.com.

^ Jehl, Douglas (April 23, 2005).

"Cheney underlines support for UN pick" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2015 . Retrieved April 25, 2011 .

^ Conant, Eve (May 11, 2005).

"A Nuclear Blunder?" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2018 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Jehl, Douglas (May 27, 2005).

"Democrats Force Senate to Delay a Vote on Bolton" .

The New York Times . p. A1 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Welna, David (May 25, 2005).

"Senate Delays Vote on Bolton U.N. Nomination" .

NPR .

^ "Frist reverses himself, pushes Bolton vote" .

NBC News . June 21, 2005 . Retrieved October 11, 2024 .

^ Babington, Charles (July 22, 2006).

"Bolton's Nomination Revives After Senator Changes Mind" .

The Washington Post . p. A02.

Archived from the original on April 13, 2012 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Weisman, Steven (July 30, 2005).

"Bolton not truthful, 36 senators charge in opposing appointment" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2012 . Retrieved July 30, 2005 .

^ Bumiller, Elisabeth; Sheryl Stolberg (August 1, 2005).

"Bush appoints Bolton as U.N. envoy, bypassing Senate" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 1, 2005 .

^ Williams, Timothy (August 1, 2005).

"Bush appoints Bolton as U.N. envoy, bypassing Senate" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 1, 2005 .

^ Bumiller, Elisabeth; Sheryl Stolberg (August 2, 2005).

"President sends Bolton to U.N.; bypasses Senate" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 8, 2008 .

^ "His UNdoing" .

The Economist . December 7, 2006. pp.

33– 34.

Archived from the original on December 13, 2006 . Retrieved August 16, 2007 .

^ "A matter of honour" .

The Economist . July 26, 2007.

Archived from the original on November 9, 2007 . Retrieved August 16, 2007 .

^ "The Shame of the United Nations" .

The New York Times . February 26, 2006.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2016 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ "Bad counsel" .

The Economist . April 4, 2007.

Archived from the original on April 30, 2007 . Retrieved August 16, 2007 .

^ U.S. Congress (July 27, 2006).

"Nominations" (PDF) .

Congressional Record Daily Digest . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2006.

^ "Bolton wins praise from vocal Republican critic" .

news.yahoo.com .

Reuters . Archived from the original on March 2, 2006.

^ "Bolton Resignation Signals New Reality Facing Bush" .

NPR . December 4, 2006 . Retrieved October 10, 2024 .

^ "Key Republican joins Dems opposing Bolton nomination" .

CNN . November 10, 2006.

Archived from the original on July 24, 2008 . Retrieved May 7, 2010 .

^ Linzer, Dafna (November 10, 2006).

"Bolton May Not Return As U.N. Envoy" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ "Bush on Bolton resignation: 'I'm not happy about it' " .

CNN .

Associated Press . Archived from the original on January 2, 2007.

^ Hunt, Terence (December 4, 2006).

"Bush Accepts Bolton's UN Resignation" .

CBS News . Archived from the original on October 24, 2007 . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

^ "Russians hope for better ties to U.S." United Press International. December 4, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 24, 2007 . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

: "They were reacting to the resignation of U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. John Bolton earlier Monday, Bolton resigned after it became clear that the incoming Democratic-controlled Senate in the 110th Congress would not vote to confirm his appointment as ambassador." ^ Feller, Ben (December 4, 2006).

"Bush Accepts Bolton's U.N. Resignation" .

ABC News . Archived from the original on December 11, 2006 . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

^ a b "President Bush Meets with United Nations Ambassador John Bolton" . Office of the Press Secretary, The White House. December 4, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 27, 2011 . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

: "I received the resignation of Ambassador John Bolton. I accepted." ^ Montopoli, Brian (December 4, 2006).

"White House Contests Claim That Bolton 'Resigned' " .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2006 . Retrieved December 4, 2006 .

^ "U.N. Ambassador John Bolton To Step Down" .

cbsnews.com .

CBS News / AP News . December 4, 2006.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2018 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ Cornwell, Rupert (December 5, 2006).

"Bolton is forced to quit UN ambassador post" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2017 . Retrieved September 1, 2017 .

^ "John Bolton resigns as ambassador to U.N." NBC News . December 4, 2006.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2019 . Retrieved February 5, 2020 .

^ "Bolton's Nomination Gets Letter of Support" .

Los Angeles Times . Times Wire Reports. April 4, 2005.

Archived from the original on November 15, 2016 . Retrieved February 5, 2020 .

^ "On eve of Bolton re-nomination hearing, fifty-four" . July 26, 2006.

Archived from the original on November 15, 2016 . Retrieved November 14, 2016 .

^ Trump, Donald (August 11, 2016).

"Donald Trump Makes a Return Visit" .

The Hugh Hewitt Show (radio program). Interviewed by Hugh Hewitt .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Fandos, Nicholas (December 4, 2016).

"Trump Expands Search for His Secretary of State" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2016 . Retrieved December 4, 2016 .

^ Rucker, Philip; Tumulty, Karen (December 22, 2016).

"Donald Trump rejected Secretary of State candidate John Bolton over his moustache, adviser reveals" .

The Independent . United Kingdom.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2016 . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

^ "Trump presidency: Exxon's Rex Tillerson for top diplomat?" .

BBC News . December 10, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 13, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Blake, Aaron (December 12, 2016).

"John Bolton's 'False Flag' Conspiracy Theory about The CIA and Russia Fits a Clear Pattern for Him" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2018 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Nelson, Louis (December 30, 2016).

"Bolton: Russia sanctions insufficient; U.S. must 'make the Russians feel pain' " .

Politico Magazine .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ "John Bolton reacts after US imposes sanctions against Russia" .

Fox News . December 30, 2016.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Boyer, Dave (February 18, 2017).

"Trump to Interview Bolton, Three Others for National Security Adviser Post" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2017 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie (February 19, 2017).

"Trump Meets With Four Candidates for National Security Adviser" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2017 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ "Trump Names Lt Gen HR McMaster as National Security Adviser" .

BBC News . February 20, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2019 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ Baker, Peter; Gordon, Michael R. (February 20, 2017).

"Trump Chooses H.R. McMaster as National Security Adviser" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2017 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ Rosario, Justin (November 9, 2018).

"With Gary Cohn Out, How Much Worse Can The Trump White House Get? Two Words: John Bolton" .

The Daily Banter .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2019 . Retrieved March 7, 2018 .

^ Salama, Vivian (April 9, 2018).

"John Bolton back on the job, as President Trump weighs Syria options" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2018 . Retrieved April 9, 2018 .

^ Trump, Donald [@realDonaldTrump] (March 22, 2018).

"I am pleased to announce that, effective 4/9/18, @AmbJohnBolton will be my new National Security Advisor. I am very thankful for the service of General H.R. McMaster who has done an outstanding job & will always remain my friend. There will be an official contact handover on 4/9" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved March 22, 2018 – via Twitter .

^ Sanger, David E. (March 22, 2018).

"With Bolton, Trump Creates a Historically Hard-Line Foreign Policy Team" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ Calia, Michael; Javers, Eamon (April 10, 2018).

"Trump's top homeland security advisor Tom Bossert to resign" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2018 . Retrieved April 10, 2018 .

^ Holland, Steve; Volz, Dustin (April 10, 2018).

"Trump's homeland security adviser Bossert resigns on Bolton's request" .

Reuters . London, UK.

^ a b Singman, Brooke (April 12, 2018).

"Another National Security Council resignation, as Bolton cleans house" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2018 . Retrieved April 13, 2018 .

^ Cohen, Zachary; McLaughlin, Jenna; Diamond, Jeremy (September 19, 2018).

"Trump's Most Trusted National Security Adviser? Himself" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2018 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Nelson, Steven (September 20, 2018).

"John Bolton Says He 'Fixed' White House Overstaffing by Cutting Cybersecurity Job" .

Washington Examiner .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2018 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ a b Mark Landler (2018).

"Trump Abandons Iran Nuclear Deal He Long Scorned" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2018 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ a b Weber, Lauren (May 9, 2018).

"Sudden Departure Of White House Global Health Security Head Has Experts Worried" .

HuffPost . Retrieved March 7, 2020 .

^ Sun, Lena H.

"Top White House official in charge of pandemic response exits abruptly" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2020 .

^ Thomsen, Jacqueline (May 10, 2018).

"Trump official overseeing pandemic readiness exits" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2020 .

^ Yong, Ed (May 11, 2018).

"Ebola Returns Just as the White House Loses Its Top Biodefense Expert" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved March 7, 2020 .

^ McKelvey, Tara (September 10, 2018).

"International Criminal Court: US threatens sanctions" .

bbc.co.uk .

BBC .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2018 . Retrieved September 10, 2018 .

^ Tharoor, Ishaan (September 11, 2018).

"The White House's new attack on the international system" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2018 . Retrieved September 11, 2018 .

^ Holland, Steve (September 9, 2018).

"Trump administration takes aim at International Criminal Court, PLO" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2018 . Retrieved September 11, 2018 .

^ Schmitt, Eric; Landler, Mark (January 13, 2019).

"Pentagon Officials Fear Bolton's Actions Increase Risk of Clash With Iran" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ Landler, Mark; Cooper, Helene (January 7, 2019).

"Bolton Walked Back Syria Statement. His Disdain for Debate Helped Produce It" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ a b Hirsh, Michael (September 28, 2018).

"John Bolton Is Living the Dream – for Now" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2018 . Retrieved December 27, 2018 .

^ Talev, Margaret; Jacobs, Jennifer (April 2, 2019).

"Bolton Tests His Boundaries and Trump's Patience in Growing Role" .

bloomberg.com .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2019 . Retrieved April 9, 2019 .

^ DeYoung, Karen; Jaffe, Greg; Hudson, John; Dawsey, Josh (March 4, 2019).

"John Bolton puts his singular stamp on Trump's National Security Council" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved April 8, 2019 .

^ Wood, Graeme (April 1, 2019).

"Will John Bolton Bring on Armageddon – Or Stave It Off?" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2019 . Retrieved April 8, 2019 .

^ Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie (May 28, 2019).

"Trump Undercuts John Bolton on North Korea and Iran" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ "U.S. adviser Bolton to visit Belarus, meet Lukashenko" . SaltWire Network.

Reuters . August 27, 2019.

^ Morin, Rebecca (September 10, 2019).

" 'Let's be clear, I resigned.' John Bolton contradicts Donald Trump on whether he was fired" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2019 . Retrieved September 17, 2019 .

^ Pettypiece, Shannon; Lee, Carol; Alexander, Peter; Edelman, Adam (September 11, 2019).

"Trump fires John Bolton as national security adviser" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on September 17, 2019 . Retrieved September 17, 2019 .

^ Johnson, Eliana (September 10, 2019).

"Inside Trump and Bolton's spectacular split" .

Politico . Retrieved May 22, 2022 .

^ Forgey, Quint (September 12, 2019).

"Trump claims Bolton was 'holding me back!' " .

Politico .

Archived from the original on April 5, 2020 . Retrieved September 18, 2019 .

^ Chalfant, Morgan (September 12, 2019).

"Trump: Bolton 'was holding me back' on Venezuela" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2020 . Retrieved September 18, 2019 .

^ "Politicians continue push into PE | PitchBook" .

pitchbook.com . Retrieved September 11, 2021 .

^ Cummings, William (October 15, 2019).

"John Bolton decried Giuliani effort to pressure Ukraine as 'drug deal,' ex-aide Fiona Hill testifies, reports say" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Desiderio, Andrew (November 7, 2019).

"Impeachment investigators pressing forward without John Bolton" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2019 . Retrieved January 7, 2020 .

^ Leonnig, Carol D.; Hamburger, Tom (November 7, 2019).

"Bolton willing to defy White House and testify if court clears the way, according to people familiar with his views" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Stahl, Chelsea (January 6, 2020).

"Will John Bolton testify?" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Lee, Carol E.; Nichols, Hans; Welker, Kristen (January 6, 2020).

"Bolton willing to testify in Senate impeachment trial" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Fandos, Nicholas; Schmidt, Michael S. (January 6, 2020).

"Bolton Is Willing to Testify in Trump Impeachment Trial, Raising Pressure for Witnesses" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Herb, Jeremy; Atwood, Kylie; Raju, Manu (January 6, 2020).

"John Bolton says he is prepared to testify in Senate trial if subpoenaed" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Palmer, Anna; Sherman, Jake; Okun, Eli; Ross, Garrett (January 6, 2020).

"John Bolton throws an impeachment curveball" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Roberts, John (January 29, 2020).

"White House told Bolton to remove classified material from manuscript before publication" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2020 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ "White House seeks objects publication of Bolton's book, demands classified info be removed first" .

NBC News . January 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 5, 2020 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ " 'I've had it take years': Bolton's book could be tied up past November" .

Politico . January 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2020 . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ Bobic, Igor; Delaney, Arthur (January 28, 2020).

"Trump Lawyer Jay Sekulow Argues John Bolton's Book 'Inadmissible' In Senate Trial" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Wu, Nicholas; Behrmann, Savannah; King, Ledyard; Jansen, Bart (January 28, 2020).

"Trump lawyer Sekulow says Bolton book manuscript 'inadmissable' – live Trump impeachment trial updates" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Fandos, Nicholas (January 28, 2020).

"Day in Impeachment: Republicans Huddle on Witnesses After Trump's Defense Concludes" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ "Nomination of John R. Bolton To Be an Assistant Secretary of State" .

The American Presidency Project . February 28, 1989 . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ Rice, Condoleezza (March 7, 2005).

"Announcement of Nomination of John Bolton as U.S. Ambassador to the UN" (Press release). US Department of State.

Archived from the original on February 5, 2009 . Retrieved April 18, 2006 .

^ a b Fahrenthold, David (June 12, 2018).

"John Bolton was paid $115,000 to participate in two panels sponsored by foundation of Ukrainian steel magnate" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 13, 2018 . Retrieved June 12, 2018 .

^ "John R. Bolton Articles" .

The Weekly Standard . Archived from the original on September 30, 2015 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ Przybyla, Heidi (April 23, 2018).

"John Bolton presided over anti-Muslim think tank" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2018 . Retrieved April 23, 2018 .

^ Ball, Molly (December 17, 2010).

"John Bolton eyes 2012 presidential run" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ "Bolton won't run for president" .

CNN . September 7, 2011. Archived from the original on January 12, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ McLaughlin, Seth; Dinan, Stephen (December 7, 2011).

"Gingrich: John Bolton will be my secretary of state" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ Bohn, Kevin (January 11, 2012).

"John Bolton endorses Romney" .

CNN . Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ a b "American Enterprise Institute" .

AEI . Archived from the original on April 22, 2009 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ "Fighting fires" .

The Economist . February 16, 2007.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2007 . Retrieved August 16, 2007 .

^ Barro, Josh (July 25, 2013).

"Groundswell: Grover Norquist Hater Club" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2014 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ a b Blumenthal, Paul (December 12, 2016).

"John Bolton's Super PAC Spent Millions On Senators Who Might Vote To Confirm Him" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2017 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ Kaye, Kate (February 1, 2016).

"Much-hyped Data Firm's Promise Could Be Tested In Iowa" .

AdAge .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2016 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ Lazar, Alexl (July 30, 2014).

"John Bolton Endorses Scott Brown For Senate" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2017 . Retrieved April 6, 2018 .

^ Douglas, Anna (September 6, 2016).

"NC's Burr again focuses on bipartisan work in latest TV ad" .

McClatchy DC .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ a b Levine, Carrie (March 20, 2018).

"John Bolton – eyed for Trump post – leads super PAC that employed Cambridge Analytica" .

The Center for Public Integrity .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ Vanden Brook, Tom; Korte, Gregory (March 22, 2018).

"Trump removes H.R. McMaster as national security adviser, replacing him with John Bolton" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ a b Swan, Jonathan (January 3, 2018).

"Keep your eye on John Bolton in 2018" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ Kamisar, Ben; Hagen, Lisa (January 24, 2018).

"GOP faces brutal Senate primary in Wisconsin" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ "Bolton PAC Launches New Ad to Benefit Nicholson for Senate" .

Associated Press . March 19, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 22, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ Keefe, Josh (April 9, 2018).

"Why Hasn't John Bolton Disbanded His Fundraising PACs? Conflict-of-Interest Questions Already Dog Trump Staffer" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2018 . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ Schwartz, Brian (April 4, 2018).

"John Bolton runs into potential ethics issues before he becomes Trump's national security advisor" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2018 . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ Buncombe, Andrew (January 6, 2023).

"John Bolton vows 2024 presidential run to stop Donald Trump securing White House" .

www.independent.co.uk . Retrieved January 10, 2023 .

^ Hartmann, Margaret (January 6, 2023).

"John Bolton Announces 2024's Most Ridiculous Presidential Bid" .

nymag.com .

Vox Media . Retrieved January 10, 2023 .

^ Strozewski, Zoe (January 6, 2023).

"John Bolton's Chances of Beating Trump in 2024 for GOP Nomination" .

www.newsweek.com . Newsweek Publishing LLC . Retrieved January 10, 2023 .

^ Tucker, Eric (June 16, 2020).

"Trump Administration Sues To Block Release Of Bolton Book" .

HuffPost . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ Hsu, Spencer (June 20, 2020).

"U.S. judge declines to block release of book by former national security adviser John Bolton" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ Baker, Peter (June 17, 2020).

"Bolton Says Trump Impeachment Inquiry Missed Other Troubling Episodes" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 23, 2020 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ Rummler, Orion (June 18, 2020).

"DOJ applies for emergency restraining order to block Bolton's book" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2020 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ Savage, Charlie (June 17, 2020).

"Justice Dept. Escalates Legal Fight With Bolton Over Book" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2020 . Retrieved June 19, 2020 .

^ "Pirated editions of Bolton's book appearing online" .

Politico .

Associated Press . Retrieved June 22, 2020 .

^ Libby Cathey, Bolton book releases Tuesday even as judge says his profits might be seized , ABC News (June 23, 2020).

^ Benner, Katie (September 15, 2020).

"Justice Dept. Opens Criminal Inquiry Into John Bolton's Book" .

The New York Times .

^ Schmidt, Michael S.; Benner, Katie (June 16, 2021).

"Justice Dept. Ends Criminal Inquiry, Lawsuit on John Bolton's Book" .

The New York Times .

^ "Bolton says Trump 'unfit' to be President in new memoir intro" .

Reuters .

^ "Lunch with the FT: John Bolton" .

Financial Times . October 19, 2007.

Archived from the original on July 22, 2018 . Retrieved July 22, 2018 .

^ Baker, Peter (September 10, 2019).

"Trump Ousts John Bolton as National Security Adviser" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2019 . Retrieved September 11, 2019 .

^ a b Hirsh, Michael (March 22, 2018).

"John Bolton, the Anti-McMaster" .

Politico Magazine .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Patrick, Stewart M. (March 23, 2018).

"John Bolton, Sovereignty Warrior" .

Council on Foreign Relations .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John R. (February 2, 2009).

"The Coming War on Sovereignty" .

American Enterprise Institute .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John R. (April 4, 2000).

"Should We Take Global Governance Seriously?" .

Chicago Journal of International Law .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Bosco, David (March 27, 2018).

"John Bolton Talks Tough on the U.N. What's His Record Really Like?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 28, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John (November 20, 2017).

"The Hague Aims for U.S. Soldiers" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on September 12, 2018 . Retrieved September 11, 2018 .

^ "US threatens to arrest ICC judges if they pursue Americans for Afghan war crimes" . France 24. September 10, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 14, 2019 . Retrieved January 13, 2019 .

^ Booth, Ken (2007).

Theory of World Security by Ken Booth . p. 433.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511840210 .

ISBN 9780511840210 .

Archived from the original on June 17, 2018 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Busby, Joshua W. (2010).

Moral Movements and Foreign Policy by Joshua W. Busby . p. 224.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511779893 .

ISBN 978-0511779893 .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Wippman, David (2004).

"The International Criminal Court" .

The Politics of International Law . Cambridge University Press. pp.

176– 177.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511491641.008 .

ISBN 9780521546713 .

S2CID 150923870 .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ "Background: John Bolton's Nomination to the U.N." NPR . June 3, 2005.

Archived from the original on September 19, 2005 . Retrieved January 19, 2018 .

^ Applebaum, Anne (March 9, 2005).

"Defending Bolton" .

The Washington Post . p. A21.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2011 . Retrieved August 15, 2006 .

^ Schweid, Barry (April 12, 2005).

"Bush's U.N. pick called into question" .

The Baylor Lariat .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2015.

^ Bolton, John (May 1997).

"America's Skepticism About the United Nations" .

Usinfo.state.gov . Archived from the original on November 14, 2008.

^ Calamur, Krishnadev (March 24, 2018).

"How John Bolton Views U.S. Allies and Adversaries" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John (October 27, 2010).

"Amb. John Bolton: A Stark Choice Between European Model Or the American Way" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Schumacher, Elizabeth (March 23, 2018).

"John Bolton: The Conservative Hawk Tapped by Trump" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John (June 24, 2016).

"Brexit Victory is a True Populist Revolt" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ Swan, Jonathan (January 20, 2019).

"John Bolton, Brexiteer" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2019 . Retrieved January 20, 2019 .

^ MacAskill, Andrew (March 19, 2019).

"Trump adviser Bolton says British establishment failing on Brexit" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2019 . Retrieved March 19, 2019 .

^ "John Bolton" .

Right Web – Institute for Policy Studies . November 21, 2014 . Retrieved January 12, 2015 .

^ Grove, Lloyd (March 28, 2011).

"Former U.S. Ambassador John Bolton Wants To Target Qaddafi For Assassination" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John (June 27, 2011).

"John Bolton on How Obama's Blunders in Libya Could Keep Gaddafi In Power" .

The Daily Beast .

^ Rothkopf, David (March 23, 2018).

"John Bolton's mustache is more qualified to be national security adviser than he is" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2019 . Retrieved May 18, 2019 .

^ Harp, Seth (November 26, 2018).

"Is the Trump Administration Pivoting the Fight in Syria Toward a War with Iran?" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2018 . Retrieved May 18, 2019 .

^ Zilbermints, Regina (May 16, 2019).

"Pelosi warns Trump on Iran: Only Congress can declare war" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2019 . Retrieved May 18, 2019 .

^ Wedel, Janine R. (2011).

Shadow Elite: How the World's New Power Brokers Undermine Democracy, Government, and the Free Market . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465022014 .

^ "John Bolton: Bush-era war hawk makes comeback" .

BBC News . March 22, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2018 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Terkel, Amanda (March 23, 2018).

"Trump Abandons His Anti-Iraq Campaign Stance And Hires A Key Warmonger" .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 – via HuffPost .

^ Berman, Eli; Lake, David A., eds. (2019).

Proxy Wars: Suppressing Violence through Local Agents . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. p. 260.

ISBN 978-1501733062 .

^ "Twenty years on, John Bolton is still defending the US's Iraq War" .

Al Jazeera . March 24, 2023.

^ a b Rudic, Filip (August 24, 2018).

"US Won't Oppose Serbia-Kosovo Border Changes – Bolton" .

Balkan Insight .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2018 . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ "Un casino pour trump le dernier plan d'alger pour relancer le referendum sur le sahara" .

fr.hespress.com . July 7, 2025 . Retrieved July 10, 2025 .

^ a b c "US: Who is John Bolton?" .

Al Jazeera . March 23, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 25, 2018 .

^ Mearsheimer, John J.; Walt, Stephen M. (2008).

The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy . Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0374531508 .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ a b Cortellessa, Eric (March 23, 2018).

"Bringing in Bolton, White House appears to stiffen against Palestinians, Iran" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved March 25, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John (November 8, 2017).

"Amb. John Bolton: America's embassy in Israel should be moved to Jerusalem – Now" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ "Testimony of John R. Bolton On The Implications for Moving the U.S. Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem Before the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Subcommittee on National Security" (PDF) . House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. November 8, 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved March 24, 2018 .

^ "Aznar, Trimble to launch new pro-Israel project. 'Friends of Israel' " .

Jerusalem Post . May 31, 2010. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010.

^ "John Bolton's Three State Solution for Palestine" . July 6, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 11, 2021 – via www.youtube.com.

^ "On Palestine, the gap between the US right and left is huge" .

Al Jazeera . December 2, 2023.

^ "John Bolton advises resettlement for Gazans as long-term solution" .

NewsNation . December 2, 2023.

^ "Former Trump national security advisor John Bolton says Gaza war is still 'in the very early stages' " .

CNBC . April 4, 2024.

^ a b Krieg, Gregory (March 23, 2018).

"John Bolton on: bombing Iran, North Korea, Russia and the Iraq War" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Tait, Robert; Pilkington, Ed (December 13, 2006).

"Move to bring genocide case against Ahmadinejad as Iran president repeats call to wipe out Israel" .

The Guardian . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ a b Lifhits, Jenna (March 22, 2018).

"John Bolton's Long History as a Russia Hawk" .

The Weekly Standard .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2019 . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

^ a b Filkins, Dexter (April 29, 2019).

"John Bolton on the Warpath" .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2019 . Retrieved May 1, 2019 .

^ Bolton, John R. (August 28, 2017).

"How to Get Out of the Iran Nuclear Deal" . National Review Online.

Archived from the original on December 17, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Schmitt, Eric; Barnes, Julian E. (May 13, 2019).

"White House Reviews Military Plans Against Iran, in Echoes of Iraq War" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 13, 2020 . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

^ Kim, Tong-hyung; Vasilyeva, Nataliya; Gannon, Kathy; Heller, Aron; Goodman, Joshua; Gambrell, Jon; Smith, Scott (September 12, 2019).

"Some world hot spots see possible openings in Bolton firing" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

^ "How Bolton, Netanyahu and Pompeo Sabotaged Trump's Dream of Talks With Iran" .

Haaretz . June 21, 2020.

^ "John Bolton Can Stomach Kim Jong Un's North Korea, but Not Iran" .

Foreign Policy . June 25, 2020.

^ "The Latest: Iran urges UN to condemn 'criminal act' by US" .

Associated Press . January 4, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2020 . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

^ Klatell, Jamie (June 12, 2011).

"Top lobby firm works to remove Iranian group from terrorist list" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2018 . Retrieved August 14, 2018 .

^ Peterson, Scott (August 8, 2011).

"Iranian group's big-money push to get off US terrorist list" .

Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2018 . Retrieved August 14, 2018 .

^ Masters, Jonathan (July 28, 2014).

"Mujahadeen-e-Khalq (MEK)" .

Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ Department Of State. The Office of Electronic Information, Bureau of Public Affairs.

"Background Information on Foreign Terrorist Organizations" .

2001-2009.state.gov .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2011 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report (OGE Form 278e) (PDF) , Al-Monitor, January 2018, archived (PDF) from the original on June 20, 2018 , retrieved June 13, 2018 – via U.S. Office of Government Ethics Certification ^ "Iran's Khamenei: some US officials are 'first-class idiots' " .

france24 . January 9, 2019.

^ Regencia, Ted.

"MEK's violent past looms over US lobby for regime change in Iran" .

Al Jazeera .

^ Kamali Dehghan, Saeed (July 2, 2018).

"Who is the Iranian group targeted by bombers and beloved of Trump allies?" .

The Guardian .

^ Richard Engel (May 25, 2018), "The MEK's man inside the White House" , MSNBC , On Assignment with Richard Engel, archived from the original on May 28, 2018 , retrieved May 26, 2018 ^ Suchkov, Maxim A. (March 23, 2018).

"Russians fear Bolton may doom Iran deal, stoke arms race" .

Al-Monitor .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ "White House, Kremlin agree on time and place for Trump-Putin summit" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2018 . Retrieved July 26, 2018 .

^ "Trump adviser Bolton says Putin invite to White House delayed until Mueller 'witch hunt' over" .

Nbcnews.com . July 26, 2018.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2018 . Retrieved July 26, 2018 .

^ Bolton, John (December 28, 2021).

"John Bolton: Now Is the Time For NATO To Stand Up To Russia" .

19FortyFive . Retrieved December 28, 2021 .

^ "Controversy surrounds US decision to send cluster munitions to Ukraine" .

The Hill . July 7, 2023. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023.

^ "Bolton hails Biden decision to send cluster bombs to Ukraine as 'an excellent idea' " .

The Hill . July 7, 2023.

^ Stewart, Phil (October 23, 2018).

"Trump's missile treaty pullout could escalate tension with China" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2019 . Retrieved August 13, 2019 .

^ "APNSA John Bolton Interview with Elena Chernenko, Kommersant" .

ru.usembassy.gov . Moscow, Russia: U.S. Embassy & Consulates in Russia. October 22, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 8, 2019 . Retrieved August 13, 2019 .

^ Cadell, Cate; Munroe, Tony (January 21, 2021).

"China imposes sanctions on 28 Trump-era officials including Pompeo" .

Reuters . Retrieved December 29, 2024 .

^ "Trump's national security adviser praises Brazil's far-right president-elect Bolsonaro as 'like-minded' " .

The Independent . November 2, 2018.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2018 . Retrieved November 2, 2018 .

^ Shaw, Adam (November 1, 2018).

"Bolton brands Cuba, Venezuela, Nicaragua a 'troika of tyranny' in sanctions rollout" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2018 . Retrieved November 16, 2018 .

^ Shesgreen, Deirdre (November 1, 2018).

"Bolton embraces Brazil's hard-right president as 'like-minded' leader, blasts others in region as 'troika of tyranny' " .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2018 . Retrieved November 16, 2018 .

^ Borger, Julian (November 1, 2018).

"Bolton praises Bolsonaro while declaring 'troika of tyranny' in Latin America" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2018 . Retrieved November 16, 2018 .

^ Wemple, Erik (December 28, 2012).

"Is John Bolton recanting his contention that Hillary Clinton is a faker?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 8, 2019 .

^ Abad-Santos, Alexander (December 18, 2012).

"Conservatives Think Hillary Clinton Is Faking Her Concussion" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2018 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ Gavin, Patrick (December 18, 2012).

"Some on right doubt Clinton injury" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ Eli Clifton (August 2, 2011).

"John Bolton's Pamela Geller And Robert Spencer Problem" .

ThinkProgress.org . Center for American Progress Action Fund.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2015 . Retrieved January 30, 2015 .

^ Kaczysnki, Andrew; McDermott, Nathan; Massie, Chris (March 23, 2018).

"John Bolton Has Decade-Long Association with Anti-Islam Activist Pamela Geller" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 23, 2018 .

^ Pamela Geller; Robert Spencer; (foreword John Bolton) (2010).

The Post-American Presidency: The Obama Administration's War on America . Simon and Schuster. p. xii.

ISBN 978-1439189900 . Retrieved November 9, 2016 – via Google Books .

^ "Member of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) Charged with Plot to Murder the Former National Security Advisor" . August 10, 2022.

^ Willmer, Sabrina; Jacobs, Jennifer (August 10, 2022).

"Bolton Was Target of Murder Plot in US Iranian Guard Case" .

^ Everson, Zach (January 28, 2022).

"The Secret Service Is Watching Former Ambassador John Bolton's House" .

Forbes . Retrieved July 2, 2023 .

^ Collins, Kaitlan.

"Trump terminates John Bolton's security detail within hours of taking office" .

CNN . Retrieved January 21, 2025 .

^ Haberman, Maggie ; Aleaziz, Hamed (January 21, 2025).

"Trump Revokes John Bolton's Secret Service Protection" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2025 . Retrieved January 25, 2025 .

^ Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (January 24, 2025).

John Bolton, Anthony Fauci security detail revoked as Trump says 'they can hire their own' . Retrieved January 25, 2025 – via YouTube.

^ a b Farrell, Paul (September 10, 2019).

"Gretchen Smith Bolton, John Bolton's Wife: 5 Fast Facts You Need to Know" .

Heavy.com . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ Millstein, Seth (March 23, 2018).

"Who Is Gretchen Smith Bolton? John Bolton's Wife Shares An Alma Mater With Trump" .

Bustle .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2018 . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ Bolton, John R. (August 15, 1997).

"Re: MUR 4250" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 20, 2021.

9107 Fernwood Rd Bethesda, MD 20817 ^ DeMuth, Christopher (November 13, 2007).

"Surrender is Not an Option – Transcript" .

American Enterprise Institute . Archived from the original on April 21, 2009.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to John Bolton .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to John R. Bolton .

Profile Archived January 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine at American Enterprise Institute Appearances on C-SPAN John Bolton collected news and commentary at The New York Times The Creation, Fall, Rise, and Fall of the United Nations John Bolton's chapter from the Cato Institute book, Delusions of Grandeur: The United Nations and Global Intervention John Bolton interviewed by Jon Stewart on "The Daily Show" from March 20, 2007 John Bolton interview by Neal Conan on Talk of the Nation, May 1, 2007 Audio interview with National Review Online and article Offices Legal offices Preceded by Richard K. Willard United States Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Division 1988–1989 Succeeded by Stuart M. Gerson Political offices Preceded by Richard Williamson Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs 1989–1993 Succeeded by Doug Bennet Preceded by John Holum Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Affairs 2001–2005 Succeeded by Robert Joseph Preceded by H. R. McMaster National Security Advisor 2018–2019 Succeeded by Charles Kupperman Acting Diplomatic posts Preceded by Anne Patterson Acting United States Ambassador to the United Nations 2005–2006 Succeeded by Alejandro Wolff Acting Links to related articles v t e United States assistant secretaries of state for international organization affairs Rusk Hickerson Murphy Key Wilcox Cleveland Sisco De Palma Popper Buffum Lewis Maynes McCall Abrams Newell Keyes Williamson Bolton Bennet Lyman Welch Holmes Silverberg Hook Brimmer Crocker Moley Sison v t e United States under secretaries of state for arms control and international security Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs 1972–1993 Tarr Donaldson Maw Benson Nimetz Buckley Schneider Derwinski Bartholomew Wisner Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Affairs 1993–present Davis Holum Bolton Joseph Rood (Acting) Tauscher Gottemoeller Thompson Jenkins v t e United States ambassadors to the United Nations Stettinius Johnson Austin Lodge Wadsworth Stevenson Goldberg Ball Wiggins Yost Bush Scali Moynihan Scranton Young McHenry Kirkpatrick Walters Pickering Perkins Albright Richardson Burleigh Holbrooke Cunningham Negroponte Danforth Patterson Bolton Wolff Khalilzad Rice DiCarlo Power Sison Haley Cohen Craft Mills Thomas-Greenfield Shea Italics indicates acting v t e United States national security advisors Cutler Anderson Jackson (acting) Cutler Gray Bundy Rostow Kissinger Scowcroft Brzezinski Allen Nance (acting) Clark McFarlane Poindexter Carlucci Powell Scowcroft Lake Berger C. Rice Hadley Jones Donilon S. Rice Flynn Kellogg (acting) McMaster Bolton Kupperman (acting) O'Brien Sullivan Waltz Rubio (acting) v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Bolton&oldid=1301884358 " Categories : John Bolton 1948 births Living people 20th-century American lawyers 20th-century American politicians 20th-century Lutherans 21st-century American diplomats 21st-century American lawyers 21st-century American memoirists 21st-century Lutherans American anti-communists American Enterprise Institute American individuals subject to Chinese sanctions American nationalists American political commentators Critics of Islamism Diplomats from Maryland George H. W. Bush administration personnel George W. Bush administration personnel Lawyers from Baltimore Lutherans from Maryland Maryland National Guard personnel Maryland Republicans Opposition to Viktor Orbán Opposition to Vladimir Putin People associated with Covington & Burling People associated with Kirkland & Ellis People from Bethesda, Maryland People from Owings Mills, Maryland Permanent representatives of the United States to the United Nations Reagan administration personnel Recess appointments during the George W. Bush administration First Trump administration personnel United States Army reservists United States Army soldiers United States assistant attorneys general for the Civil Division United States Department of State officials United States national security advisors Yale Law School alumni Yale College alumni Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2023 Articles with hAudio microformats Articles to be expanded from March 2018 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 06:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Bolton 42 languages Add topic

