Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Empirical formula 2.2 Molecular formula 2.3 Structural formula 2.4 Condensed formula 2.5 Chemical names in answer to limitations of chemical formulae 2.6 Polymers in condensed formulae 2.7 Ions in condensed formulae 3 Isotopes 4 Trapped atoms 5 Non-stoichiometric chemical formulae 6 General forms for organic compounds 7 Hill system 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Chemical formula 99 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла سرائیکی Scots Seeltersk Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Compact notation for chemical compounds An editor has determined that sufficient sources exist to establish the subject's notability .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chemical formula" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Al 2 ( SO 4 ) 3 {\displaystyle {\ce {Al_2(SO_4)_3}}} Chemical formula for aluminium sulfate H − − C | H H | − − C | H H | − − C | H H | − − C | H H | − − H {\displaystyle {\ce {H-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-H}}} Structural formula for butane A chemical formula is a way of  presenting information about the chemical proportions of atoms that constitute a particular chemical compound or molecule , using chemical element symbols, numbers, and sometimes also other symbols, such as parentheses, dashes, brackets, commas and plus (+) and minus (−) signs. These are limited to a single typographic line of symbols, which may include subscripts and superscripts . A chemical formula is not a chemical name since it does not contain any words. Although a chemical formula may imply certain simple chemical structures , it is not the same as a full chemical structural formula . Chemical formulae can fully specify the structure of only the simplest of molecules and chemical substances , and are generally more limited in power than chemical names and structural formulae.

The simplest types of chemical formulae are called empirical formulae , which use letters and numbers indicating the numerical proportions of atoms of each type.

Molecular formulae indicate the simple numbers of each type of atom in a molecule, with no information on structure. For example, the empirical formula for glucose is CH 2 O (twice as many hydrogen atoms as carbon and oxygen ), while its molecular formula is C 6 H 12 O 6 (12 hydrogen atoms, six carbon and oxygen atoms).

Sometimes a chemical formula is complicated by being written as a condensed formula (or condensed molecular formula, occasionally called a "semi-structural formula"), which conveys additional information about the particular ways in which the atoms are chemically bonded together, either in covalent bonds , ionic bonds , or various combinations of these types. This is possible if the relevant bonding is easy to show in one dimension. An example is the condensed molecular/chemical formula for ethanol , which is CH 3 −CH 2 −OH or CH 3 CH 2 OH . However, even a condensed chemical formula is necessarily limited in its ability to show complex bonding relationships between atoms, especially atoms that have bonds to four or more different substituents .

Since a chemical formula must be expressed as a single line of chemical element symbols , it often cannot be as informative as a true structural formula, which is a graphical representation of the spatial relationship between atoms in chemical compounds (see for example the figure for butane structural and chemical formulae, at right). For reasons of structural complexity, a single condensed chemical formula (or semi-structural formula) may correspond to different molecules, known as isomers . For example, glucose shares its molecular formula C 6 H 12 O 6 with a number of other sugars , including fructose , galactose and mannose . Linear equivalent chemical names exist that can and do specify uniquely any complex structural formula (see chemical nomenclature ), but such names must use many terms (words), rather than the simple element symbols, numbers, and simple typographical symbols that define a chemical formula.

Chemical formulae may be used in chemical equations to describe chemical reactions and other chemical transformations, such as the dissolving of ionic compounds into solution. While, as noted, chemical formulae do not have the full power of structural formulae to show chemical relationships between atoms, they are sufficient to keep track of numbers of atoms and numbers of electrical charges in chemical reactions, thus balancing chemical equations so that these equations can be used in chemical problems involving conservation of atoms, and conservation of electric charge.

Overview A chemical formula identifies each constituent element by its chemical symbol and indicates the proportionate number of atoms of each element. In empirical formulae, these proportions begin with a key element and then assign numbers of atoms of the other elements in the compound, by ratios to the key element. For molecular compounds, these ratio numbers can all be expressed as whole numbers. For example, the empirical formula of ethanol may be written C 2 H 6 O because the molecules of ethanol all contain two carbon atoms, six hydrogen atoms, and one oxygen atom. Some types of ionic compounds, however, cannot be written with entirely whole-number empirical formulae. An example is boron carbide , whose formula of CB n is a variable non-whole number ratio with n ranging from over 4 to more than 6.5.

When the chemical compound of the formula consists of simple molecules , chemical formulae often employ ways to suggest the structure of the molecule. These types of formulae are variously known as molecular formulae and condensed formulae . A molecular formula enumerates the number of atoms to reflect those in the molecule, so that the molecular formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 rather than the glucose empirical formula, which is CH 2 O . However, except for very simple substances, molecular chemical formulae lack needed structural information, and are ambiguous.

For simple molecules, a condensed (or semi-structural) formula is a type of chemical formula that may fully imply a correct structural formula. For example, ethanol may be represented by the condensed chemical formula CH 3 CH 2 OH , and dimethyl ether by the condensed formula CH 3 OCH 3 . These two molecules have the same empirical and molecular formulae ( C 2 H 6 O ), but may be differentiated by the condensed formulae shown, which are sufficient to represent the full structure of these simple organic compounds .

Condensed chemical formulae may also be used to represent ionic compounds that do not exist as discrete molecules, but nonetheless do contain covalently bound clusters within them. These polyatomic ions are groups of atoms that are covalently bound together and have an overall ionic charge, such as the sulfate [SO 4 ] 2− ion. Each polyatomic ion in a compound is written individually in order to illustrate the separate groupings. For example, the compound dichlorine hexoxide has an empirical formula ClO 3 , and molecular formula Cl 2 O 6 , but in liquid or solid forms, this compound is more correctly shown by an ionic condensed formula [ClO 2 ] + [ClO 4 ] − , which illustrates that this compound consists of [ClO 2 ] + ions and [ClO 4 ] − ions. In such cases, the condensed formula only need be complex enough to show at least one of each ionic species.

Chemical formulae as described here are distinct from the far more complex chemical systematic names that are used in various systems of chemical nomenclature . For example, one systematic name for glucose is (2 R ,3 S ,4 R ,5 R )-2,3,4,5,6-pentahydroxyhexanal. This name, interpreted by the rules behind it, fully specifies glucose's structural formula, but the name is not a chemical formula as usually understood, and uses terms and words not used in chemical formulae. Such names, unlike basic formulae, may be able to represent full structural formulae without graphs.

Types Empirical formula Main article: Empirical formula In chemistry , the empirical formula of a chemical is a simple expression of the relative number of each type of atom or ratio of the elements in the compound. Empirical formulae are the standard for ionic compounds , such as CaCl 2 , and for macromolecules, such as SiO 2 . An empirical formula makes no reference to isomerism , structure, or absolute number of atoms. The term empirical refers to the process of elemental analysis , a technique of analytical chemistry used to determine the relative percent composition of a pure chemical substance by element.

For example, hexane has a molecular formula of C 6 H 14 , and (for one of its isomers, n-hexane) a structural formula CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 , implying that it has a chain structure of 6 carbon atoms, and 14 hydrogen atoms. However, the empirical formula for hexane is C 3 H 7 . Likewise the empirical formula for hydrogen peroxide , H 2 O 2 , is simply HO , expressing the 1:1 ratio of component elements.

Formaldehyde and acetic acid have the same empirical formula, CH 2 O . This is also the molecular formula for formaldehyde, but acetic acid has double the number of atoms.

Like the other formula types detailed below, an empirical formula shows the number of elements in a molecule, and determines whether it is a binary compound , ternary compound , quaternary compound , or has even more elements.

Molecular formula Isobutane structural formula Molecular formula: C 4 H 10 Condensed formula: (CH 3 ) 3 CH H − − C | H H | − − C | H H | − − C | H H | − − C | H H | − − H {\displaystyle {\ce {H-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-{\overset {\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset {| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}}-H}}} n -Butane structural formula Molecular formula: C 4 H 10 Condensed formula: CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 Molecular formulae simply indicate the numbers of each type of atom in a molecule of a molecular substance. They are the same as empirical formulae for molecules that only have one atom of a particular type, but otherwise may have larger numbers. An example of the difference is the empirical formula for glucose, which is CH 2 O ( ratio 1:2:1), while its molecular formula is C 6 H 12 O 6 ( number of atoms 6:12:6). For water, both formulae are H 2 O . A molecular formula provides more information about a molecule than its empirical formula, but is more difficult to establish.

Structural formula Main article: Structural formula In addition to indicating the number of atoms of each elementa molecule, a structural formula indicates how the atoms are organized, and shows (or implies) the chemical bonds between the atoms. There are multiple types of structural formulas focused on different aspects of the molecular structure.

The two diagrams show two molecules which are structural isomers of each other, since they both have the same molecular formula C 4 H 10 , but they have different structural formulas as shown.

Condensed formula Main article: Condensed formula The connectivity of a molecule often has a strong influence on its physical and chemical properties and behavior. Two molecules composed of the same numbers of the same types of atoms (i.e. a pair of isomers ) might have completely different chemical and/or physical properties if the atoms are connected differently or in different positions. In such cases, a structural formula is useful, as it illustrates which atoms are bonded to which other ones. From the connectivity, it is often possible to deduce the approximate shape of the molecule .

A condensed (or semi-structural) formula may represent the types and spatial arrangement of bonds in a simple chemical substance, though it does not necessarily specify isomers or complex structures. For example, ethane consists of two carbon atoms single-bonded to each other, with each carbon atom having three hydrogen atoms bonded to it. Its chemical formula can be rendered as CH 3 CH 3 . In ethylene there is a double bond between the carbon atoms (and thus each carbon only has two hydrogens), therefore the chemical formula may be written: CH 2 CH 2 , and the fact that there is a double bond between the carbons is implicit because carbon has a valence of four. However, a more explicit method is to write H 2 C=CH 2 or less commonly H 2 C::CH 2 . The two lines (or two pairs of dots) indicate that a double bond connects the atoms on either side of them.

A triple bond may be expressed with three lines ( HC≡CH ) or three pairs of dots ( HC:::CH ), and if there may be ambiguity, a single line or pair of dots may be used to indicate a single bond.

Molecules with multiple functional groups that are the same may be expressed by enclosing the repeated group in round brackets . For example, isobutane may be written (CH 3 ) 3 CH . This condensed structural formula implies a different connectivity from other molecules that can be formed using the same atoms in the same proportions ( isomers ). The formula (CH 3 ) 3 CH implies a central carbon atom connected to one hydrogen atom and three methyl groups ( CH 3 ). The same number of atoms of each element (10 hydrogens and 4 carbons, or C 4 H 10 ) may be used to make a straight chain molecule, n - butane : CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 .

Chemical names in answer to limitations of chemical formulae Main article: Chemical nomenclature The alkene called but-2-ene has two isomers, which the chemical formula CH 3 CH=CHCH 3 does not identify. The relative position of the two methyl groups must be indicated by additional notation denoting whether the methyl groups are on the same side of the double bond ( cis or Z ) or on the opposite sides from each other ( trans or E ).

[ 1 ] As noted above, in order to represent the full structural formulae of many complex organic and inorganic compounds, chemical nomenclature may be needed which goes well beyond the available resources used above in simple condensed formulae. See IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry and IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry 2005 for examples. In addition, linear naming systems such as International Chemical Identifier (InChI) allow a computer to construct a structural formula, and simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) allows a more human-readable ASCII input. However, all these nomenclature systems go beyond the standards of chemical formulae, and technically are chemical naming systems, not formula systems.

[ 2 ] Polymers in condensed formulae For polymers in condensed chemical formulae, parentheses are placed around the repeating unit. For example, a hydrocarbon molecule that is described as CH 3 (CH 2 ) 50 CH 3 , is a molecule with fifty repeating units. If the number of repeating units is unknown or variable, the letter n may be used to indicate this formula: CH 3 (CH 2 ) n CH 3 .

Ions in condensed formulae For ions , the charge on a particular atom may be denoted with a right-hand superscript. For example, Na + , or Cu 2+ . The total charge on a charged molecule or a polyatomic ion may also be shown in this way, such as for hydronium , H 3 O + , or sulfate , SO 2− 4 . Here + and − are used in place of +1 and −1, respectively.

For more complex ions, brackets [ ] are often used to enclose the ionic formula, as in [B 12 H 12 ] 2− , which is found in compounds such as caesium dodecaborate , Cs 2 [B 12 H 12 ] . Parentheses ( ) can be nested inside brackets to indicate a repeating unit, as in Hexamminecobalt(III) chloride , [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] 3+ Cl − 3 . Here, (NH 3 ) 6 indicates that the ion contains six ammine groups ( NH 3 ) bonded to cobalt , and [ ] encloses the entire formula of the ion with charge +3.

[ further explanation needed ] This is strictly optional; a chemical formula is valid with or without ionization information, and Hexamminecobalt(III) chloride may be written as [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] 3+ Cl − 3 or [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ]Cl 3 . Brackets, like parentheses, behave in chemistry as they do in mathematics, grouping terms together – they are not specifically employed only for ionization states. In the latter case here, the parentheses indicate 6 groups all of the same shape, bonded to another group of size 1 (the cobalt atom), and then the entire bundle, as a group, is bonded to 3 chlorine atoms. In the former case, it is clearer that the bond connecting the chlorines is ionic , rather than covalent .

Isotopes Although isotopes are more relevant to nuclear chemistry or stable isotope chemistry than to conventional chemistry, different isotopes may be indicated with a prefixed superscript in a chemical formula. For example, the phosphate ion containing radioactive phosphorus-32 is [ 32 PO 4 ] 3− . Also a study involving stable isotope ratios might include the molecule 18 O 16 O .

A left-hand subscript is sometimes used redundantly to indicate the atomic number . For example, 8 O 2 for dioxygen, and 16 8 O 2 for the most abundant isotopic species of dioxygen. This is convenient when writing equations for nuclear reactions , in order to show the balance of charge more clearly.

Trapped atoms Traditional formula: MC 60 The "@" notation: M@C 60 Main article: Endohedral fullerene The @ symbol ( at sign ) indicates an atom or molecule trapped inside a cage but not chemically bound to it. For example, a buckminsterfullerene ( C 60 ) with an atom (M) would simply be represented as MC 60 regardless of whether M was inside the fullerene without chemical bonding or outside, bound to one of the carbon atoms. Using the @ symbol, this would be denoted M@C 60 if M was inside the carbon network. A non-fullerene example is [As@Ni 12 As 20 ] 3− , an ion in which one arsenic (As) atom is trapped in a cage formed by the other 32 atoms.

This notation was proposed in 1991 [ 3 ] with the discovery of fullerene cages ( endohedral fullerenes ), which can trap atoms such as La to form, for example, La@C 60 or La@C 82 . The choice of the symbol has been explained by the authors as being concise, readily printed and transmitted electronically (the at sign is included in ASCII , which most modern character encoding schemes are based on), and the visual aspects suggesting the structure of an endohedral fullerene.

Non-stoichiometric chemical formulae Main article: Non-stoichiometric compound Chemical formulae most often use integers for each element. However, there is a class of compounds, called non-stoichiometric compounds , that cannot be represented by small integers. Such a formula might be written using decimal fractions , as in Fe 0.95 O , or it might include a variable part represented by a letter, as in Fe 1− x O , where x is normally much less than 1.

General forms for organic compounds A chemical formula used for a series of compounds that differ from each other by a constant unit is called a general formula . It generates a homologous series of chemical formulae. For example, alcohols may be represented by the formula C n H 2 n + 1 OH ( n ≥  1), giving the homologs methanol , ethanol , propanol for 1 ≤ n ≤ 3.

Hill system The Hill system (or Hill notation) is a system of writing empirical chemical formulae, molecular chemical formulae and components of a condensed formula such that the number of carbon atoms in a molecule is indicated first, the number of hydrogen atoms next, and then the number of all other chemical elements subsequently, in alphabetical order of the chemical symbols . When the formula contains no carbon,  all the elements, including hydrogen, are listed alphabetically.

By sorting formulae according to the number of atoms of each element present in the formula according to these rules, with differences in earlier elements or numbers being treated as more significant than differences in any later element or number—like sorting text strings into lexicographical order —it is possible to collate chemical formulae into what is known as Hill system order.

The Hill system was first published by Edwin A. Hill of the United States Patent and Trademark Office in 1900.

[ 4 ] It is the most commonly used system in chemical databases and printed indexes to sort lists of compounds.

[ 5 ] A list of formulae in Hill system order is arranged alphabetically, as above, with single-letter elements coming before two-letter symbols when the symbols begin with the same letter (so "B" comes before "Be", which comes before "Br").

[ 5 ] The following example formulae are written using the Hill system, and listed in Hill order: BrClH 2 Si BrI CCl 4 CH 3 I C 2 H 5 Br H 2 O 4 S See also Chemistry portal Formula unit Glossary of chemical formulae Nuclear notation Periodic table Skeletal formula Simplified molecular-input line-entry system Notes References Wikidata has the property: chemical formula (P274) (see uses ) ^ Burrows, Andrew. (2013-03-21).

Chemistry³ : introducing inorganic, organic and physical chemistry (Second ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-969185-2 .

OCLC 818450212 .

^ Miles, Linda.

"LibGuides: CHE 120 - Introduction to Organic Chemistry - Textbook: Chapter 1 - Organic Chemistry Review / Hydrocarbons" .

guides.hostos.cuny.edu . Retrieved 2024-07-13 .

^ Chai, Yan; Guo, Ting; Jin, Changming; Haufler, Robert E.; Chibante, L. P. Felipe; Fure, Jan; Wang, Lihong; Alford, J. Michael; Smalley, Richard E. (1991). "Fullerenes wlth Metals Inside".

Journal of Physical Chemistry .

95 (20): 7564– 7568.

doi : 10.1021/j100173a002 .

^ Edwin A. Hill (1900).

"On a system of indexing chemical literature; Adopted by the Classification Division of the U.S. Patent Office" .

J. Am. Chem. Soc.

22 (8): 478– 494.

Bibcode : 1900JAChS..22..478H .

doi : 10.1021/ja02046a005 .

hdl : 2027/uiug.30112063986233 .

^ a b Wiggins, Gary. (1991).

Chemical Information Sources.

New York: McGraw Hill. p. 120.

Petrucci, Ralph H.; Harwood, William S.; Herring, F. Geoffrey (2002).

"3" .

General chemistry: principles and modern applications (8th ed.). Upper Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-014329-7 .

LCCN 2001032331 .

OCLC 46872308 .

External links Media related to Chemical formulas at Wikimedia Commons Hill notation example , from the University of Massachusetts Lowell libraries, including how to sort into Hill system order Molecular formula calculation applying Hill notation . The library calculating Hill notation is available on npm .

v t e Molecular visualization Chemical formulas Non-structural formulas Empirical formula Molecular formula Structural formulas Lewis structure Condensed formula Skeletal formula Molecular models Ball-and-stick model Space-filling model CPK coloring Other ways Molecular graph SMILES InChl v t e Molecules detected in outer space Molecules Diatomic Aluminium monochloride Aluminium monofluoride Aluminium(II) oxide Argonium Carbon cation Carbon monophosphide Carbon monosulfide Carbon monoxide Cyano radical Diatomic carbon Fluoromethylidynium Helium hydride ion Hydrogen chloride Hydrogen fluoride Hydrogen (molecular) Hydroxyl radical Imidogen Iron(II) oxide Magnesium monohydride Methylidyne radical Nitric oxide Nitrogen (molecular) Oxygen (molecular) Phosphorus monoxide Phosphorus mononitride Potassium chloride Silicon carbide Silicon monoxide Silicon monosulfide Sodium chloride Sodium iodide Sulfanyl Sulfur mononitride Sulfur monoxide Titanium(II) oxide Triatomic Aluminium(I) hydroxide Aluminium isocyanide Amino radical Carbon dioxide Carbonyl sulfide CCP radical Chloronium Diazenylium Dicarbon monoxide Disilicon carbide Ethynyl radical Formyl radical Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) Hydrogen isocyanide (HNC) Hydrogen sulfide Hydroperoxyl Iron cyanide Isoformyl Magnesium cyanide Magnesium isocyanide Methylene Methylidynephosphane N 2 H + Nitrous oxide Nitroxyl Ozone Potassium cyanide Sodium cyanide Sodium hydroxide Silicon carbonitride c-Silicon dicarbide SiNC Sulfur dioxide Thioformyl Thioxoethenylidene Titanium dioxide Tricarbon Trihydrogen cation Water Four atoms Acetylene Ammonia Cyanoethynyl Formaldehyde Fulminic acid HCCN Hydrogen peroxide Hydromagnesium isocyanide Isocyanic acid Isothiocyanic acid Ketenyl Methyl cation Methyl radical Methylene amidogen Propynylidyne Protonated carbon dioxide Protonated hydrogen cyanide Silicon tricarbide Thiocyanic acid Thioformaldehyde Tricarbon monosulfide Tricarbon monoxide Five atoms Ammonium ion Butadiynyl Carbodiimide Cyanamide Cyanoacetylene Cyanoformaldehyde Cyanomethyl Cyclopropenylidene Formic acid Isocyanoacetylene Ketene Methane Methoxy radical Methylenimine Propadienylidene Protonated formaldehyde Silane Silicon-carbide cluster Six atoms Acetonitrile Cyanobutadiynyl radical Cyclopropenone Diacetylene E-Cyanomethanimine Ethylene Formamide HC 4 N Ketenimine Methanethiol Methanol Methyl isocyanide Pentynylidyne Propynal Protonated cyanoacetylene Seven atoms Acetaldehyde Acrylonitrile Vinyl cyanide Cyanodiacetylene Ethylene oxide Glycolonitrile Hexatriynyl radical Methyl isocyanate Methylamine Propyne Vinyl alcohol Eight atoms Acetic acid Acrolein Aminoacetonitrile Cyanoallene Ethanimine Glycolaldehyde Hexapentaenylidene Methyl formate Methylcyanoacetylene Nine atoms Acetamide Cyanohexatriyne Dimethyl ether Ethanethiol Ethanol Methyldiacetylene N-Methylformamide Octatetraynyl radical Propene Propionitrile Ten atoms or more Acetone Benzene Benzonitrile Buckminsterfullerene (C 60 , C 60 + , fullerene, buckyball) Butyronitrile C 70 fullerene Cyanodecapentayne Ethyl formate Ethylene glycol Heptatrienyl radical Methyl acetate Methyl-cyano-diacetylene Methyltriacetylene Propionaldehyde Pyrimidine Deuterated molecules Ammonia Ammonium ion Formaldehyde Formyl radical Heavy water Hydrogen cyanide Hydrogen deuteride Hydrogen isocyanide N 2 D + Propyne Trihydrogen cation Unconfirmed Anthracene Dihydroxyacetone Glycine Graphene H 2 NCO + Hemolithin Linear C 5 Methoxyethane Naphthalene cation Phosphine Pyrene Silylidyne Related Abiogenesis Astrobiology Astrochemistry Atomic and molecular astrophysics Chemical formula Circumstellar dust Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Cosmic ray Cosmochemistry Diffuse interstellar band Earliest known life forms Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial liquid water Forbidden mechanism Homochirality Intergalactic dust Interplanetary medium Interstellar medium Iron–sulfur world theory Kerogen Molecules in stars Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Organic compound Outer space PAH world hypothesis Photodissociation region Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) Pseudo-panspermia RNA world hypothesis Spectroscopy Tholin Category:Astrochemistry Outer space portal Astronomy portal Chemistry portal Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_formula&oldid=1287927047 " Categories : Chemical formulas Chemical nomenclature Notation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2012 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages that use a deprecated format of the chem tags This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 09:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical formula 99 languages Add topic

