Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Popular culture 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Sigillography 39 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Türkmençe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of seals This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sigillography" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 19th-century drawings of the seal of Richard de Clare ("Strongbow"), Earl of Pembroke (1130–1176) Sigillography , also known by its Greek-derived name, sphragistics , is the scholarly discipline that studies the wax , lead, clay, and other seals used to authenticate archival documents. It investigates not only aspects of the artistic design and production of seals (both matrices and impressions), but also considers the legal, administrative and social contexts in which they were used. It has links to diplomatics , heraldry , social history , and the history of art , and is regarded as one of the auxiliary sciences of history . A student of seals is known as a sigillographer .

Etymology [ edit ] The word sigillography derives from the Latin word sigillum , meaning 'seal', and the Greek suffix γραφή , meaning 'description'. It was effectively coined in Italian (as sigillografia ) by Anton Stefano Cartari in 1682.

[ 1 ] It entered English at a much later date: the earliest instances recorded by the Oxford English Dictionary date from 1879 ( sigillography ) and 1882 ( sigillographer ).

[ 2 ] The alternative term, sphragistics , is derived from the Greek word σϕρᾱγίς , meaning 'seal': this word is first recorded in English in 1836.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Title page of Olivier de Wree 's Sigilla comitum Flandriae (1639) Antiquaries such as Thomas Elmham and John Rous began to record and to discuss the historic use of seals in the 15th century. In the 16th and 17th centuries the consideration of seals became a fairly widespread antiquarian activity. Notable early students and collectors included Robert Glover , John Dee , Sir Robert Cotton and Nicolas-Claude de Peiresc .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The first published treatises dedicated to seals included Giorgio Longo's De anulis signatoriis antiquorum (Milan, 1615); Olivier de Wree 's Sigilla comitum Flandriae (Bruges, 1639); and Theodorus Hoepingk's De sigillorum prisco et novo jure tractatus (Nuremberg, 1642). Especially influential in shaping the discipline were Jean Mabillon 's De re diplomatica (1681) and Johann Michael Heineccius ' De veteribus Germanorum aliarumque nationum sigillis (1710). In England, John Anstis compiled a substantial study titled "Aspilogia", but this remained in manuscript: the first work to reach print was a much slighter tract by John Lewis, Dissertation on the Antiquity and Use of Seals in England (1740).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In the second half of the 19th century sigillography was further developed by German scholars including Hermann Grotefend and Otto Posse , and French scholars including Louis Douët d'Arcq and Germain Demay .

Sigillography is also an important subdiscipline of Byzantine studies , involving the study of Byzantine lead seal impressions and the text and images thereon. Its importance derives from both the scarcity of surviving Byzantine documents themselves, and from the large number (over 40,000) of extant seals.

[ 10 ] One of the largest compendiums of Byzantine seals can be found in the large volume by Gustave Schlumberger , Sigillographie de l'empire Byzantin , published in 1904.

[ 11 ] The first international colloquium on Byzantine sigillography was held at Dumbarton Oaks in  August 1986.

[ 12 ] Popular culture [ edit ] Sigillography features in the plot of King Ottokar's Sceptre (1939/1947), one of The Adventures of Tintin . Tintin accompanies Professor Alembick , a sigillographer, on a research trip to the fictional Balkan nation of Syldavia , only to become embroiled in a plot to dethrone the King.

See also [ edit ] Heraldry Emblem References [ edit ] ^ Sandri, Leopoldo (1955). "La 'Sigillografia Universale' di Anton Stefano Cartari: contributo agli studi di sigillografia nel sec. XVII".

Rassegna degli Archivi di Stato .

15 : 141– 88.

^ "sigillography, n." .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "sphragistic, n. and adj." .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Harris, Oliver D. (2019). "Fragments of the past: the early antiquarian perception and study of seals in England". In Whatley, Laura (ed.).

A Companion to Seals in the Middle Ages . Leiden: Brill. pp.

129– 54.

ISBN 978-90-04-38064-6 .

^ Harvey, P. D. A.; McGuinness, Andrew (1996).

A Guide to British Medieval Seals . London: British Library and Public Record Office. pp.

22– 26.

ISBN 0-7123-0410-X .

^ New, Elizabeth (2010).

Seals and Sealing Practices . Archives and the User. Vol. 11. London: British Records Association . pp.

29– 32.

ISBN 978-0-900222-15-3 .

^ Bascapé, Giacomo C. (1969). "Storia della sigillografia". In Bascapé, Giacomo C.; Welber, Mariano (eds.).

Sigillografia: il sigillo nella diplomatica, nel diritto, nella storia, nell'arte . Vol. 1. (Milan: Antonino Giuffré. pp.

35– 51.

^ Harvey and McGuinness 1996, pp. 24–25.

^ Harris 2019, p. 148.

^ Kazhdan, Alexander, ed. (1991).

Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium . Oxford University Press. pp.

1894– 1895.

ISBN 978-0-19-504652-6 .

^ Schlumberger, Gustave , ed. (1904).

Sigillographie de l'empire Byzantin . Ernest Leroux.

^ Oikonomidès Nicolas, Dumbarton Oaks International Colloquium on Byzantine Sigillography and International Congress of Byzantine Studies. 1987.

Studies in Byzantine Sigillography.

Washington D.C: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection.

Look up sigillography or sphragistics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sigillography&oldid=1289736386 " Categories : Historiography Seals (insignia) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Articles needing additional references from October 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sigillography 39 languages Add topic

