Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classifications of respiration Toggle Classifications of respiration subsection 1.1 By species 1.2 By mechanism 1.3 By experiments 1.4 By intensive care and emergency medicine 1.5 By other medical topics 2 Additional images 3 See also 4 References 5 External links 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Respiration (physiology) 55 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kernowek Kurdî ລາວ Lëtzebuergesch Lingála മലയാളം मराठी Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Русский Sicilianu Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Exchange of gases between environment and tissues For other uses, see Respiration (disambiguation) .

In physiology , respiration is the transport of oxygen from the outside environment to the cells within tissues , and the removal of carbon dioxide in the opposite direction to the environment by a respiratory system .

[ 1 ] The physiological definition of respiration differs from the biochemical definition , which refers to a metabolic process by which an organism obtains energy (in the form of ATP and NADPH) [ 2 ] by oxidizing nutrients and releasing waste products. Although physiologic respiration is necessary to sustain cellular respiration and thus life in animals, the processes are distinct: cellular respiration takes place in individual cells of the organism, while physiologic respiration concerns the diffusion and transport of metabolites between the organism and the external environment.

Exchange of gases in the lung occurs by ventilation and perfusion.

[ 1 ] Ventilation refers to the in-and-out movement of air of the lungs and perfusion is the circulation of blood in the pulmonary capillaries.

[ 1 ] In mammals, physiological respiration involves respiratory cycles of inhaled and exhaled breaths . Inhalation (breathing in) is usually an active movement that brings air into the lungs where the process of gas exchange takes place between the air in the alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries . Contraction of the diaphragm muscle causes a pressure variation, which is equal to the pressures caused by elastic, resistive and inertial components of the respiratory system . In contrast, exhalation (breathing out) is usually a passive process, though there are many exceptions: when generating functional overpressure (speaking, singing, humming, laughing, blowing, snorting, sneezing, coughing, powerlifting ); when exhaling underwater (swimming, diving); at high levels of physiological exertion (running, climbing, throwing) where more rapid gas exchange is necessitated; or in some forms of breath-controlled meditation . Speaking and singing in humans requires sustained breath control that many mammals are not capable of performing.

The process of breathing does not fill the alveoli with atmospheric air during each inhalation (about 350 ml per breath), but the inhaled air is carefully diluted and thoroughly mixed with a large volume of gas (about 2.5 liters in adult humans) known as the functional residual capacity which remains in the lungs after each exhalation, and whose gaseous composition differs markedly from that of the ambient air . Physiological respiration involves the mechanisms that ensure that the composition of the functional residual capacity is kept constant , and equilibrates with the gases dissolved in the pulmonary capillary blood, and thus throughout the body . Thus, in precise usage , the words breathing and ventilation are hyponyms , not synonyms , of respiration ; but this prescription is not consistently followed, even by most health care providers , because the term respiratory rate (RR) is a well-established term in health care , even though it would need to be consistently replaced with ventilation rate if the precise usage were to be followed. During respiration the C-H bonds are broken by oxidation-reduction reaction and so carbon dioxide and water are also produced. The cellular energy-yielding process is called cellular respiration.

Classifications of respiration [ edit ] There are several ways to classify the physiology of respiration: This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( February 2014 ) By species [ edit ] Aquatic respiration Buccal pumping Cutaneous respiration Intestinal respiration Respiratory system By mechanism [ edit ] Breathing Gas exchange Arterial blood gas Control of respiration Apnea By experiments [ edit ] Huff and puff apparatus Spirometry Selected ion flow tube mass spectrometry By intensive care and emergency medicine [ edit ] CPR Mechanical ventilation Intubation Iron lung Intensive care medicine Liquid breathing ECMO Oxygen toxicity Medical ventilator Life support General anaesthesia Laryngoscope By other medical topics [ edit ] Respiratory therapy Breathing gases Hyperbaric oxygen therapy Hypoxia Gas embolism Decompression sickness Barotrauma Oxygen equivalent Oxygen toxicity Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide poisoning Carbon monoxide poisoning HPNS Additional images [ edit ] See also [ edit ] Diffusing capacity – Measure of the transfer of gas from the lung to red blood cells Outline of biology Respiratory sounds Respiratory monitoring – Method to mechanically assist or replace spontaneous breathing Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ a b c Hinic-Frlog, Sanja (2019).

Introductory Animal Physiology . University of Toronto Mississauga: Pressbooks (CC BY 4.0). pp.

40– 59.

^ Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P, eds. (2002).

"NADH and NADPH Are Important Electron Carriers" .

Molecular Biology of the Cell (4th ed.). New York: Garland Science .

ISBN 0-8153-3218-1 – via NCBI Bookshelf .

Nelsons VCE Units 1–2 Physical Education. 2010 Cengage Copyright.

External links [ edit ] Overview at Johns Hopkins University Further reading [ edit ] Nilsson, Goran E. (2010).

Respiratory Physiology of Vertebrates . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-70302-4 .

Randall, David (2002).

Eckert Animal Physiology . New York: W.H. Freeman and CO.

ISBN 0-7167-3863-5 .

, human biology 146149 C.Michael Hogan. 2011.

Respiration . Encyclopedia of Earth. Eds. Mark McGinley and C.J.Cleveland. National Council for Science and the Environment. Washington DC v t e Respiratory physiology Respiration breath inhalation exhalation obligate nasal breathing respiratory rate respirometer pulmonary surfactant compliance elastic recoil hysteresivity airway resistance bronchial hyperresponsiveness constriction dilatation mechanical ventilation Control pons pneumotaxic center apneustic center medulla dorsal respiratory group ventral respiratory group chemoreceptors central peripheral pulmonary stretch receptor Hering–Breuer reflex Lung volumes VC FRC Vt dead space CC PEF calculations respiratory minute volume FEV1/FVC ratio Lung function tests spirometry body plethysmography peak flow meter nitrogen washout Circulation pulmonary circulation hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction pulmonary shunt Interactions ventilation (V) Perfusion (Q) Ventilation/perfusion ratio V/Q scan zones of the lung gas exchange pulmonary gas pressures alveolar gas equation alveolar–arterial gradient hemoglobin oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve ( Oxygen saturation 2,3-BPG Bohr effect Haldane effect ) carbonic anhydrase ( chloride shift ) oxyhemoglobin respiratory quotient arterial blood gas diffusion capacity ( DLCO ) Insufficiency high altitude death zone oxygen toxicity hypoxia Authority control databases National Germany Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Respiration_(physiology)&oldid=1265156780 " Categories : Excretion Respiration Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from February 2014 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from February 2014 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 25 December 2024, at 11:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Respiration (physiology) 55 languages Add topic

