Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Materials 2 Painting of sculpture 3 Development of Greek sculptures Toggle Development of Greek sculptures subsection 3.1 Geometric 3.2 Archaic 3.3 Classical 3.4 Hellenistic 4 Cult images 5 Drapery Toggle Drapery subsection 5.1 Female 5.2 Male 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek sculpture 28 languages العربية Български Català Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Riders from the Parthenon Frieze , around 440 BC, key examples of Classical Greek sculpture The sculpture of ancient Greece is the main surviving type of fine ancient Greek art as, with the exception of painted ancient Greek pottery , almost no ancient Greek painting survives. Modern scholarship identifies three major stages in monumental sculpture in bronze and stone: Archaic Greek sculpture (from about 650 to 480 BC), Classical (480–323 BC) and Hellenistic thereafter. At all periods there were great numbers of Greek terracotta figurines and small sculptures in metal and other materials.

Jockey of Artemision . Late Hellenistic bronze statue of a mounted jockey, National Archaeological Museum, Athens .

The Greeks decided very early on that the human form was the most important subject for artistic endeavour.

[ 1 ] Since they pictured their gods as having human form, there was little distinction between the sacred and the secular in art—the human body was both secular and sacred. A male nude of Apollo or Heracles shows only slight differences in treatment from a sculpture of that year's Olympic boxing champion. The statue (originally single, but by the Hellenistic period often in groups) was the dominant form, although reliefs , often so "high" that they were almost free-standing, were also important.

Bronze was the most prestigious material, but is the least common to survive, as it was always expensive and generally recycled.

Materials [ edit ] Natural marble By the Classical period , roughly the 5th and 4th centuries BC, monumental sculpture was composed almost entirely of marble or bronze , with cast bronze becoming the favoured medium for major works by the early 5th century BC. Many pieces of sculpture now known only in marble copies made for the Roman market had been originally made in bronze. The territories of ancient Greece, except for Sicily and southern Italy, contained abundant supplies of fine marble, with Pentelic and Parian marble the most highly prized. The ores for bronze were also relatively easy to obtain.

[ 2 ] Smaller works were in a great variety of materials, many of them precious, but there was also a very large production of terracotta figurines.

Athena in the workshop of a sculptor working on a marble horse, Attic red-figure kylix , 480 BC, Staatliche Antikensammlungen (Inv. 2650) Both marble and bronze are relatively easy to form and very durable. No doubt there were also traditions of sculpture in wood, as in most ancient cultures, but we know very little of them apart from acrolithic sculptures, usually large, in which the head and exposed flesh parts were carved in marble but the clothed parts in wood. Bronze always had a significant scrap value, so that very few original bronzes have survived. But in recent years marine archaeology or trawling have added a few spectacular finds, such as the Artemision Bronze and Riace bronzes , which have significantly extended modern understanding of ancient bronze art. Many copies from the later Roman period are marble versions of works whose originals had been cast in bronze. In the Archaic period ordinary limestone was used for sculpture, but thereafter (except in areas of the Italian peninsula with no local marble) only for architectural sculpture and decoration. Plaster or stucco was sometimes used, only for the hair.

[ 3 ] Chryselephantine sculptures, used for temple cult images and luxury works, used gold (most often in leaf form ) and ivory for all of the figure or for faces and hands. Probably some included gems and other materials, but these were much less common, and only fragments have survived.

Many statues were given jewellery, as can be seen from the holes for attaching it, and held weapons or other objects in different materials.

[ 4 ] The Victorious Youth ( c.

310 BC ), a remarkably well-preserved bronze statue of a Greek athlete in contrapposto pose Painting of sculpture [ edit ] While the pigments originally present on most sculptures from the era have worn away, Greek sculptures were originally painted.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] This experimental colour restoration shows what a statue of a Trojan archer from the Temple of Aphaia , Aegina may have originally looked like.

[ 6 ] Ancient Greek sculptures were originally painted in multiple colours; [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] they appear colourless today only because the original pigments have deteriorated.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] References to painted sculptures are found in classical literature, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] including in Euripides 's Helen , in which the eponymous character laments, "If only I could shed my beauty and assume an uglier aspect / The way you would wipe colour off a statue." [ 6 ] Some well-preserved statues still bear traces of pigments [ 5 ] and archaeologists can reconstruct what they may have originally looked like.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Development of Greek sculptures [ edit ] Geometric [ edit ] It is commonly thought that the earliest incarnation of Greek sculpture was in the form of wooden or ivory cult statues , first described by Pausanias as xoana .

[ 8 ] No such statues survive, and the descriptions of them are vague, despite the fact that they were probably objects of veneration for hundreds of years. The first piece of Greek statuary to be reassembled since is probably the Lefkandi Centaur, a terracotta sculpture found on the island of Euboea, dated c.

920 BC . The statue was constructed in parts, before being dismembered and buried in two separate graves. The centaur has an intentional mark on its knee, which has led researchers to postulate [ 9 ] that the statue might portray Cheiron , presumably kneeling wounded from Herakles ' arrow. If so, it would be the earliest known depiction of myth in the history of Greek sculpture.

The forms from the Geometric period ( c.

900 to 700 BC ) were chiefly terracotta figurines , bronzes , and ivories . The bronzes are chiefly tripod cauldrons , and freestanding figures or groups. Such bronzes were made using the lost-wax technique probably introduced from Syria, and are almost entirely votive offerings left at the Hellenistic civilization Panhellenic sanctuaries of Olympia , Delos , and Delphi , though these were likely manufactured elsewhere, as a number of local styles may be identified by finds from Athens , Argos , and Sparta . Typical works of the era include the Karditsa warrior (Athens Br. 12831) and the many examples of the equestrian statuette (for example, NY Met. 21.88.24 online ). The repertory of this bronze work is not confined to standing men and horses, however, as vase paintings of the time also depict imagery of stags, birds, beetles, hares, griffins and lions.

There are no inscriptions on early-to-middle geometric sculpture, until the appearance of the Mantiklos "Apollo" (Boston 03.997) of the early 7th century BC found in Thebes. The figure is that of a standing man with a pseudo- daedalic form, underneath which lies the hexameter inscription reading "Mantiklos offered me as a tithe to Apollo of the silver bow; do you, Phoibos [Apollo], give some pleasing favour in return".

[ 10 ] Apart from the novelty of recording its own purpose, this sculpture adapts the formulae of oriental bronzes, as seen in the shorter more triangular face and slightly advancing left leg. This is sometimes seen as anticipating the greater expressive freedom of the 7th century BC and, as such, the Mantiklos figure is referred to in some quarters as proto-Daedalic.

Archaic [ edit ] Further information: Kouros Main article: Archaic Greek Sculpture Kleobis and Biton , kouroi of the Archaic period, c.

580 BC .

Delphi Archaeological Museum .

The Sabouroff head , an important example of Late Archaic Greek marble sculpture, and a precursor of true portraiture , c.

550 -525 BCE.

[ 11 ] Inspired by the monumental stone sculpture of ancient Egypt [ 12 ] and Mesopotamia , the Greeks began again to carve in stone. Free-standing figures share the solidity and frontal stance characteristic of Eastern models, but their forms are more dynamic than those of Egyptian sculpture, as for example the Lady of Auxerre and Torso of Hera (Early Archaic period, c.

660–580 BC , both in the Louvre, Paris). After about 575 BC, figures such as these, both male and female, began wearing the so-called archaic smile . This expression, which has no specific appropriateness to the person or situation depicted, may have been a device to give the figures a distinctive human characteristic.

Three types of figures prevailed—the standing nude male youth ( kouros , plural kouroi), the standing draped girl ( kore , plural korai), and the seated woman. All emphasize and generalize the essential features of the human figure and show an increasingly accurate comprehension of human anatomy. The youths were either sepulchral or votive statues. Examples are Apollo (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), an early work; the Strangford Apollo from Anafi (British Museum), a much later work; and the Anavyssos Kouros ( National Archaeological Museum of Athens ). More of the musculature and skeletal structure is visible in this statue than in earlier works. The standing, draped girls have a wide range of expression, as in the sculptures in the Acropolis Museum of Athens . Their drapery is carved and painted with the delicacy and meticulousness common in the details of sculpture of this period.

The Greeks thus decided very early on that the human form was the most important subject for artistic endeavour. Seeing their gods as having human form, there was no distinction between the sacred and the secular in art—the human body was both secular and sacred. A male nude without any attachments such as a bow or a club, could just as easily be Apollo or Heracles as that year's Olympic boxing champion. In the Archaic Period, the most important sculptural form was the kouros (See for example Biton and Kleobis ). The kore was also common; Greek art did not present female nudity (unless the intention was pornographic) until the 4th century BC, although the development of techniques to represent drapery is obviously important.

As with pottery, the Greeks did not produce sculpture merely for artistic display. Statues were commissioned either by aristocratic individuals or by the state, and used for public memorials, as offerings to temples, oracles and sanctuaries (as is frequently shown by inscriptions on the statues), or as markers for graves. Statues in the Archaic period were not all intended to represent specific individuals. They were depictions of an ideal—beauty, piety, honor or sacrifice. These were always depictions of young men, ranging in age from adolescence to early maturity, even when placed on the graves of (presumably) elderly citizens.

Kouroi were all stylistically similar. Graduations in the social stature of the person commissioning the statue were indicated by size rather than artistic innovations.

Dipylon Kouros, c.

600 BC , Athens, Kerameikos Museum.

The Moschophoros or calf-bearer, c.

570 BC , Athens, Acropolis Museum .

Phrasikleia Kore , c.

550 BC , Athens, National Archaeological Museum of Athens .

Peplos Kore , c.

530 BC , Athens, Acropolis Museum .

Frieze of the Siphnian Treasury , Delphi , depicting a Gigantomachy , c.

525 BC , Delphi Archaeological Museum .

Euthydikos Kore.

c.

490 BC , Athens, authorized replica, original in National Archaeological Museum of Athens An Ethiopian 's head and female head, with a kalos inscription . Attic Greek janiform red-figure aryballos , c.

520 –510 BC.

Classical [ edit ] Further information: Classical Greek sculpture and Severe style Riace bronzes , examples of proto classic bronze sculpture, Museo Nazionale della Magna Grecia , Reggio Calabria Artemision Bronze , thought to be either Poseidon or Zeus , c. 460 BC, National Archaeological Museum , Athens . Found by fishermen off the coast of Cape Artemisium in 1928. The figure is more than 2 m in height.

The Classical period saw a revolution of Greek sculpture, sometimes associated by historians with the popular culture surrounding the introduction of democracy and the end of the aristocratic culture associated with the kouroi . The Classical period saw changes in the style and function of sculpture, along with a dramatic increase in the technical skill of Greek sculptors in depicting realistic human forms. Poses also became more naturalistic, notably during the beginning of the period. This is embodied in works such as the Kritios Boy (480 BC), sculpted with the earliest known use of contrapposto ('counterpose'), and the Charioteer of Delphi (474 BC), which demonstrates a transition to more naturalistic sculpture. From about 500 BC, Greek statues began increasingly to depict real people, as opposed to vague interpretations of myth or entirely fictional votive statues , although the style in which they were represented had not yet developed into a realistic form of portraiture. The statues of Harmodius and Aristogeiton , set up in Athens mark the overthrow of the aristocratic tyranny , and have been said to be the first public monuments to show actual individuals.

The Classical Period also saw an increase in the use of statues and sculptures as decorations of buildings . The characteristic temples of the Classical era, such as the Parthenon in Athens, and the Temple of Zeus at Olympia, used relief sculpture for decorative friezes , and pedimental sculpture in the round to fill the triangular fields of the pediments . The difficult aesthetic and technical challenge stimulated much in the way of sculptural innovation. Most of these works survive only in fragments, for example the Parthenon Marbles , roughly half of which are in the British Museum .

Funeral statuary evolved during this period from the rigid and impersonal kouros of the Archaic period to the highly personal family groups of the Classical period. These monuments are commonly found in the suburbs of Athens, which in ancient times were cemeteries on the outskirts of the city. Although some of them depict "ideal" types—the mourning mother, the dutiful son—they increasingly depicted real people, typically showing the departed taking his dignified leave from his family. This is a notable increase in the level of emotion relative to the Archaic and Geometrical eras.

Another notable change is the rise of giving artistic credit to sculptors. The entirety of information known about sculpture in the Archaic and Geometrical periods are centred upon the works themselves, and seldom, if ever, on the sculptors. Examples include Phidias , known to have overseen the design and building of the Parthenon , and Praxiteles , whose nude female sculptures were the first to be considered artistically respectable. Praxiteles' Aphrodite of Knidos , which survives in copies, was praised by Pliny the Elder .

Lysistratus is said to have been the first to use plaster moulds taken from living people to produce lost-wax portraits, and to have also developed a technique of casting from existing statues. He came from a family of sculptors and his brother, Lysippos of Sicyon , is supposed to have produced fifteen hundred statues in his career.

[ 13 ] The Statue of Zeus at Olympia and the Statue of Athena Parthenos (both chryselephantine and executed by Phidias or under his direction, and considered to be the greatest of the Classical Sculptures), are lost, although smaller copies (in other materials) and good descriptions of both still exist. Their size and magnificence prompted rivals to seize them in the Byzantine period, and both were removed to Constantinople , where they were later destroyed.

Kritios Boy . Marble, c.

480 BC .

Acropolis Museum , Athens.

Copy of Polyclitus ' Diadumenos , National Archaeological Museum, Athens .

So-called Venus Braschi by Praxiteles , type of the Knidian Aphrodite , Munich Glyptothek .

Family group on a grave marker from Athens, National Archaeological Museum, Athens The Marathon Youth , 4th century BC bronze statue, possibly by Praxiteles , National Archaeological Museum, Athens .

Atalante Hermes , possibly by Lysippos , National Archaeological Museum, Athens .

Terracotta vase in the shape of Dionysus ' head, c.

410 BC ; on display in the Ancient Agora Museum in Athens , housed in the Stoa of Attalus Pottery vessel, Aphrodite inside a shell; from Attica , Classical Greece , discovered in the Phanagoria cemetery, Taman Peninsula ( Bosporan Kingdom , southern Russia ), early 4th century BC, Hermitage Museum , Saint Petersburg .

Athenian cavalryman Dexileos fighting a naked hoplite in the Corinthian War .

[ 14 ] Dexileos was killed in action near Corinth in the summer of 394 BC, probably in the Battle of Nemea , [ 14 ] or in a proximate engagement.

[ 15 ] Grave Stele of Dexileos , 394-393 BC.

Dionysus holding an egg and a cock, terracotta from Tanagra , Greece, c. 350 BC Hellenistic [ edit ] Laocoön and His Sons (Late Hellenistic), Vatican Museum The Hellenistic Pergamon Altar : l to r Nereus , Doris , a Giant , Oceanus Main articles: Hellenistic sculpture and Phidias The transition from the Classical to the Hellenistic period occurred during the 4th century BC. Greek art became increasingly diverse, influenced by the cultures of the peoples drawn into the Greek orbit, by the conquests of Alexander the Great (336 to 323 BC). In the view of some art historians, this is described as a decline in quality and originality; however, individuals of the time may not have shared this outlook. Many sculptures previously considered classical masterpieces are now known to be of the Hellenistic age. The technical ability of the Hellenistic sculptors are clearly in evidence in such major works as the Winged Victory of Samothrace , and the Pergamon Altar . New centres of Greek culture, particularly in sculpture, developed in Alexandria , Antioch , Pergamum , and other cities. By the 2nd century BC, the rising power of Rome had also absorbed much of the Greek tradition—and an increasing proportion of its products as well.

During this period, sculpture again experienced a shift towards increasing naturalism. Common people, women, children, animals, and domestic scenes became acceptable subjects for sculpture, which was commissioned by wealthy families for the adornment of their homes and gardens. Realistic figures of men and women of all ages were produced, and sculptors no longer felt obliged to depict people as ideals of beauty or physical perfection. At the same time, new Hellenistic cities springing up in Egypt , Syria , and Anatolia required statues depicting the gods and heroes of Greece for their temples and public places. This made sculpture, like pottery, an industry, with the consequent standardisation and (some) lowering of quality. For these reasons, quite a few more Hellenistic statues survive to the present than those of the Classical period.

Alongside the natural shift towards naturalism, there was a shift in expression of the sculptures as well. Sculptures began expressing more power and energy during this time period. An easy way to see the shift in expressions during the Hellenistic period would be to compare it to the sculptures of the Classical period. The classical period had sculptures such as the Charioteer of Delphi expressing humility. The sculptures of the Hellenistic period however saw greater expressions of power and energy as demonstrated in the Jockey of Artemision .

[ 16 ] Some of the best known Hellenistic sculptures are the Winged Victory of Samothrace (2nd or 1st century BC), the statue of Aphrodite from the island of Melos known as the Venus de Milo (mid-2nd century BC), the Dying Gaul (about 230 BC), and the monumental group Laocoön and His Sons (late 1st century BC). All these statues depict Classical themes, but their treatment is far more sensuous and emotional than the austere taste of the Classical period would have allowed or its technical skills permitted. Hellenistic sculpture was also marked by an increase in scale, which culminated in the Colossus of Rhodes (late 3rd century), thought to have been roughly the same size as the Statue of Liberty . The combined effect of earthquakes and looting have destroyed this as well as any other very large works of this period that might have existed.

Following the conquests of Alexander the Great, Greek culture spread as far as India, as revealed by the excavations of Ai-Khanoum in eastern Afghanistan, and the civilization of the Greco-Bactrians and the Indo-Greeks .

Greco-Buddhist art represented a syncretism between Greek art and the visual expression of Buddhism. Discoveries made since the end of the 19th century surrounding the (now submerged) ancient Egyptian city of Heracleum include a 4th-century BC depiction of Isis . The depiction is unusually sensual for depictions of the Egyptian goddess, as well as being uncharacteristically detailed and feminine, marking a combination of Egyptian and Hellenistic forms around the time of Alexander the Great's conquest of Egypt.

In Goa , India, were found Buddha statues in Greek styles. These are attributed to Greek converts to Buddhism, many of whom are known to have settled in Goa during Hellenistic times.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The Hellenistic Prince , a bronze statue originally thought to be a Seleucid , or Attalus II of Pergamon , now considered a portrait of a Roman general, made by a Greek artist working in Rome in the 2nd century BC.

The Winged Victory of Samothrace (Hellenistic), The Louvre , Paris Sepulchral monument of a dying Adonis , polychrome terracotta , Etruscan art from Tuscana , 250-100 BC Fragment of a marble relief depicting a Kore , 3rd century BC, from Panticapaeum , Taurica ( Crimea ), Bosporan Kingdom Ancient Greek terracotta head of a young man, found in Tarent , c.

300 BC , Antikensammlung Berlin.

Female head incorporating a vase ( lekythos ), c.

325 -300 BC.

Bronze portrait of an unknown sitter, with inlaid eyes, Hellenistic period, 1st century BC, found in Lake Palestra of the Island of Delos .

Greco-Buddhist frieze of Gandhara with devotees, holding plantain leaves, in Hellenistic style, inside Corinthian columns , 1st–2nd century CE. Buner, Swat, Pakistan .

Victoria and Albert Museum .

Gravestone of a woman with her child slave attending to her, c.

100 BC (early period of Roman Greece ) Cult images [ edit ] Reproduction of the Athena Parthenos statue at the original size in the Parthenon in Nashville , Tennessee.

All ancient Greek temples and Roman temples normally contained a cult image in the cella . Access to the cella varied, but apart from the priests, at the least some of the general worshippers could access the cella some of the time, though sacrifices to the deity were normally made on altars outside in the temple precinct ( temenos in Greek). Some cult images were easy to see, and were what we would call major tourist attractions. The image normally took the form of a statue of the deity, originally less than life-size, then typically roughly life-size, but in some cases many times life-size, in marble or bronze, or in the specially prestigious form of a Chryselephantine statue using ivory plaques for the visible parts of the body and gold for the clothes, around a wooden framework. The most famous Greek cult images were of this type, including the Statue of Zeus at Olympia , and Phidias 's Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon in Athens, both colossal statues now completely lost. Fragments of two chryselephantine statues from Delphi have been excavated. Cult images generally held or wore identifying attributes, which is one way of distinguishing them from the many other statues of deities in temples and other locations.

The acrolith was another composite form, this time a cost-saving one with a wooden body. A xoanon was a primitive and symbolic image, usually in wood, some perhaps comparable to the Hindu lingam , although the oldest cult image from the Greek world, the Minoan Palaikastro Kouros , is highly sophisticated. Many xoana were retained and revered for their antiquity in later periods; they were often light enough to be carried in processions. Many of the Greek statues well known from Roman marble copies were originally temple cult images, which in some cases, such as the Apollo Barberini , can be credibly identified. A very few actual originals survive, for example the bronze Piraeus Athena (2.35 metres high, including a helmet).

In Greek and Roman mythology , a " palladium " was an image of great antiquity on which the safety of a city was said to depend, especially the wooden one that Odysseus and Diomedes stole from the citadel of Troy and which was later taken to Rome by Aeneas . (The Roman story was related in Virgil 's Aeneid and other works.) Part of a series on the History of Greek art Greek Bronze Age Aegean art Cycladic art Minoan art Minoan pottery Mycenaean art Mycenaean pottery Protogeometric art Ancient Greece Geometric art Archaic Greek art Ancient Greek art Ancient Greek architecture Ancient Greek pottery Ancient Greek sculpture Hellenistic art see also: Greco-Buddhist art Medieval Greece Byzantine art Byzantine Iconoclasm Macedonian art Post-Byzantine Greece Cretan school Heptanese school Modern Greece Modern Greek art Modern Greek architecture Munich School Contemporary Greek art v t e Drapery [ edit ] Female [ edit ] Diane of  Gabies [ fr ] dressing with a diplax Pallas over a peplos.

Chiton Weavers on the Parthenon Frieze Male [ edit ] Chlamys Parthenon Frieze See also [ edit ] Meniskos , a device for protecting statues placed outside Notes [ edit ] ^ Cook, 19 ^ Cook, 74–75 ^ Cook, 74–76 ^ Cook, 75–76 ^ a b c d e f Brinkmann, Vinzenz (2008). "The Polychromy of Ancient Greek Sculpture". In Panzanelli, Roberta; Schmidt, Eike D.; Lapatin, Kenneth (eds.).

The Color of Life: Polychromy in Sculpture from Antiquity to the Present . Los Angeles, California: The J. Paul Getty Museum and the Getty Research Institute. pp.

18– 39.

ISBN 978-0-89-236-918-8 .

^ a b c d e f g Gurewitsch, Matthew (July 2008).

"True Colors: Archaeologist Vinzenz Brinkmann insists his eye-popping reproductions of ancient Greek sculptures are right on target" .

Smithsonian.com . Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 15 May 2018 .

^ a b c Prisco, Jacopo (30 November 2017).

" 'Gods in Color' returns antiquities to their original, colorful grandeur" .

CNN style . CNN. Cable News Network . Retrieved 15 May 2018 .

^ The term xoanon and the ascriptions are both highly problematic. A.A. Donohue's Xoana and the origins of Greek sculpture , 1988, details how the term had a variety of meanings in the ancient world not necessarily to do with the cult objects ^ [1] Archived February 27, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ Μαντικλος μ' ανεθεκε ϝεκαβολοι αργυροτοχσοι τας {δ}δε|κατας· τυ δε Φοιβε διδοι χαριϝετταν αμοιϝ[αν]," transliterated as "Mantiklos m’ anetheke wekaboloi argyrotokhsoi tas dekatas; tu de Phoibe didoi khariwettan amoiw[an]" ^ CAHN, HERBERT A.; GERIN, DOMINIQUE (1988). "Themistocles at Magnesia".

The Numismatic Chronicle .

148 : 20 & Plate 3.

JSTOR 42668124 .

^ The debt of archaic Greek sculpture to Egyptian canons was recognized in Antiquity: see Diodorus Siculus , i.98.5–9.

^ Gagarin, 403 ^ a b Hutchinson, Godfrey (2014).

Sparta: Unfit for Empire . Frontline Books. p. 43.

ISBN 9781848322226 .

^ "IGII2 6217 Epitaph of Dexileos, cavalryman killed in Corinthian war (394 BC)" .

www.atticinscriptions.com .

^ Stele, R. Web. 24 November 2013. < http://www.ancientgreece.com/s/Sculpture/ > ^ Gazetteer of the Union Territory Goa, Daman and Diu: district gazetteer, Volume 1 . panajim Goa: Gazetteer Dept., Govt. of the Union Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, 1979. 1979. pp. (see page 70).

^ (see Pius Melkandathil, Martitime activities of Goa and the Indian ocean .) References [ edit ] Cook, R.M.

, Greek Art , Penguin, 1986 (reprint of 1972), ISBN 0140218661 Gagarin, Michael, Elaine Fantham (contributor), The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome, Volume 1 , Oxford University Press, 2010, ISBN 9780195170726 Stele, R. Web. 24 November 2013.

http://www.ancientgreece.com/s/Sculpture/ Bibliography [ edit ] Boardman, John.

Greek Sculpture: The Archaic Period: A Handbook . New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.

--.

Greek Sculpture: The Classical Period: A Handbook . London: Thames and Hudson, 1985.

--.

Greek Sculpture: The Late Classical Period and Sculpture In Colonies and Overseas . New York: Thames and Hudson, 1995.

Dafas, K. A., 2019.

Greek Large-Scale Bronze Statuary: The Late Archaic and Classical Periods , Institute of Classical Studies, School of Advanced Study, University of London, Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies, Monograph, BICS Supplement 138 (London).

Dillon, Sheila.

Ancient Greek Portrait Sculpture: Contexts, Subjects, and Styles . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Furtwängler, Adolf.

Masterpieces of Greek Sculpture: A Series of Essays On the History of Art . London: W. Heinemann, 1895.

Jenkins, Ian.

Greek Architecture and Its Sculpture . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006.

Kousser, Rachel Meredith.

The Afterlives of Greek Sculpture: Interaction, Transformation, and Destruction . New York: Cambridge University Press, 2017.

Marvin, Miranda.

The Language of the Muses: The Dialogue Between Roman and Greek Sculpture . Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2008.

Mattusch, Carol C.

Classical Bronzes: The Art and Craft of Greek and Roman Statuary . Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996.

Muskett, G. M.

Greek Sculpture . London: Bristol Classical Press, 2012.

Neer, Richard.

The Emergence of the Classical Style In Greek Sculpture . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Neils, Jenifer.

The Parthenon Frieze . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Palagia, Olga.

Greek Sculpture: Function, Materials, and Techniques In the Archaic and Classical Periods . New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Palagia, Olga, and J. J. Pollitt.

Personal Styles In Greek Sculpture . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Pollitt, J. J.

The Ancient View of Greek Art: Criticism, History, and Terminology . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974.

--.

Art In the Hellenistic Age . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

Ridgway, Brunilde Sismondo.

The Archaic Style In Greek Sculpture . 2nd ed. Chicago: Ares, 1993.

--.

Fourth-Century Styles In Greek Sculpture . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1997.

Smith, R. R. R.

Hellenistic Royal Portraits . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.

--.

Hellenistic Sculpture: A Handbook . New York: Thames and Hudson, 1991.

Spivey, Nigel Jonathan.

Understanding Greek Sculpture: Ancient Meanings, Modern Readings . New York: Thames and Hudson, 1996.

--.

Greek Sculpture . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.

Stanwick, Paul Edmund.

Portraits of the Ptolemies: Greek Kings As Egyptian Pharaohs . Austin: University of Texas Press, 2002.

Stewart, Andrew F.

Greek Sculpture: An Exploration . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990.

--.

Faces of Power: Alexander's Image and Hellenistic Politics . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.

von Mach, Edmund.

Greek Sculpture: Its Spirit and Its Principles . New York: Parkstone Press International, 2006.

--.

Greek Sculpture . New York: Parkstone International, 2012.

Winckelmann, Johann Joachim, and Alex Potts.

History of the Art of Antiquity . Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Ancient Greek sculpture Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Classic Greek Sculpture to Late Hellenistic Era , lecture by professor Kenney Mencher, Ohlone College [link not valid as of 20 March 2023 [update] ] Sideris A., Aegean Schools of Sculpture in Antiquity , Cultural Gate of the Aegean Archipelago, Athens 2007 (a detailed per period and per island approach).

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6vqlq
Cached time: 20250812000632
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.687 seconds
Real time usage: 0.877 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4288/1000000
Revision size: 38434/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 183999/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4306/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112365/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.334/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6405769/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  669.218      1 -total
 22.94%  153.494      1 Template:Reflist
 14.67%   98.141      3 Template:Cite_book
 12.91%   86.393      1 Template:Short_description
 12.23%   81.865      1 Template:History_of_Greek_art
 11.94%   79.917      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.65%   77.954      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 11.32%   75.739      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.17%   47.987      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.05%   40.468      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1797078:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000632 and revision id 1299418769. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greek_sculpture&oldid=1299418769 " Category : Ancient Greek sculpture Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 08:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek sculpture 28 languages Add topic

