Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's works by Bekker numbers 2 Aristotelian works lacking Bekker numbers Toggle Aristotelian works lacking Bekker numbers subsection 2.1 Constitution of the Athenians 2.2 Fragments 3 Use in citations 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Bekker numbering 8 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bekker numbers ) Standard form of referencing to works in the Corpus Aristotelicum August Immanuel Bekker Bekker numbering or Bekker pagination is the standard form of citation to the works of Aristotle .  It is based on the page numbers used in the Prussian Academy of Sciences edition of the complete works of Aristotle (1831–1837) and takes its name from the editor of that edition, the classical philologist August Immanuel Bekker (1785–1871); because the academy was located in Berlin, Prussia, the system is occasionally referred to by the alternative name Berlin numbering or Berlin pagination .

[ 1 ] Bekker numbers consist of up to three ordered coordinates, or pieces of information: a number, the letter a or b, and another number, which refer respectively to the page number of Bekker's edition of the Greek text of Aristotle's works, the page column (a standard page of Bekker's edition has exactly two columns), and the line number (total lines typically ranging from 20 to 40 on a given column or page in Bekker's edition).  For example, the Bekker number denoting the beginning of Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics is 1094a1, which corresponds to page 1094 of Bekker's edition, first column (column a), line 1.

[ 2 ] All modern editions or translations of Aristotle intended for scholarly readers use Bekker numbers, in addition to or instead of page numbers.  Contemporary scholars writing on Aristotle use the Bekker number so that the author's citations can be checked by readers without having to use the same edition or translation that the author used.

While Bekker numbers are the dominant method used to refer to the works of Aristotle, Catholic or Thomist scholars often use the medieval method of reference by book, chapter, and sentence, albeit generally in addition to Bekker numbers.

Stephanus pagination is the comparable system for referring to the works of Plato , and Diels–Kranz numbering is the comparable system for Pre-Socratic philosophy .  Unlike Stephanus pagination, which is based upon a three-volume translation of Plato's works and which recycles low page numbers across the three volumes, introducing the possibility for ambiguity if the Platonic work or volume is not specified, Bekker page numbers cycle from 1 through the end of the Corpus Aristotelicum regardless of volume, without starting over for some other given volume.  Bekker numbering therefore has the advantage that its notation is unambiguous as compact numerical information, although it relies upon the ordering of Aristotle's works as presented in Bekker's edition.

Aristotle's works by Bekker numbers [ edit ] The following list is complete. The titles are given in accordance with the standard set by the Revised Oxford Translation.

[ 3 ] Latin titles, still often used by scholars, are also given.

Key * Authenticity disputed.

[ ] Generally agreed to be spurious.

Bekker number Work Latin name Logic Organon 1a Categories Categoriae 16a On Interpretation De Interpretatione 24a Prior Analytics Analytica Priora 71a Posterior Analytics Analytica Posteriora 100a Topics Topica 164a On Sophistical Refutations De Sophisticis Elenchis Physics (natural philosophy) 184a Physics Physica 268a On the Heavens De Caelo 314a On Generation and Corruption De Generatione et Corruptione 338a Meteorology Meteorologica 391a [ On the Universe ] [ De Mundo ] 402a On the Soul De Anima Parva Naturalia ("Short Works on Nature") 436a Sense and Sensibilia De Sensu et Sensibilibus 449b On Memory De Memoria et Reminiscentia 453b On Sleep De Somno et Vigilia 458a On Dreams De Insomniis 462b On Divination in Sleep De Divinatione per Somnum 464b On Length and Shortness of Life De Longitudine et Brevitate Vitae 467b On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration De Juventute et Senectute, De Vita et Morte, De Respiratione 481a [ On Breath ] [ De Spiritu ] 486a History of Animals Historia Animalium 639a Parts of Animals De Partibus Animalium 698a Movement of Animals De Motu Animalium 704a Progression of Animals De Incessu Animalium 715a Generation of Animals De Generatione Animalium 791a [ On Colors ] [ De Coloribus ] 800a [ On Things Heard ] [ De audibilibus ] 805a [ Physiognomonics ] [ Physiognomonica ] 815a [ On Plants ] [ De Plantis ] 830a [ On Marvellous Things Heard ] [ De mirabilibus auscultationibus ] 847a [ Mechanics ] [ Mechanica ] 859a Problems * Problemata * 968a [ On Indivisible Lines ] [ De Lineis Insecabilibus ] 973a [ The Situations and Names of Winds ] [ Ventorum Situs ] 974a [ On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias ] [ De Melisso, Xenophane, Gorgia ] Metaphysics 980a Metaphysics Metaphysica Ethics and politics 1094a Nicomachean Ethics Ethica Nicomachea 1181a Great Ethics * Magna Moralia * 1214a Eudemian Ethics Ethica Eudemia 1249a [ On Virtues and Vices ] [ De Virtutibus et Vitiis Libellus ] 1252a Politics Politica 1343a Economics * Oeconomica * Rhetoric and poetics 1354a Rhetoric Ars Rhetorica 1420a [ Rhetoric to Alexander ] [ Rhetorica ad Alexandrum ] 1447a Poetics Ars Poetica Aristotelian works lacking Bekker numbers [ edit ] Constitution of the Athenians [ edit ] The Constitution of the Athenians (or Athenaiōn Politeia ) was not included in Bekker's edition because it was first edited in 1891 from papyrus rolls acquired in 1890 by the British Museum .  The standard reference to it is by section (and subsection) numbers.

Fragments [ edit ] Surviving fragments of the many lost works of Aristotle were included in the fifth volume of Bekker's edition, edited by Valentin Rose .  These are not cited by Bekker numbers, however, but according to fragment numbers. Rose's first edition of the fragments of Aristotle was Aristoteles Pseudepigraphus (1863).  As the title suggests, Rose considered these all to be spurious. The numeration of the fragments in a revised edition by Rose, published in the Teubner series, Aristotelis qui ferebantur librorum fragmenta , Leipzig, 1886, is still commonly used (indicated by R 3 ), although there is a more current edition with a different numeration by Olof Gigon (published in 1987 as a new vol. 3 in Walter de Gruyter 's reprint of the Bekker edition), and a new de Gruyter edition by Eckart Schütrumpf is in preparation.

[ 4 ] For a selection of the fragments in English translation, see W.D. Ross, Select Fragments ( Oxford 1952 ), and Jonathan Barnes (ed.), The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation , vol. 2, Princeton 1984, pp. 2384–2465.

The works surviving only in fragments include the dialogues On Philosophy (or On the Good ), Eudemus (or On the Soul ), On Justice , and On Good Birth .  The possibly spurious work, On Ideas survives in quotations by Alexander of Aphrodisias in his commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics .  For the dialogues, see also the editions of Richard Rudolf Walzer , Aristotelis Dialogorum fragmenta, in usum scholarum (Florence 1934), and Renato Laurenti, Aristotele: I frammenti dei dialoghi (2 vols.), Naples: Luigi Loffredo, 1987.

Use in citations [ edit ] To cite a work of the Corpus Aristotelicum or part thereof, Bekker numbers may be combined with book, chapter, and line numbers to give a precise reference. By academic convention, and regardless of the citation style otherwise generally followed throughout an academic work , the pagination in a citation to Aristotle would be in the general form of: Book number(s).Chapter number(s),Bekker number(s)Line number(s).

[ 5 ] For example, a citation of ( Metaphysics , 1.9, 991b9-20) would refer to lines 9–20 on page 991b of chapter 9 in Book I of the Metaphysics .

See also [ edit ] Stephanus pagination Diels–Kranz numbering References [ edit ] ^ Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica , ex recognitione Immanuelis Bekkeri, 5 voll. Berlin,  Georgium Reimerum, 1831-1870 (the last volume contains the Index Aristotelicus by Hermann Bonitz ) ^ Jonathan Barnes, The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle , Cambridge 1995 xxi ^ The Complete Works of Aristotle , edited by Jonathan Barnes , 2 vols., Princeton University Press, 1984.

^ " CU-Boulder Expert Wins $75,000 Award For Research On Aristotle," Archived 2016-04-18 at the Wayback Machine University of Colorado Office of News Services, December 14, 2005.

^ "Citing Plato and Aristotle: Stephanus and Bekker Numbers" .

Proofed . 2019-11-23 . Retrieved 2021-03-16 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bekker_numbering&oldid=1299865220 " Categories : Referencing systems 1831 introductions Works by Aristotle Ancient Greek philosophy studies Classical Greek philosophy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 21:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bekker numbering 8 languages Add topic

