Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family 2 Mythology 3 Legacy 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Machaon (mythology) 25 languages Alemannisch Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Ido Italiano Latina Lietuvių 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mythical Greek healer hero Marble torso probably representing the son of Asclepius , Machaon. 2nd century B.C. Ancient Messene museum.

In Greek mythology , Machaon ( / m ə ˈ k eɪ .

ə n / ; Ancient Greek : Μαχάων , romanized : Macháōn ) was a son of Asclepius ; and the older brother of Podalirius . He and his brother led an army from Tricca in the Trojan War on the side of the Greeks.

[ 1 ] Family [ edit ] Machaon fathered Nicomachus and Gorgasus by Anticleia , daughter of Diocles of Pharae .

[ 2 ] His other sons were Alexanor , [ 3 ] Sphyrus [ 4 ] and Polemocrates .

[ 5 ] According to Diogenes Laertius 's Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers , Hermippus , in his book On Aristotle, places Machaon as the son of Asclepius , father of Nicomachus , and ancestor of Aristotle .

[ 6 ] Mythology [ edit ] Both Machaon and Podalirius were highly valued surgeons and medics.

[ 7 ] In the Iliad , he was wounded and put out of action by Paris .

[ 8 ] Machaon (or his brother) healed Philoctetes , Telephus and Menelaus , after he sustained an arrow at the hand of Pandarus , during the war.  He was also supposed to possess herbs which were bestowed to his father Asclepius by Chiron , the centaur.

[ 9 ] He was killed by Eurypylus in the tenth year of the war.

[ 10 ] He was buried in Gerenia in Messenia , where he was worshiped by the people.

In the account of Dares the Phrygian , Machaon was illustrated as ". . . large and brave, dependable, prudent, patient, and merciful." [ 11 ] Legacy [ edit ] The Latin name of a butterfly Old World Swallowtail ( Papilio machaon ) is derived from Machaon.

Machaonia , a plant genus in Rubiaceae , was named for Machaon.

The Jovian trojan asteroid 3063 Makhaon is named after him.

[ 12 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Homer , Iliad 2.729–32 ^ Pausanias , 4.30.2 ^ Pausanias, 2.11.5, 2.23.4 & 2.38.6 ^ Pausanias, 2.23.4 ^ Pausanias, 2.38.6 ^ Diogenes Laertius (1925). "Lives of Eminent Philosophers 5.1. Aristotle".

doi : 10.4159/dlcl.diogenes_laertius-lives_eminent_philosophers_book_v_chapter_1_aristotle.1925 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Homer, Iliad 2.273 ^ Homer, Iliad 11.506 ^ Homer, Iliad 4.219 ^ Quintus Smyrnaeus , 6.408 ^ Dares Phrygius , History of the Fall of Troy 13 ^ Schmadel, Lutz D. (2003) Dictionary of minor planet names, Springer - p.252 References [ edit ] Dares Phrygius , from The Trojan War.

The Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian translated by Richard McIlwaine Frazer, Jr. (1931-). Indiana University Press. 1966.

Online version at theio.com Diogenes Laertius , Lives of Eminent Philosophers edited by R.D. Hicks. Cambridge. Harvard University Press. 1972 (First published 1925).

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

ISBN 978-0674995796 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Homer, Homeri Opera in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920.

ISBN 978-0198145318 .

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Pausanias , Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.

ISBN 0-674-99328-4 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio.

3 vols . Leipzig, Teubner. 1903.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Quintus Smyrnaeus , The Fall of Troy translated by Way. A. S. Loeb Classical Library Volume 19. London: William Heinemann, 1913.

Online version at theio.com Quintus Smyrnaeus, The Fall of Troy . Arthur S. Way. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 1913.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

v t e Characters in the Iliad Achaeans Acamas Achilles Agamemnon (king of Mycenae) Agapenor Ajax the Greater (king of Salamis) Ajax the Lesser Alcimus Anticlus Antilochus Arcesilaus Ascalaphus Automedon Balius and Xanthus Bias Calchas (prophet) Diomedes (king of Argos) Elephenor Epeius Eudoros Euryalus Eurybates Eurydamas Eurypylus Guneus Helen (queen of Sparta) Ialmenus Idomeneus (king of Crete) Iphigenia (princess of Mycenae) Leitus Leonteus Lycomedes Machaon Medon Meges Menelaus (king of Sparta) Menestheus Meriones Neoptolemus Nestor (king of Pylos) Nireus Odysseus (king of Ithaca) Palamedes Patroclus Peneleos Philoctetes Phoenix Podalirius Podarces Polites Polypoetes Promachus Protesilaus Prothoenor Schedius Sinon Stentor Sthenelus Talthybius Teucer Thersites Thoas Thrasymedes Tlepolemus Trojans Aeneas (royal demigod) Aesepus Agenor Alcathous Amphimachus Anchises Andromache Antenor (king's brother-in-law) Antiphates Antiphus Archelochus Asius Asteropaios Astyanax Atymnius Axylus Briseis Calesius Caletor Cassandra (princess of Troy) Chryseis Chryses (priest of Apollo) Clytius Coön Dares Phrygius Deiphobus (prince of Troy) Dolon Epistrophus Euphemus Euphorbus Glaucus Gorgythion Hector (prince of Troy) Hecuba (queen of Troy) Helenus Hyperenor Hypsenor Iamenus Ilioneus Imbrius Iphidamas Kebriones Laocoön Lycaon (prince of Troy) Melanippus Memnon (King of Ethiopia) Mentes Mydon Mygdon of Phrygia Othryoneus Pandarus Panthous Paris (prince of Troy) Pedasus Peirous Penthesilea (Queen of the Amazons) Phorcys Podes Polites Polydamas Polybus Polydorus (prince of Troy) Polyxena (princess of Troy) Priam (king of Troy) Pylaemenes Pylaeus Pyraechmes Rhesus of Thrace Sarpedon (king of Lycia) Scamandrius Theano Ucalegon Gods Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Dionysus Eris Hades Helios Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hypnos Iris Leto Poseidon Scamander Thanatos Thetis Zeus Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany Poland Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Machaon_(mythology)&oldid=1257343874 " Categories : Children of Asclepius Achaean Leaders Mythological Greek physicians Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 14 November 2024, at 12:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Machaon (mythology) 25 languages Add topic

