Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 The root and origins 2 The gunas under various philosophies Toggle The gunas under various philosophies subsection 2.1 Samkhya school of Hinduism 2.2 Nyaya school of Hinduism 2.3 Vaisheshika school of Hinduism 2.4 Bhagavad Gita 3 Guna in theory of ethics 4 Guna in cosmology 5 Guna in other contexts Toggle Guna in other contexts subsection 5.1 Sanskrit grammar 5.2 Ayurveda 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Guṇa 32 languages বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian philosophical concept This article is about the Hindu philosophical concept. For other uses, see Guṇa (Jainism) .

"Gunas" redirects here; not to be confused with Günəş .

For other uses of "Guna", see Guna (disambiguation) .

Guṇa ( Sanskrit : गुण ) refers to the three fundamental tendencies or forces that constitute nature, or the matrix of material existence in Hindu philosophies. It can be translated as "quality, peculiarity, attribute, property".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The concept is originally notable as a feature of Samkhya philosophy.

[ 3 ] The guṇas are now a key concept in nearly all schools of Hindu philosophy .

[ 4 ] There are three guṇas ( triguṇa ), according to this worldview, that have always been and continue to be present in all things and beings in the world.

[ 4 ] These three guṇas are called: sattva (goodness, calmness, harmonious), rajas (passion, activity, movement), and tamas (ignorance, inertia, laziness).

[ 5 ] All of these three guṇas are present in everyone and everything; it is the proportion that is different, according to Hindu worldview. The interplay of these guṇas defines the character of someone or something, of nature and determines the progress of life.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] In some contexts, it may mean "a subdivision, species, kind, quality", or an operational principle or tendency of something or someone.

[ 6 ] In human behavior studies, Guna means personality, innate nature and psychological attributes of an individual.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Like many technical terms in other languages, guṇa can be difficult to encapsulate with a single English word. Its original and common meaning is a thread, implying the original materials that weave together to make up reality. The usual, but approximate translation in common usage is "a quality".

[ 10 ] Terminology [ edit ] Guna appears in many ancient and medieval Indian texts. Depending on the context, it means: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 11 ] string or thread, rope, sinew, chord (music, vowel phonology and arts literature) [ 12 ] [ 13 ] virtue, merit, excellence ( dharma and soteriological literature) [ 11 ] [ 14 ] quality, peculiarity, tendency, attribute, property, species ( sastras , sutras , the Epics, food and analytical literature) [ 15 ] The root and origins [ edit ] Guṇa is both a root and a word in Sanskrit. Its different context-driven meanings are derived from either the root or the word. In verse VI.36 of Nirukta by Yāska , a 1st millennium BC text on Sanskrit grammar and language that preceded Panini , Guṇa is declared to be derived from another root Gaṇa , [ 16 ] which means "to count, enumerate".

[ 17 ] This meaning has led to its use in speciation, subdivision, classification of anything by peculiarity, attribute or property. This meaning has also led to its use with prefixes such as Dviguṇa (twofold), Triguṇa (threefold) and so on.

In other contexts, such as phonology, grammar and arts, "Guṇa-" takes the meaning of āmantraṇā (आमन्त्रणा, addressing, invitation) or abhyāsa (अभ्यास, habit, practice).

[ 17 ] In the Mahabharata Book 6 Chapter 2, the meaning of guṇa similarly comes in the sense of addressing each part (the root implying āmantraṇā), and thereby it means avayava (अवयव, member, subdivision, portion). In Sanskrit treatises on food and cooking, guṇa means quality, tendency and nature of ingredient. Ancient South Indian commentators, such as Lingayasurin, explain that the meaning of guṇa as "thread, string" comes from the root guṇa- in the sense of repetition ( abhyāsa ), while the Telugu commentator Mallinatha explains the root guṇa- is to be understood in Sisupalavadha as āmredana (आम्रेडन, reiteration, repetition).

[ 17 ] Larson and Bhattacharya suggest that the "thread" metaphor relates to that which connects and runs between what we objectively observe to the tattva (तत्त्व, elementary property, principle, invisible essence) of someone or something.

[ 11 ] [ 18 ] In the context of philosophy, morality and understanding nature, "Guna-" with more dental na takes the meaning of addressing quality, substance, tendency and property.

[ 11 ] [ 17 ] In abstract discussion, it includes all hues of qualities – desirable, neutral or undesirable; but if unspecified, it is assumed with good faith to be good and divine in Indian philosophy. Thus, Guṇi from the root "Guṇa-" means someone or something with "divine qualities", as in Svetasvatara Upanishad hymn VI.2.

[ 17 ] The gunas under various philosophies [ edit ] Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Innate qualities and tendencies are key ancient concepts in Indian literature.

Maitrayaniya Upanishad is one of the earliest texts making an explicit reference to Hindu trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva and linking them to their Guna – as creator/activity, preserver/purity, destroyer/recycler respectively.

[ 19 ] The idea of three types of guṇa , innate nature and forces that together transform and keep changing the world is, however, found in numerous earlier and later Indian texts.

[ 20 ] Samkhya school of Hinduism [ edit ] In Samkhya philosophy, a guṇa is one of three "attributes, tendencies, qualities": sattva , rajas and tamas . This category of guṇa s has been widely adopted by various schools of Hinduism for categorizing behavior and natural phenomena. The three qualities are: Sattva is the guṇa of balance, harmony, goodness, purity, universal-ism, holism, construction, creativity, positivity, peacefulness, and virtue.

[ 21 ] Rajas is the guṇa of passion, activity, neither good nor bad and sometimes either, self-centeredness, egoism, individualization, drivenness, movement, and dynamism.

[ 5 ] [ 22 ] Tamas is the guṇa of imbalance, disorder, chaos, anxiety, impurity, destruction, delusion, negativity, dullness or inactivity, apathy, inertia or lethargy, violence, viciousness, and ignorance.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] In Indian philosophy, these qualities are not considered present in an either-or fashion. Rather, everyone and everything has all three, only in different proportions and in different contexts.

[ 4 ] The living being or substance is viewed as the net result of the joint effect of these three qualities.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] According to Samkya school, no one and nothing is either purely Sattvik or purely Rajasik or purely Tamasik.

[ 5 ] One's nature and behavior constitute a complex interplay of all three guṇas, in varying degrees. In some, the conduct is Rajasik with significant influence of Sattvik guṇa; in some it is Rajasik with significant influence of Tamasik guṇa, and so on.

[ 5 ] The balance of Gunas of everything and everyone can change and does. However, change in one quality faces inertia from other two qualities in Indian worldview. Change needs internal or external influence or reinforcement, as knowledge and force to transform. The force to change comes from the Rajas guṇa, the Sattva guṇa empowers one towards harmonious and constructive change, while Tamas guṇa checks or retards the process.

In Indian mythology, Vishnu is envisioned with more Sattva , Brahma with more Rajas , and Shiva seen with all three Gunas .

[ 20 ] Nyaya school of Hinduism [ edit ] In Nyaya (Generality or common features) school of Hinduism, there is extensive debate on what Guna means, and whether quality is innate, subjective or describable. Early scholars of this school identified 17 qualities, which later scholars expanded to 24 guṇas . Different scholars of this school list the 24 differently; for example, Bhasarvajna disallows 6 of the 24 commonly accepted by the ancient scholars.

[ 10 ] The most commonly accepted list is: color, taste, smell, touch, number, contact, disjunction, farness, nearness, dimension, separateness, knowledge, pleasure, frustration, desire, hatred, effort, weight, fluidity, viscosity, dispositional tendency, merit, demerit, and sound.

[ 24 ] Nyaya school considers quality as non-repeatable, a conceptual theme not found in Western philosophy where "quality" is presumed to be repeatable. It is also not found in some parallel schools of Hinduism. Repeatability means that the white in one object is same as white in other object, and white means the same thing. Nyaya scholars hold that "whiteness" is a guṇa of "white", but that is different from "whiteness" of an object or living being. To them, white has many hues and the "whiteness" is subjective.

[ 24 ] In Laksanavali, an ancient Indian text by Udayana, Guna is discussed with more nuance. For example, he writes, "quality of earth" is specific only if it meets three conditions: it occurs in earth, does not occur in anything that is not earthy, and be a distinctive quality that cannot be described as combination of other qualities.

[ 25 ] Vaisheshika school of Hinduism [ edit ] In Vaisheshika school of Hinduism, which is most related to Nyaya school, states that our awareness, understanding and judgments of any person and thing in the world is relational. All relations, holds this school of Hinduism, is dyadic between anuyogin (referend) and pratiyogin (referent).

[ 26 ] Guna (quality) is considered one of the seven padārtha (category) of relations. The others are: inherence ( samavaya ), being ( bhava ), genus ( samanya ), species ( vishesha ), substance ( dravya ) and motion/action ( karman ). Unlike Vaisheshika, Nyaya considers inherence as subset of guṇa (quality).

[ 26 ] Gangesha , a Nyaya scholar, suggests a somewhat different theory, stating that our awareness is of two types – true and false. True awareness is produced when we seek to observe some excellence ( guṇa ) in its cause, while false awareness results from observing fault ( dosha ) in its cause. In other words, in Gangesha's perspective, the observer's state of mind and attitude affects relational awareness.

[ 27 ] Bhagavad Gita [ edit ] Chapters 2, 3, 7, 13, 14, 17 and 18 of Bhagavad Gita discuss Guna .

[ 28 ] Verse 17.2 refers to the three Guna – sattvic, rajasic and tamasic – as innate nature (psychology or personality of an individual).

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Sattvic guṇa is one driven by what is pure, truth, compassionate, without craving, doing the right because it is right, positive and good. Tamasic guṇa is one driven by what is impure, dark, destructive, aimed to hurt another, contemptuous, negative and vicious. Rajasic guṇa is one that is ego-driven, out of personal passion, active, ostentatious, seeking the approval of others.

[ 28 ] [ 30 ] In Chapters 17 and 18, Bhagavad Gita illustrates various items and actions by their three Guna . For example, three types of charity are discussed, and what makes charity Sattvic, Rajasic or Tamasic. Similarly, food, relationships, knowledge and actions are detailed in terms of the three Guna .

[ 28 ] In Chapter 18, for example: [ 31 ] नियतं सङ्गरहितमरागद्वेषतः कृतम् । अफलप्रेप्सुना कर्म यत्तत्सात्त्विकमुच्यते ॥२३॥ यत्तु कामेप्सुना कर्म साहंकारेण वा पुनः । क्रियते बहुलायासं तद्राजसमुदाहृतम् ॥२४॥ अनुबन्धं क्षयं हिंसामनपेक्ष्य च पौरुषम् । मोहादारभ्यते कर्म यत्तत्तामसमुच्यते ॥२५॥ Action that is virtuous, thought through, free from attachment, and without craving for results is considered Sattvic; Action that is driven purely by craving for pleasure, selfishness and much effort is Rajasic; Action that is undertaken because of delusion, disregarding consequences, without considering loss or injury to others or self, is called Tamasic.

— Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 18, verses 23–25 [ 31 ] Similarly, knowledge that is attached to object of action, without concern for understanding the cause, without concern for purpose or significance, is Tamasic knowledge; knowledge that is segregated, that considers everything unconnected, individualistic and meaningless is Rajasic; knowledge that sees one being in all beings, that seeks the whole, a unity in diversity , and similarities in the divided components is Sattvic.

[ 32 ] Furthermore, in Chapter 2 of the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna advises Arjuna to transcend the three modes of existence and other forms of dualism .

[ 33 ] Guna in theory of ethics [ edit ] Guna is one of the four important elements in the framework of ethical theories in Indian philosophy.

[ 5 ] [ 34 ] Bommer et al. suggest that ethical/non-ethical behavior is an outcome of individual attributes, personal environment, social environment and institutional rules and laws.

[ 35 ] Guna theory is the ancient Indian philosophy on individual attributes, while the theories of Dharma and Ashramas address the personal and social environment, as well as part of its institutional framework. Guna theory, states Crawford, [ 34 ] represents a hierarchical theory of values, where the relative order of hierarchy is suggested to vary within each individual along with the relative proportion of each guṇa . The interplay of three guṇas affect an individual's values, and in Hindu worldview, these values affect individual's actions, as well as the happiness and serenity experienced by the individual.

[ 4 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The guṇas are not considered static and set. Hindu literature, such as the Bhagavad Gita, state it to be dynamic and changeable with knowledge, introspection and understanding of sva-dharma . Realizing one's sva-dharma and Self is emphasized in Indian ethical theories. The highest state of existence and bliss, in Advaita school of Hinduism for example, is jivanmukti (Self-realization) and moksha .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Guna theory's perspective on values constituting human personality is unique yet congruent with other ethical theories.

[ 40 ] Guna in cosmology [ edit ] Samkhya cosmology combines the three guṇas with primal matter (universe, Prakrti ).

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] These are present in all things and beings in the world, and it is their interplay that defines the physical and psychological character and nature.

[ 41 ] They serve as the fundamental operating principles or 'tendencies' of prakṛti which are called: sattva guṇa , rajas guṇa , and tamas guṇa .

[ 6 ] [ 43 ] When any of the guṇa is out of balance in a being or object, the Samkhya school suggests that a pattern of evolution starts, affecting not only itself but its environment.

[ 41 ] Purusha , or consciousness, is considered separate from Prakriti and changeless.

[ 41 ] Guna in other contexts [ edit ] Sanskrit grammar [ edit ] In the Sanskrit grammatical tradition ( Vyakarana ), guṇa refers to a set of normal-length vowels that are less reduced than the basic set (in modern terms, the zero grade ), but more reduced than the vṛddhi vowels (in modern terms, the lengthened grade ).  As an example, ṛ, i, u are basic (zero-grade) vowels, with corresponding guṇa (full-grade) vowels ar, e, o and vṛddhi (lengthened-grade) vowels ār, ai, au . (This is more understandable once it is realized that, at an earlier stage of development, Sanskrit e and o were ai and au , and Sanskrit ai and au were āi and āu .) Guṇa corresponds to what is now termed the full grade in Indo-European ablaut . Another orthography and phonology concept related to Guṇa is Vṛddhi .

[ 44 ] These innovations are not unique to Sanskrit, but also found in Greek, Latin, Italian and to some extent Russian.

[ 45 ] Guna and other rules of language for Sanskrit are described by Pāṇini in his Ashtadhyayi .

[ 46 ] Ayurveda [ edit ] In the terminology of Ayurveda (traditional medicine), guṇa can refer to one of twenty fundamental properties which any substance can exhibit, arranged in ten pairs of antonyms, viz.  heavy/light, cold/hot, unctuous/dry, dull/sharp, stable/mobile, soft/hard, non-slimy/slimy, smooth/coarse, minute/gross, viscous/liquid.

[ 47 ] Guṇa is also a concept in Ayurvedic medicine, as a system to assess conditions and diets . For this reason Triguṇa and tridosha are considered to be related in the traditions of Ayurveda.

See also [ edit ] Guṇa (Jainism) , the concept in Jainism Jain (Satvika) Maya Nirguna Brahman , Saguna Brahman References [ edit ] ^ a b guna Monier Williams' Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Cologne Digital Sanskrit Lexicon, Germany ^ a b guNa Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Koeln University, Germany ^ Larson, Gerald James.

Classical Samkhya: An Interpretation . p. 37. Referring to the opinions of Surendranath Dasgupta. Quote: "An older school of Samkhya can be seen in the Caraka Samhita and in the doctrines of Pancasikha in Mahabharata 12.219. This school accepted only twenty-four principles. It included purusa within the avyakta prakrti.

It had no theory of the gunas , and the ultimate salvation state was a kind of unconscious annihilation." ^ a b c d e f James G. Lochtefeld, "Guna", in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism : A–M, Vol. 1, Rosen Publishing, ISBN 978-0823931798 , p. 265 ^ a b c d e f Alban Widgery (1930), "The principles of Hindu Ethics", International Journal of Ethics , Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 234–237 ^ a b c Theos Bernard (1999), Hindu Philosophy , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120813731 , pp. 74–76 ^ Elankumaran, S (2004). "Personality, organizational climate and job involvement: An empirical study".

Journal of Human Values .

10 (2): 117– 130.

doi : 10.1177/097168580401000205 .

^ Deshpande, S; Nagendra, H. R.; Nagarathna, R (2009).

"A randomized control trial of the effect of yoga on Gunas (personality) and Self esteem in normal healthy volunteers" .

International Journal of Yoga .

2 (1): 13– 21.

doi : 10.4103/0973-6131.43287 .

PMC 3017961 .

PMID 21234210 .

^ Shilpa, S; Venkatesha Murthy, C. G. (2011).

"Understanding personality from Ayurvedic perspective for psychological assessment: A case" .

AYU .

32 (1): 12– 19.

doi : 10.4103/0974-8520.85716 .

PMC 3215408 .

PMID 22131752 .

^ a b Karl H. Potter (2011), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies , Volume 2: Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120803091 , p. 112 ^ a b c d Gerald James Larson and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya (2014), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies – Samkhya, A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy, Volume 4, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691604411 , pp. 65–66 ^ W Raffé (1952), Rāgas and Rāginīs: A key to Hindu aesthetics, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 11(2): 105–117 ^ Benjamin Woodbridge Dwight, Modern Philology: Comparative phonology. Comparative English etymology at Google Books ^ E Yamaguchi (1967), "A Consideration to Pratyaya-Sarga", Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies , 15, 16–22 ^ Klostermaier, K (1984). "Time in Patañjali's Yogasūtra".

Philosophy East and West .

34 (2): 205– 210.

doi : 10.2307/1398919 .

JSTOR 1398919 .

^ gaNana Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Germany ^ a b c d e Kapila Vatsyayan, Kalātattvakośa: Manifestation of nature : Sr̥ṣṭi vistāra, Volume 4, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120815476 , pp. 144–148 ^ tattva Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Koeln University, Germany ^ G. M. Bailey (1979), Trifunctional Elements in the Mythology of the Hindu Trimūrti, Numen , Vol. 26, Fasc. 2, pp. 152–163 ^ a b Gonda, Jan (1968). "The Hindu Trinity".

Anthropos .

63 : 215– 219.

^ Alter, Joseph S., Yoga in Modern India , 2004 Princeton University Press, p. 55 ^ a b Feuerstein, Georg The Shambhala Encyclopedia of Yoga, Shambhala Publications, 1997 ^ Whicher, Ian The Integrity of the Yoga Darśana , 1998 SUNY Press, p. 110 ^ a b Karl H. Potter (2011), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 2: Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120803091 , pp. 112–132 ^ Karl H. Potter (2011), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 2: Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120803091 , pp. 113–114 ^ a b Karl H. Potter and Sibajiban Bhattacharya (1994), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 6: Indian Philosophical Analysis, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691073842 , pp. 15–24 ^ Karl H. Potter and Sibajiban Bhattacharya (1994), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 6: Indian Philosophical Analysis, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691073842 , pp. 97–117 ^ a b c Christopher Key Chapple, The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth–Anniversary Edition, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-1438428420 , pp. 185–194, 330–332, 634–661 ^ Christopher Key Chapple, The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth–Anniversary Edition, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-1438428420 , p. 635 ^ a b Gideon Arulmani et al (2014), Handbook of Career Development: International Perspectives, Springer, ISBN 978-1461494591 , pp. 139–143 ^ a b 1st English translation : Christopher Key Chapple, The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth–Anniversary Edition, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-1438428420 , pp. 684–686; 2nd English Translation : Bhagavad Gita: Chapter 18 verses 23–25; With 11 interpretations/commentaries (Sanskrit): Bhagavad Gita Chapter 18.23–25; pp. 333–336 ^ Christopher Key Chapple, The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth–Anniversary Edition, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-1438428420 , pp. 681–683 ^ Swami Mukundananda.

"Bhagavad Gita: Chapter 2, Verse 45" .

^ a b S. Cromwell Crawford (2003), Chapter: Hindu Ethics, in Hindu Bioethics for the Twenty-first Century, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791457801 , pp. 11–30 ^ Michael Bommer et al (1987), A behavioral model of ethical and unethical decision making, Journal of Business Ethics, 6(4): 265–280 ^ N Pani (2009), Hinduism, in Handbook of Economics and Ethics (Editors: Jan Peil and Irene Staveren), Edward Elgar, ISBN 978-1845429362 , 216–221 ^ NK Shastree, Value Management In Professions, ISBN 978-8180693410 , pp. 21–30 ^ Klaus Klostermaier (1985), Mokṣa and Critical Theory, Philosophy East and West, 35(1): 61–71 ^ Karl Potter (2008), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies: Advaita Vedānta Up to Śaṃkara and His Pupils, Vol. 3, Motilal Banarsidass, pp. 210–215 ^ M Innes-Brown and S Chatterjee (1999), The Relevance of the Guna Theory in the Congruence of Eastern Values and Western Management Practice, Journal of Human Values, 5(2): 93–102 ^ a b c d James G. Lochtefeld (2001), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A-M, Rosen Publishing, ISBN 978-0823931798 , pp. 224, 265, 520 ^ Axel Michaels (2003), Notions of Nature in Traditional Hinduism, Environment across Cultures, Springer, ISBN 978-3642073243 , pp. 111–121 ^ Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on the Bhagavad-Gita, a New Translation and Commentary, Chapter 1–6. Penguin Books, 1969, p. 128 (v 45) and p. 269 v. 13 ^ MW Woollaston, A Practical Grammar of the Sanskrit Language at Google Books , Edward Hall, London ^ HA Woodham, Proceedings of the Philological Society, Vol. 1 at Google Books , No. 9, pp. 98–101 ^ Macdonald, Arthur Anthony (1927 [1886]), A Sanskrit Grammar for Students p. 11. Oxford: Oxford University Press ISBN 0198154666 ^ Chopra, Ananda S. (2003).

"Āyurveda" . In Selin, Helaine (ed.).

Medicine Across Cultures: History and Practice of Medicine in Non-Western Cultures . Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers . pp.

75– 83.

ISBN 1402011660 .

p. 76, citing Sushrutasamhita 25.36.

Further reading [ edit ] Narain, Harsh. "Finding an English Equivalent for 'Guna'".

Philosophy East and West 11.1 (1961): 45.

External links [ edit ] Sattva, Rajas & Tamas From The Mahabharata Guna debate 1 , One of many in The Vedanta-Sutras, Ramanuja's views, George Thibaut (Translator) Guna debate 2 , One of many in The Vedanta-Sutras, Shankara's views, George Thibaut (Translator) Chapter 2: Each is Great in His Own Place Sattva, Rajas & Tamas – gunas and Karma Yoga, Vivekananda Sattva, Rajas & Tamas From a Shamanic perspective Archived 2021-01-26 at the Wayback Machine v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guṇa&oldid=1301395102 " Category : Guna Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 15:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guṇa 32 languages Add topic

