Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Unrest 2 Economy 3 Population 4 Administrative divisions 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents North Caucasus 75 languages Адыгэбзэ العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ГӀалгӀай گیلکی 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Лезги Lietuvių Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°21′18″N 42°26′31″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.35500°N 42.44194°E ﻿ / 43.35500; 42.44194 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subregion in Eastern Europe For other uses, see North Caucasus (disambiguation) .

North Caucasus Map of North Caucasus Coordinates 43°21′18″N 42°26′31″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.35500°N 42.44194°E ﻿ / 43.35500; 42.44194 Country Russia Federal subjects Republic of Adygea Republic of Chechnya Republic of Dagestan Republic of Ingushetia Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria Republic of Kalmykia (partially) Republic of Karachay-Cherkessia Krasnodar Krai Republic of North Ossetia-Alania Rostov Oblast (partially) Stavropol Krai Demonym North Caucasian Time Zones UTC+03:00 Highest mountain Elbrus (5,642 metres (18,510 ft)) [ a ] The North Caucasus , [ b ] or Ciscaucasia , [ c ] is a subregion in Eastern Europe governed by Russia .

[ d ] It constitutes the northern part of the wider Caucasus region, which separates Europe and Asia . The North Caucasus is bordered by the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea to the west, the Caspian Sea to the east, and the Caucasus Mountains to the south. The region shares land borders with the countries of Georgia and Azerbaijan in the South Caucasus .

[ e ] Located in the southern part of the region, Mount Elbrus is the tallest peak in Europe.

[ a ] Krasnodar is the most populous among the urban centres in the region.

The North Caucasus came under Russian control in the 19th century, following the Caucasian War between the Russian Empire and the various regional powers. The territory is the southernmost portion of Russia and is divided between a number of republics and krais . It is administered as part of the North Caucasian and Southern Federal Districts and consists of Krasnodar Krai , Stavropol Krai , and the constituent republics, approximately from west to east: the Republic of Adygea , Karachay-Cherkessia , Kabardino-Balkaria , North Ossetia–Alania , Ingushetia , Chechnya , and Republic of Dagestan and to the north: Kalmykia .

[ 4 ] Geographically, the term North Caucasus also refers to the northern slope and western extremity of the Greater Caucasus mountain range, as well as a part of its southern slope to the West. The Pontic–Caspian steppe area is often also encompassed under the notion of a Ciscaucasus region, thus the northern boundary of the Forecaucasus steppe or Nogai steppe is generally considered to be the Manych River . Owing to its mild climate compared to much of Russia, the region has been described as Russia's " sunbelt ".

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Northern Caucasus, Early Bronze Age artifacts, 3rd millennium BCE.

Ancient cultures of the Northern Caucasus are known as Klin-Yar community, with one of the most notable cultures being the ancient Koban culture .

[ 5 ] Ciscaucasus was historically covered by the Pontic–Caspian steppe , mostly on fertile calcareous chernozyom soils, which has been almost completely tilled and grazed. It is bounded by the Sea of Azov on the west, and the Caspian Sea on the east. According to the Concise Atlas of the World, Second Edition (2008), the Ciscaucasus region lies on the European side of the "commonly-accepted division" that separates Europe from Asia.

[ d ] The Russian Empire completed the conquest of the North Caucasus by 1864. Between the 1850s and World War I, about a million North Caucasian Muslims, including Circassians , Chechens , Ingush, Ossetians, and others, became refugees in the Ottoman Empire .

[ 6 ] The Ottoman government settled North Caucasian refugees in territories of modern-day Turkey, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel, Iraq, Georgia, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, Kosovo, Greece, Cyprus, and North Macedonia, creating a large North Caucasian diaspora.

[ 7 ] Much of the Northern Caucasus seceded from Russia in March 1917 as the Mountainous Republic of the Northern Caucasus , taking advantage of the instability caused by the February Revolution and becoming a minor participant in the Russian Civil War . Mountainous Republic troops engaged in fierce clashes against the invading White General Anton Denikin 's Volunteer Army , before the latter's defeat at the hands of the Red Army . The region was informally occupied by the Soviet Union shortly afterwards, and the republic was forced into accepting a nonviolent annexation in January 1921. It was reformed into the Mountainous ASSR , which was later dissolved in October 1924, replaced by a series of autonomous Okrugs and Oblasts.

The outer border of the Soviet Union's North Caucasus Krai was the same as that of present-day North Caucasus Economic Region (Raion) which includes an oblast ( Rostov Oblast ), two krais ( Krasnodar Krai and Stavropol Krai ), and seven republics. The former North Caucasus Military District (Okrug) also included Astrakhan Oblast , Volgograd Oblast , and the Republic of Kalmykia . Its administrative center was Rostov-on-Don until 10 January 1934, Pyatigorsk until January 1936, then Ordzhonikidze (today Vladikavkaz) and, from 15 December 1936, Voroshilovsk (today Stavropol).

Unrest [ edit ] Main article: Insurgency in the North Caucasus The North Caucasus region experienced widespread unrest and insurgency after the fall of the Soviet Union, including a low-level armed conflict between Russia and militants associated with the Caucasus Emirate and, from June 2015, the Islamic State .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The insurgency became relatively dormant in its later years.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] During its peak, the violence was mostly concentrated in the North Caucasus republics of Chechnya , Dagestan , Ingushetia and Kabardino-Balkaria . Occasional incidents happened in surrounding regions, such as North Ossetia–Alania , Karachay-Cherkessia , Stavropol Krai , and Volgograd Oblast .

While the insurgency was officially declared over on 19 December 2017 when FSB Director Alexander Bortnikov announced the final elimination of the insurgent underground in the North Caucasus, [ 11 ] counter-terrorism operations in the North Caucasus have not ended.

[ 12 ] In June 2022, the US State Department advised citizens not to travel to the North Caucasus, including Chechnya and Mount Elbrus , due to terrorism, kidnapping and risk of civil unrest.

[ 13 ] Other paramilitaries active in the region have included the Confederation of Mountain Peoples of the Caucasus , a pan-Caucasian organization that based its flag and political agenda directly on those of the Mountainous Republic.

Economy [ edit ] The North Caucasus is considered part of peripheral Russia , and suffers from very low levels of economic development.

[ 14 ] The United States' National Intelligence Council in 2004 described the region as being dominated by corruption, weapons smuggling, and lagging economies.

[ 15 ] The main source of employment in the North Caucasus is the black market, [ 16 ] and organized crime is powerful in local business and politics.

[ 17 ] The Russian government has primarily focused on increasing the tourism sector in encouraging development in the North Caucasus. This strategy has proven unsuccessful, with only two percent of the region's economy coming from tourism revenues. Primary reasons that people do not travel to the North Caucasus include poor infrastructure in the region, frequent instability and violence, and the poor image of the Caucasus in the Russian public consciousness.

[ 18 ] Population [ edit ] Life expectancy at birth in the North Caucasus, 1990–2021 [ 19 ] [ 20 ] See also: List of federal subjects of Russia by life expectancy The North Caucasus, especially in its mountainous territories, has the highest life expectancy in Russia.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The region is known for a large number of centenarians .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The North Caucasus is extremely ethnically and linguistically diverse, which has been a historic driver of conflict in the region. Luxembourgish politician Anne Brasseur wrote in 2004 that "There is no other region in Russia or Eurasia in general in which so many peoples and ethnic groups with their various languages and cultures live together in such a small area." [ 24 ] The local population predominantly follows Sunni Islam , [ 25 ] with the exception of the Ossetians and Abkhazians .

[ 24 ] The western half of the North Caucasus (comprising the republics of Adygea, Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachay-Cherkessia, and North Ossetia) also has extant traditions of paganism, which have become closely connected to Islam. In contrast, the eastern portion of the North Caucasus (including Chechnya, Dagestan, and Ingushetia) is dominated by Sufism .

[ 26 ] Conflicts between Islamic ethnic groups are also frequent, with battles for control over religious and political institutions often overlapping. As an example, the takeover of the Spiritual Board of Muslims of Dagestan (now the Muftiate of the Republic of Dagestan [ ru ] ) by Sufi tariqa sheikhs, who were predominantly ethnic Avars , led to a conflict over the board's leadership, involving religious, ethnic, and political differences.

[ 25 ] Administrative divisions [ edit ] Krasnodar Krai Adygea KC KB Stavropol Krai Oss Ing Cya Dag- est- an Rostov Oblast Volgograd Oblast Kalmykia Ast- rakh- an Oblast class=notpageimage| The North Caucasus region within Russia Red : NC economic region, former NC krai, former NC military okrug Green : former NC military okrug Blue : NC economic region, NC federal okrug, former NC military okrug Russian political subdivisions associated with the region include: Mountain Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (Under RSFSR ) North Caucasian Federal District North Caucasian Soviet Republic North Caucasus economic region North Caucasian Krai North Caucasian Military District Southern Federal District Gallery [ edit ] Location of the North Caucasian Federal District Map of former North Caucasus Military District ( okrug ) Map of modern-day North Caucasus Economic Region ( raion ) Sophia Valley, Karachay-Cherkessia See also [ edit ] Europe portal Russia portal Geography portal Dolmens of the North Caucasus North Caucasian Federal University North Caucasian Railway Saray-Gora Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Mount Elbrus is widely considered to be the tallest European peak.

[ 3 ] ^ ( Adyghe : Темыр Къафкъас , romanized: Temır Qafqas ; Avar : Хьундасеб Кавказ ; Karachay-Balkar : Шимал Кавказ , romanized: Şimal Kavkaz ; Chechen : Къилбаседа Кавказ , romanized: Q̇ilbaseda Kavkaz ; Ingush : Даькъасте , romanized: Däq̇aste ; Kabardian : Ишхъэрэ Къаукъаз , romanized: İṩxhərə Qauqaz ; Ossetian : Цӕгат Кавказ , romanized: Cægat Kavkaz ; Russian : Северный Кавказ , romanized : Severnyy Kavkaz , IPA: [ˈsʲevʲɪrnɨj kɐfˈkas] ) ^ Russian : Предкавказье , romanized : Predkavkazye ; Also translated as Ciscaucasus or Forecaucasus ^ a b The northern part of the Caucasus is widely considered to be a part of the European continent, as it sits north the Greater Caucasus watershed.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] ^ The North Caucasus also shares borders with the two partially recognized breakaway states of South Ossetia and Abkhazia to its south, both of which are internationally recognised as part of Georgia.

References [ edit ] ^ 18th-century definitions drew the boundary north of the Caucasus, across the Kuma–Manych Depression . This definition remained in use in the Soviet Union during the 20th century.
In western literature, the continental boundary has been drawn along the Caucasus watershed since at least the mid-19th century.
See e.g. Baron von Haxthausen, "Transcaucasia" (1854); review Dublin university magazine Douglas W. Freshfield, " Journey in the Caucasus ", Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, Volumes 13–14, 1869.

^ "Europe" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

Among the alternative boundaries proposed by geographers that have gained wide acceptance is a scheme that sees the crest of the Greater Caucasus range as the dividing line between Europe and Asia, placing Ciscaucasia, the northern part of the Caucasus region, in Europe and Transcaucasia, the southern part, in Asia.

^ "El'brus" .

National Geographic . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

Mount El'brus is located in southwest Russia and is part of the Caucasus Mountains. It is the highest point in Russia as well as the highest point in all of Europe. It makes up part of the Prielbrusye National Park .

^ a b Hill, Fiona; Gaddy, Clifford (2003).

The Siberian Curse: How Communist Planners Left Russia Out in the Cold . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-8157-9618-3 .

The North Caucasus region extends across Rostov oblast and Stavropol and Krasnodar krays. It also encompasses the seven autonomous republics of Dagestan, Chechnya, Ingushetiya, North Ossetiya, Kabardino-Balkariya, Karachayevo-Cherkessiya, and Adygeya. The region accounts for about 2 percent of the territory of the Russian Federation and in 1989 had a population of 13,183,860, or about 8 percent of the Russian population. The North Caucasus could qualify as Russia's 'sunbelt.' ^ Sharko, Fedor S.; Boulygina, Eugenia S.; Tsygankova, Svetlana V.; Slobodova, Natalia V.; Rastorguev, Sergey M.; Krasivskaya, Anna A.; Belinsky, Andrej B.; Härke, Heinrich; Kadieva, Anna A.; Demidenko, Sergej V.; Malashev, Vladimir Yu; Shvedchikova, Tatiana Yu; Dobrovolskaya, Maria V.; Reshetova, Irina K.; Korobov, Dmitry S. (4 January 2024).

"Koban culture genome-wide and archeological data open the bridge between Bronze and Iron Ages in the North Caucasus" .

European Journal of Human Genetics .

32 (11): 1483– 1491.

doi : 10.1038/s41431-023-01524-4 .

ISSN 1476-5438 .

PMC 11576754.

PMID 38177408 .

S2CID 266745350 .

^ Hamed-Troyansky 2024 , p. 49.

^ Hamed-Troyansky 2024 , p. 2.

^ "Six Russian soldiers killed in Chechnya" .

BBC News . 24 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

Russian troops in Chechnya have faced a low level insurgency for years ... They still face a low-level insurgency in the mainly Muslim region in Russia's volatile North Caucasus area.

^ a b "Russia's North Caucasus Insurgency Widens as ISIS' Foothold Grows" .

www.worldpoliticsreview.com . 12 April 2016.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

Russia's North Caucasus insurgency has gone relatively quiet, but reduced casualty numbers belie a still-worrying situation where long-standing grievances remain.

^ a b Walker, Shaun (4 April 2017).

"Why suspicion over St Petersburg metro attack is likely to fall on Islamist groups" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 3 April 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

A renewed crackdown on any suspected militant activity in the run-up to the Sochi winter Olympics in 2014 and the departure of many militants to fight in Syria led to a weakening of the North Caucasus insurgency.

^ Нечаев А., Зайнашев Ю.

Россия выиграла еще одну важнейшую битву // Взгляд.ру , 19.12.2017 ^ Федеральный закон № 5-ФЗ от 12 января 1995, "О ветеранах" (in Russian) ^ "Russia Travel Advisory" .

travel.state.gov .

^ "Russia Country Report 2024" .

BTI Transformation Index . p. 18 . Retrieved 6 January 2025 .

^ Moroney & Karasik 2007 , p. 207.

^ Mamedov, O. Yu. (2014).

"Северному Кавказу современную экономику!" [The North Caucasus needs a modern economy!].

Terra Economicus (in Russian).

12 (1): 8 – via Cyberleninka.

^ Paul, Clarke & Serena 2014 , p. 120–121.

^ "III. The North Caucasus Resorts Project" .

Too Far, Too Fast: Sochi, Tourism and Conflict in the Caucasus .

International Crisis Group . 30 January 2014.

^ a b "Демографический ежегодник России" [The Demographic Yearbook of Russia] (in Russian).

Federal State Statistics Service of Russia (Rosstat) . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ a b "Ожидаемая продолжительность жизни при рождении" [Life expectancy at birth].

Unified Interdepartmental Information and Statistical System of Russia (in Russian) . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ "Russia: Mountain Air Leads To Long Life In North Caucasus" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 1 June 2007.

^ Sam Bedford (13 February 2018).

"Why the Caucasus Has So Many 100-Year-Olds" .

TheCultureTrip.com .

^ Science (29 January 2021).

"The Caucasus. The Oldest People In The World (Episode 3). Full Documentary" (video) . YouTube.

^ a b Brasseur, Anne (7 April 2006).

"Cultural diversity of the North Caucasus" .

Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe . Retrieved 6 January 2025 .

^ a b Melvin 2007 , p. 19.

^ Akayev 2010 , p. 64.

Bibliography [ edit ] Hamed-Troyansky, Vladimir (2024).

Empire of Refugees: North Caucasian Muslims and the Late Ottoman State . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-1-5036-3696-5 .

Moroney, Jennifer; Karasik, Theodore (2007).

"Case Study: The North Caucasus" .

Ungoverned Territories: Understanding and Reducing Terrorism Risks .

RAND Corporation . pp.

207– 242.

ISBN 978-0-8330-4152-4 .

JSTOR 10.7249/mg561af.19 .

Melvin, Neil J.

(1 May 2007).

Building Stability in the North Caucasus: Ways Forward for Russia and the European Union .

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . p. 68.

Paul, Christopher; Clarke, Colin P.; Serena, Chad C. (2014).

"The Caucasus (1990–2012)" .

Mexico Is Not Colombia: Alternative Historical Analogies for Responding to the Challenge of Violent Drug-Trafficking Organizations, Supporting Case Studies . RAND Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-8330-8447-7 .

JSTOR 10.7249/j.ctt7zvzdn.12 .

Akayev, Vakhit Kh. (1 January 2010).

"The Conflict between Traditional Islam and Wahhabism in the North Caucasus: Origins, Dynamics and the Means for its Resolution" .

Chechen Scholars on Chechnya .

Norwegian Institute of International Affairs . p. 88.

Further reading [ edit ] Zelkina, Anna.

In Quest for God and Freedom: Sufi Responses to the Russian Advance in the North Caucasus .

[ full citation needed ] Shaw, Denis J.B.

Russia in the Modern World: A New Geography . Institute of British Geographers.

[ full citation needed ] External links [ edit ] History of the Caucasus Media related to North Caucasus at Wikimedia Commons North Caucasus travel guide from Wikivoyage Relations between The North and South Caucasus. Articles in the Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 27 v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Regions of Europe North Arctic Arctic Circle Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Fennoscandia Baltoscandia Jutland Gotland Sápmi Ingria West Nordic Baltic Baltic Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Iceland Faroe Islands British Isles English Channel Channel Islands Livonia Curonian Spit Nemunas Delta Cap of the North East Danubian countries Prussia Galicia Volhynia Wallachia Transylvania Moldavia Bukovina Bessarabia Livonia Ruthenia Carpathian Ruthenia Donbas Sloboda Ukraine Sambia Peninsula Amber Coast Curonian Spit Izium Trail Lithuania Minor Nemunas Delta Baltic Baltic Sea Vyborg Bay Karelia East Karelia Karelian Isthmus Lokhaniemi Southeastern Balkans Crimea Caucasus Greater Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Kabardia European Russia Arctic Arctic Circle Taman Peninsula Southern Russia Kola Peninsula East European Plain Ryn Desert Cap of the North Central North European Plain Baltic Baltic Sea Alpine states Alpide belt Rhineland Eastphalia Westphalia Prussia Lusatia Bohemia Moravia Silesia Czech Silesia Pomerania Pomerelia Kashubia Bukovina Istria Transdanubia Polesia Germania Germania Slavica West Benelux Low Countries Northwest British Isles English Channel Channel Islands Cotentin Peninsula Doggerland Upper Rhine Plain Upper Rhine Gaul Gascony Normandy Brittany Septimania Batavia Gulf of Lion Iberia Al-Andalus Baetic System Meseta Central Pyrenees Alpide belt South Italy Po Valley ( Padania ) Italian Peninsula Tuscan Archipelago Insular Italy Aegadian Islands Occitania Iberia Al-Andalus Baetic System Meseta Central Gibraltar Arc Southeastern Epirus Rumelia Balkans Aegean Sea Aegean Islands Attica Boeotia Opuntian Locris Phocis Megaris Peloponnese Chalkidiki Aetolia Gulf of Chania Istria Mediterranean Alpide belt Related Germanic Romance Celtic Slavic countries European Plain Eurasian Steppe Pontic–Caspian steppe Wild Fields Pannonian Basin Great Hungarian Plain Little Hungarian Plain Eastern Slovak Lowland Macaronesia Regions of Europe v t e Russia articles History Timeline Proto-Indo-Europeans Scythians Sarmatians Early Slavs East Slavs Kievan Rus' Mongol invasion Appanage Russia Novgorod Vladimir Moscow Expansion (1500–1800) Tsardom of Russia Army Russian Empire February Revolution Russian Republic October Revolution Civil war Russian state Russian SFSR Establishment of Soviet power Soviet Union Great Patriotic War Eastern Bloc Dissolution Russian Federation Military First Chechen War Second Chechen War Russo-Ukrainian War By topic Economy Journalism Internet Judicial system of the Russian Empire LGBT Military Chechen–Russian conflict Postal Historical cities Bibliographies History of the Early Slavs and Rus' Russian history (1223–1613) Russian history (1613–1917) Russo-Japanese War Russia during World War I Russian Revolution and Civil War Stalinism and the Soviet Union Soviet Union during World War II Post Stalinist Soviet Union Russian history (1991–present) Navigation Outline of Russia Outline of the Russo-Ukrainian War Geography Animal welfare and rights Borders Cities and towns Climate Earthquakes Environment Environmental issues Extreme points European Russia Central Russian Upland Northwest Russia Meshchera Lowlands Oka–Don Lowland Smolensk Upland Fjords Geology Glaciers Great Russian Regions Highest points Islands Lakes Caspian Sea Mountains Caucasus Urals Volcanoes North Asia Siberia West Siberian Plain Russian Far East North Caucasus Rivers Protected areas Wildlife Far North Politics Anarchism Capital punishment Citizenship Civil Service Classified information Conscription Constitution Criminal code Elections Far-right politics Federal budget Foreign relations Foreign relations of Russia since the Russian invasion of Ukraine Freedom of assembly Impeachment Government ( Apparatus ) Judiciary Law Law enforcement Police Prisons Department security Political abuse of psychiatry Political divisions Propaganda Liberalism Conservatism Imperialism Irredentism Nationalism Martial law Monarchism Media freedom Neo-Nazism Military Territorial defense Intelligence agencies Opposition Political parties President of Russia Prime Minister of Russia Commonwealth of Independent States Collective Security Treaty Organization State Council State of emergency Civil defense Search and rescue Urban planning Mass surveillance Separatism Term limits Terrorism Union State Economy Agriculture Aircraft industry Banking Droughts and famines Car industry Central Bank Defence industry Economic regions Energy Fishing industry Forestry Financial districts Gambling Homelessness Mining Petroleum industry Postal codes Russian oligarchs Ruble (currency) Science and technology Academy of Sciences Shipbuilding Social security system Space industry Taxation Telecommunications Telephone numbers Tourism Trade unions Transport Federal highways Waste Water supply and sanitation Society Abortion Alcohol Anti-American sentiment Cannabis Censorship Corruption Crime Deafness Demographics Aging Domestic violence Doping Education Ethnic groups Feminism Forced public apologies Funerals Gun control Health Healthcare HIV/AIDS Mental health Human rights LGBTQ Immigration Illegal Labour Languages Life expectancy Open access Orphans Polygamy Prostitution Racism Religion Irreligion Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Sikhism Scouting Slavery Social entrepreneurship Sociology Smoking Suicide Wedding Witch trials Women in army Culture Architecture Armorial Army culture Honorary weapons Arts Ballet Cinema Cuisine Wine Fashion Fairy tales Fashion Festivals Folklore Traditions and superstitions Forms of addressing Graffiti Heraldry Internet Inventions Literature Martial arts Mass media Music Names of Russia Russian given name Nobility National symbols Anthem Coat of arms Imperial coat of arms Flag Russian tsars regalia Opera Panel buildings Personification Bear Winter Playing cards Philosophy Political jokes Public holidays Russian language Tea culture Television Seven Wonders Sports Unified Sports Classification System Yoga World Heritage sites Outline Category Portal v t e Soviet Union topics Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union History Index of Soviet Union–related articles Outline Russian Revolution February October Russian Civil War Russian SFSR Creation treaty New Economic Policy Stalinism Great Purge Great Patriotic War (World War II) Evacuation The Holocaust Cold War Khrushchev thaw Sino-Soviet split Soviet space program Caribbean Crisis Stagnation Soviet–Afghan War Perestroika Glasnost Chernobyl disaster Revolutions of 1989 August Coup Parade of sovereignties Dissolution Transition period and cessation of the existence Succession, continuity and legacy Post-Soviet states Nostalgia Geography Subdivisions Republics Autonomous Krais Oblasts Autonomous Autonomous okrugs Closed city Regions Baltic States Caspian Sea Caucasus Mountains Central Asia Crimea European Russia North Caucasus Russian Far East Siberia Transcaucasia Ural Mountains Volga Region West Siberian Plain Politics General Conscription Constitution 1924 1936 1977 Elections Foreign relations Brezhnev Doctrine Gun control Government List Ministries State Committees Human rights LGBT Law Capital punishment Leaders Collective leadership National delimitation Passport system Propiska Political parties State ideology Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Soviet anti-Zionism Bodies Communist Party organisation Congress Central Committee Presidium/Politburo Secretariat General Secretary Congress of Soviets (1922–1936) Supreme Soviet (1938–1991) Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991) Supreme Court Military Collegium All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions Creative unions Offices Heads of state President Premier Deputy Premier First Deputy Premier Security services Cheka GPU NKVD Destruction battalions MVD Militsiya MGB KGB Chairmen Soviet Border Troops Soviet Armed Forces Soviet Army / Spetsnaz GRU • Soviet Navy • Soviet Air Forces / Soviet Airborne Forces Political repression Red Terror Collectivization Great Purge Population transfer Forced labor Foreign forced labor POW labor Gulag List Holodomor Political abuse of psychiatry Anti-abuse struggle War crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war Ideological repression Persecution of Christians Eastern Catholics Science Censorship Censorship of images Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank State Labor Savings Banks System Economic planning Energy policy Enterprises Five-year plans Industrialization Internet domain Inventions Net material product OGAS Economic reforms 1956–1962 Wage reform 1957 1965 1973 1979 Rouble (currency) Monetary reforms 1947 1961 1991 Automotive industry Construction Transport Ministry of Railways Railway system Rail transport Railway electrification List of metro systems Vehicle registration plates Science Communist Academy Cybernetics Academy of Sciences Academy of Medical Sciences Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences Sharashkas Naukograds List Society Antisemitism Crime Demographics Soviet people Working class 1989 census Drug policy Ethnic conflicts Family Languages Linguistics Cyrillisation Prohibition Racism Culture Ballet Cinema Fashion Literature Music Opera Phraseology Printed media Propaganda Publishing houses Religion Islam Sports Stalinist architecture Broadcasting Radio Television Opposition Anti-Soviet agitation Soviet dissidents and their groups List Symbols Anthem Republics Emblem Republics Flag Republics Hammer and sickle Soviet Union portal Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4pjhf
Cached time: 20250817045501
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.006 seconds
Real time usage: 1.303 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6383/1000000
Revision size: 27384/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 388339/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 37341/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 40/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141625/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.542/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20699422/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  968.342      1 -total
 18.74%  181.515      2 Template:Reflist
 17.07%  165.301     19 Template:Navbox
 14.65%  141.906      7 Template:Efn
 11.18%  108.308      9 Template:Langx
 10.22%   98.946      1 Template:Regions_of_the_world
 10.17%   98.432      1 Template:Infobox
  6.79%   65.763      1 Template:Russia_topics
  6.60%   63.901      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.60%   63.877      1 Template:Country_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:482121:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045501 and revision id 1289285979. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=North_Caucasus&oldid=1289285979 " Categories : Eurasia North Caucasus Caucasus Southern Russia Regions of Russia Eastern Europe Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Adyghe-language text Articles containing Avar-language text Articles containing Karachay-Balkar-language text Articles containing Chechen-language text Articles containing Ingush-language text Articles containing Kabardian-language text Articles containing Ossetian-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents North Caucasus 75 languages Add topic

