Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 20th century 1.2 21st century 1.3 Reception 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Regnery Publishing 6 languages Български Deutsch Español Français Shqip Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conservative book publisher based in Washington, D.C.

Regnery Publishing Parent company Skyhorse Publishing Founded 1947 Founder Henry Regnery Country of origin United States Headquarters location Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Distribution Simon & Schuster [ 1 ] Nonfiction topics Conservatism Imprints Regnery Gateway, Regnery History, Regnery Kids, ISI Books Official website www .regnery .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Regnery Publishing is a politically conservative book publisher based in Washington, D.C.

The company was founded by Henry Regnery in 1947.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In December 2023, Regnery was acquired from Salem Media Group by Skyhorse Publishing , with Skyhorse president Tony Lyons becoming Regnery's publisher.

[ 5 ] Regnery has published books by Haley Barbour , Ann Coulter , Ted Cruz , Newt Gingrich , Josh Hawley , David Horowitz , Michelle Malkin , Barbara Olson , Sarah Palin , Mike Pence , Robert Spencer , and others.

History [ edit ] 20th century [ edit ] Regnery Publishing has existed as a series of companies associated with Henry Regnery . The first, Henry Regnery Company , was founded in Chicago in 1947 and split in 1977, forming Regnery Gateway Inc.

and Contemporary Books Inc. Under the leadership of Henry Regnery's son, Alfred Regnery , Regnery Gateway became the present-day Regnery Publishing.

[ 6 ] After helping to found Human Events as a weekly newsletter, Regnery began publishing monthly pamphlets and books. Some of the first pamphlets he published, including a reprint of a speech by University of Chicago president Robert M. Hutchins , criticized the harsh treatment of Germans and Japanese both in popular attitudes and in postwar administration of the former Axis countries .

[ 7 ] [ page needed ] Regnery published the pamphlets and some books under the name Human Events Associates in 1946. He began publishing under his own name in September 1947. The first book published by the Henry Regnery Company was by socialist Victor Gollancz , who ran the Left Book Club in Great Britain. A man of Jewish heritage, Gollancz was appalled at the bombing of German civilians late in the war and by the treatment of the country afterward. Gollancz published In Darkest Germany in Britain but was unable to find an American publisher for his ideas. He approached Regnery, who agreed to publish it. Regnery subsequently published the U.S. edition of Our Threatened Values by Gollancz.

[ 7 ] Regnery's third book was The Hitler in Our Selves , by Max Picard . Other early books included The German Opposition to Hitler by the German nationalist Hans Rothfels and The High Cost of Vengeance (1949) by Freda Utley which was critical of the Allies' air campaign and post-war occupation. Utley's book was the first Regnery book to be reviewed in The New York Times , where it was excoriated.

[ 8 ] Reinhold Niebuhr gave it a positive review in The Nation magazine.

[ 7 ] The company was founded as a nonprofit corporation. Regnery later wrote that it was initially organized that way, "not because I had any ideological objection to profits, but because, as it seemed to me then, and does still, in matters of excellence the market is a poor judge. The books that are most needed are often precisely those that will have only a modest sale." The Internal Revenue Service forced the company to be reorganized as a for-profit concern on March 1, 1948. Regnery hired his first few employees that year.

[ 7 ] Regnery published some of the first and most important books of the postwar American conservative movement. "[I]t was a measure of the grip that liberal-minded editors had on American publishing at the time that Regnery, which was founded in 1947, was one of only two houses known to be sympathetic to conservative authors", according to Henry Regnery's 1996 obituary in The New York Times .

In the early 1950s, Regnery published two books by Robert Welch , who went on to found the John Birch Society in 1958. In May God Forgive Us , Welch criticized influential foreign-policy analysts and policymakers and accused many of working to further Communism as part of a conspiracy.

[ 9 ] In 1954, Regnery published Welch's biography of John Birch , an American Baptist missionary in China who was killed by Chinese Communists after he became a U.S. intelligence officer in World War II.

In 1951, Regnery published God and Man at Yale , the first book written by William F. Buckley, Jr.

At that time, Regnery had a close affiliation with the University of Chicago and published classics for the Great Books series at the University, but he lost the contract as a result of publishing Buckley's book.

[ 6 ] In 1953, Regnery published Russell Kirk 's work The Conservative Mind , a seminal book for post- World War II American conservatism, as well as books by Albert Jay Nock , James J. Kilpatrick , James Burnham and Whittaker Chambers . He also published paperback editions of literary works by authors such as novelist Wyndham Lewis and the poets T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound .

[ 6 ] In 1954, Regnery published McCarthy and His Enemies by William F. Buckley and L. Brent Bozell Jr.

"Although Mr. Buckley [...] had criticized the senator for 'gross exaggerations,' Mr. McCarthy said he would not dispute the merits of the book with the authors", according to a news article in The New York Times . While criticizing McCarthy, the book was sympathetic to him (and in fact was harsher on McCarthy's critics than it was on the senator for making false allegations [ 10 ] ), and McCarthy attended a reception for the authors.

[ 11 ] In 1977, the Henry Regnery Company split, with Henry Regnery moving to Washington D.C.

to form Regnery Gateway Inc. He took with him many of the Henry Regnery Company's rights to political, philosophical, psychological, and religious books along with a few select titles from other genres and the trademark for the Gateway Editions series. The original Henry Regnery Company remained in Chicago and was renamed Contemporary Books. Contemporary was purchased by Tribune Company and merged with Compton's Multimedia Publishing Group to form Tribune Education, [ 12 ] which was acquired in 2000 by McGraw-Hill .

[ 13 ] In the 1980s, Alfred S. Regnery , son of Henry Regnery, took control of Regnery Gateway.

In 1993, the Regnery family sold the publishing company to Phillips Publishing International, which put the book publishing company into its Eagle Publishing subsidiary, which also published the weekly Human Events .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] At that time, Regnery Gateway was renamed Regnery Publishing Inc. Alfred Regnery left his post as president of Regnery Publishing in the 2000s to become the publisher of The American Spectator magazine.

[ 16 ] Alex Novak, son of political columnist Robert Novak , is associate publisher of Regnery's history imprint.

21st century [ edit ] One of Regnery's publishing lines is the Politically Incorrect Guide (P.I.G.) series of books, introduced in 2004 to present conservative views of historical or current events, such as the American Civil War , the British Empire , the Roman Catholic Church , Islam , immigration , and climate change .

[ 17 ] In November 2007, Jerome Corsi , Bill Gertz , Robert "Buzz" Patterson, Joel Mowbray, and Richard Miniter , five authors whose works had been published by Regnery, filed a lawsuit over royalties claiming that Regnery had been self-dealing by diverting book sales away from retail outlets and to book clubs and other channels owned by Regnery's then-parent company, Eagle Publishing.

[ 18 ] On January 30, 2008, a federal judge dismissed all eight counts of the lawsuit because the authors had signed contracts with Regnery which included a mandatory arbitration clause in their contracts, and three of the authors later sought arbitration (Miniter, Corsi, and Mowbray).

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In December 2011, the American Arbitration Association released its decision on the arbitration case, ruling in favor of Regnery on all counts.

[ 22 ] In January 2014, Regnery was acquired along with other Eagle Publishing properties by Salem Communications .

[ 23 ] On July 18, 2018, Simon & Schuster issued a press release announcing an international distribution agreement with Regnery Publishing to begin July 2018. According to the terms of the agreement, Regnery retained responsibility for sales of its titles in the United States while Simon & Schuster began to handle distribution in the United States and both sales and distribution in Canada and export markets around the world.

[ 24 ] In 2020, Regnery Publishing published Irreversible Damage , a book that endorses the controversial concept of rapid-onset gender dysphoria (ROGD), [ 25 ] despite the lack of evidence supporting a diagnosis .

[ citation needed ] After U.S. Senator Josh Hawley lost a publishing contract with Simon & Schuster in the aftermath of the 2021 storming of the U.S. Capitol for his role in objecting to the certification of the Electoral College results in the 2020 presidential election , Regnery Publishing said it would publish Hawley's book.

[ 26 ] In early 2023, Regnery acquired ISI Books, the publishing division of the Intercollegiate Studies Institute .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] In December 2023, Skyhorse Publishing announced that it was purchasing Regnery, with Skyhorse president Tony Lyons becoming publisher of Regnery.

[ 5 ] In January 2024, Skyhorse announced the phasing out of Regnery's religious imprint, Salem Books, in favor of Skyhorse's existing Good Books imprint.

[ 29 ] Reception [ edit ] In November 2001, Nicholas Confessore , then a writer for the American Prospect , wrote the following about Regnery's position in the publishing world: Welcome to the world of Regnery Publishing—lifestyle press for conservatives, preferred printer of presidential hopefuls, and venerable publisher of books for the culture wars. Call it—gracelessly but more accurately—a medium-sized, loosely linked network of conservative types, with few degrees of separation and similar political aims. Just don't call it a conspiracy.

[ 30 ] Some reviewers have criticized the Politically Incorrect Guide books for their accuracy. In March 2005, historian David Greenberg wrote that The Politically Incorrect Guide to American History was " incorrect in more than just its politics" and that "it would be tedious to debunk." [ 31 ] In August 2006, one critic called The Politically Incorrect Guide to Darwinism and Intelligent Design "not only politically incorrect but incorrect in most other ways as well: scientifically, logically, historically, legally, academically, and morally." [ 32 ] In May 2008, Chris Mooney criticized The Politically Incorrect Guide to Science as "The Incorrect Guide to Science." [ 33 ] Peter Bacon of Harvard Political Review took issue with The Politically Incorrect Guide to the Civil War for its "cherry-picked research and one-sided judgments of figures." [ 34 ] References [ edit ] ^ "S&S to Distribute Regnery" .

Publishers Weekly . Retrieved February 6, 2018 .

^ Doherty, Brian (2009).

"Fighting for the freedom philosophy" .

Radicals for Capitalism: A Freewheeling History of the Modern American Libertarian Movement .

PublicAffairs . p. 168.

ISBN 9780786731886 .

^ "The Alt-Right Side of History Will Prevail" .

Mother Jones .

^ "Regnery Publishing" .

Media Matters .

^ a b Milliot, Jim.

"Skyhorse Buys Regnery Publishing" .

PublishersWeekly.com . Retrieved April 4, 2024 .

^ a b c Thomas Jr., Robert McG.

, "Henry Regnery, 84, Ground-Breaking Conservative Publisher" , obituary, The New York Times , June 23, 2007.

^ a b c d Regnery, Henry S., Memoirs of a Dissident Publisher Archived 2007-12-01 at the Wayback Machine , Lake Bluff, Ill.: Regnery Gateway Inc., 1985, ISBN 0-89526-802-7 ; online edition accessed September 8, 2007.

^ Clark, Delbert (July 10, 1949).

"Review: Western Rule in Germany; The High Cost of Vengeance. By Freda Utley" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 1, 2018 .

(subscription required) ^ Smith, Robert Aura, "One Man's Opinions", book review in The New York Times , November 16, 1952.

^ White, William S., "What the McCarthy Method Seeks to Establish", book review of McCarthy and His Enemies , The New York Times , April 4, 1954.

^ Conklin, William R., "M'Carthy Seeking To Push Inquiries: Would Turn to Other Cases if Army Dispute Is Delayed by Hunt for Counsel" , The New York Times , March 31, 1954.

^ Widder, Pat (July 7, 1993).

"Tribune Buys Multimedia, Book Firms" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved March 30, 2014 .

^ Schmeltzer, John (June 27, 2000).

"McGraw-Hill To Buy Tribune Education" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved March 30, 2014 .

^ Thomas L. Phillips Young America's Foundation .

^ Thomas L. Phillips NNDB .

^ Alfred Regnery NNDB . In April 2003, Marjory Grant Ross took over as President and Publisher.

[regnery leadership] ^ "Series - Regnery Publishing" .

Regnery Publishing . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ Motoko Rich, " Conservative Authors Sue Publisher" , The New York Times , October 7, 2007.

^ Rich, Motoko (February 2, 2008).

"Authors Suit Dismissed" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 4, 2009 .

^ Memorandum Opinion , US District Court for District of Columbia, January 30, 2008.

^ "Regnery Wins Arbitration Ruling" .

Publishers Weekly . March 13, 2008. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008 . Retrieved April 11, 2009 .

^ "Arbitrator Finds for Regnery in Author Dispute" .

Publishers Weekly . December 19, 2011.

^ "Salem Communications Buys Eagle Publishing" , Publishers Weekly , January 13, 2014.

^ "Simon & Schuster and Regnery Publishing in Worldwide Distribution Agreement" .

Simon & Schuster . January 18, 2018. Archived from the original (Press release) on July 7, 2019 . Retrieved July 7, 2019 .

Simon & Schuster, Inc., announced today that it has entered into a distribution agreement with Regnery Publishing, a leading publisher of conservative books. Under the agreement, beginning July 1, 2018, Simon & Schuster will handle distribution for Regnery titles in all markets and territories around the world. Regnery will continue to be responsible for sales of its titles in the United States, while Simon & Schuster will handle sales in Canada and export markets.

^ Eckert, A.J. (July 4, 2021).

"Irreversible Damage to the Trans Community: A Critical Review of Abigail Shrier's book Irreversible Damage (Part One)" .

Science-Based Medicine . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ Gross, Jenny (January 18, 2021).

"Regnery Publishing picks up Senator Hawley's book after it was dropped by Simon & Schuster" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 18, 2021 .

^ "Regnery Publishing Buys ISI Books" .

^ "ISI Books" .

Regnery Publishing . Retrieved May 1, 2023 .

^ Wenner, Emma.

"Skyhorse to Phase Out Regnery's Salem Books Imprint" .

PublishersWeekly.com . Retrieved April 4, 2024 .

^ Confessore, Nicholas (November 14, 2001).

"Hillary Was Right" .

American Prospect . Retrieved September 11, 2023 .

^ Greenberg, David (March 11, 2005).

"History for Dummies: The troubling popularity of The Politically Incorrect Guide to American History" .

Slate Magazine .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2022 .

^ Cartwright, Reed A. (August 19, 2006).

"The Politically Incorrect Guide to Darwinism and Intelligent Design Review" .

Panda's Thumb . Archived from the original on September 27, 2006 . Retrieved November 4, 2006 .

^ Yes, Virginia, There is a War on Science ^ "The Original Culture War - Harvard Political Review" .

Harvard Political Review . March 4, 2009 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Human Events' website Eagle Publishing's website v t e Salem Media Group AM radio stations KBJD KCBQ KDIA KDIZ KDOW KDYA KDZR KFAX KFIA KGNW KGU KHCM KHNR KKOL KKMS KKNT KLUP KNTH KNUS KPAM KPDQ KPRZ KPXQ KRKS KRLA KSKY KSLR KTIE KTKZ KTNO KTRB KXXT KYCR KZNT WAVA WDTK WDWD WEZE WFIL WGKA WHK WHKW WIND WLCC WLQV WLSS WLTA WMCA WMYM WNIV WNTP WNYM WORL WPGP WPIT WRFD WRHC WROL WTBN WTLN WTWD WWFE WWRC WWTC WYLL FM radio stations KDAR KDIS-FM KDXE KGFT KGU-FM KHCM-FM KKHT-FM KKLA-FM KKOL-FM KPDQ-FM KRKS-FM KRYP KWRD-FM WAVA-FM WORD-FM WTOH Satellite radio stations FamilyTalk Salem Radio Network Singing News Radio The Word In Praise Townhall Media Hot Air PJ Media RedState Townhall Twitchy Salem Web Network CCMmagazine.com Christianity.com Crosswalk.com Godtube.com v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Australia Poland People Trove Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regnery_Publishing&oldid=1279134938 " Categories : Regnery Publishing 1947 establishments in Illinois Conservative media in the United States Privately held companies based in Washington, D.C.

Publishing companies established in 1947 Salem Media Group properties Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 19:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regnery Publishing 6 languages Add topic

