Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Required education 3 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 3.1 Applied mathematics 3.2 Pure mathematics 3.3 Mathematics teaching 3.4 Consulting 4 Occupations 5 Prizes in mathematics 6 Mathematical autobiographies 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Mathematician 101 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Livvinkarjala Magyar मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person with an extensive knowledge of mathematics This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mathematician" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mathematician Euclid (holding calipers ), Greek mathematician, known as the "Father of Geometry" Occupation Occupation type Academic Description Competencies Mathematics , analytical skills and critical thinking skills Education required Doctoral degree , occasionally master's degree Fields of employment universities, private corporations, financial industry, government Related jobs statistician , actuary Part of a series on Mathematics History Index Areas Number theory Geometry Algebra Calculus and Analysis Discrete mathematics Logic Set theory Probability Statistics and Decision theory Relationship with sciences Physics Chemistry Geosciences Computation Biology Linguistics Economics Philosophy Education Mathematics Portal v t e A mathematician is someone who uses an extensive knowledge of mathematics in their work, typically to solve mathematical problems . Mathematicians are concerned with numbers , data , quantity , structure , space , models , and change .

History For broader coverage of this topic, see History of mathematics .

One of the earliest known mathematicians was Thales of Miletus ( c.

624 – c.

546 BC ); he has been hailed as the first true mathematician and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed.

[ 1 ] He is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry , by deriving four corollaries to Thales's theorem .

The number of known mathematicians grew when Pythagoras of Samos ( c.

582 – c.

507 BC ) established the Pythagorean school , whose doctrine it was that mathematics ruled the universe and whose motto was "All is number".

[ 2 ] It was the Pythagoreans who coined the term "mathematics", and with whom the study of mathematics for its own sake begins.

The first woman mathematician recorded by history was Hypatia of Alexandria ( c.

AD 350 – 415). She succeeded her father as librarian at the Great Library and wrote many works on applied mathematics. Because of a political dispute, the Christian community in Alexandria punished her, presuming she was involved, by stripping her naked and scraping off her skin with clamshells (some say roofing tiles).

[ 3 ] Science and mathematics in the Islamic world during the Middle Ages followed various models and modes of funding varied based primarily on scholars. It was extensive patronage and strong intellectual policies implemented by specific rulers that allowed scientific knowledge to develop in many areas. Funding for translation of scientific texts in other languages was ongoing throughout the reign of certain caliphs, [ 4 ] and it turned out that certain scholars became experts in the works they translated, and in turn received further support for continuing to develop certain sciences. As these sciences received wider attention from the elite, more scholars were invited and funded to study particular sciences. An example of a translator and mathematician who benefited from this type of support was Al-Khawarizmi . A notable feature of many scholars working under Muslim rule in medieval times is that they were often polymaths. Examples include the work on optics , maths and astronomy of Ibn al-Haytham .

The Renaissance brought an increased emphasis on mathematics and science to Europe. During this period of transition from a mainly feudal and ecclesiastical culture to a predominantly secular one, many notable mathematicians had other occupations: Luca Pacioli (founder of accounting ); Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia (notable engineer and bookkeeper); Gerolamo Cardano (earliest founder of probability and binomial expansion); Robert Recorde (physician) and François Viète (lawyer).

As time passed, many mathematicians gravitated towards universities. An emphasis on free thinking and experimentation had begun in Britain's oldest universities beginning in the seventeenth century at Oxford with the scientists Robert Hooke and Robert Boyle , and at Cambridge where Isaac Newton was Lucasian Professor of Mathematics & Physics . Moving into the 19th century, the objective of universities all across Europe evolved from teaching the "regurgitation of knowledge" to "encourag[ing] productive thinking." [ 5 ] In 1810, Alexander von Humboldt convinced the king of Prussia , Fredrick William III , to build a university in Berlin based on Friedrich Schleiermacher 's liberal ideas; the goal was to demonstrate the process of the discovery of knowledge and to teach students to "take account of fundamental laws of science in all their thinking." Thus, seminars and laboratories started to evolve.

[ 6 ] British universities of this period adopted some approaches familiar to the Italian and German universities, but as they already enjoyed substantial freedoms and autonomy the changes there had begun with the Age of Enlightenment , the same influences that inspired Humboldt. The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge emphasized the importance of research , arguably more authentically implementing Humboldt's idea of a university than even German universities, which were subject to state authority.

[ 7 ] Overall, science (including mathematics) became the focus of universities in the 19th and 20th centuries. Students could conduct research in seminars or laboratories and began to produce doctoral theses with more scientific content.

[ 8 ] According to Humboldt, the mission of the University of Berlin was to pursue scientific knowledge.

[ 9 ] The German university system fostered professional, bureaucratically regulated scientific research performed in well-equipped laboratories, instead of the kind of research done by private and individual scholars in Great Britain and France.

[ 10 ] In fact, Rüegg asserts that the German system is responsible for the development of the modern research university because it focused on the idea of "freedom of scientific research, teaching and study." [ 11 ] Required education Mathematicians usually cover a breadth of topics within mathematics in their undergraduate education , and then proceed to specialize in topics of their own choice at the graduate level . In some universities, a qualifying exam serves to test both the breadth and depth of a student's understanding of mathematics; the students who pass are permitted to work on a doctoral dissertation .

Activities Emmy Noether , mathematical theorist and teacher Applied mathematics Main article: Applied mathematics Mathematicians involved with solving problems with applications in real life are called applied mathematicians . Applied mathematicians are mathematical scientists who, with their specialized knowledge and professional methodology, approach many of the imposing problems presented in related scientific fields. With professional focus on a wide variety of problems, theoretical systems, and localized constructs, applied mathematicians work regularly in the study and formulation of mathematical models . Mathematicians and applied mathematicians are considered to be two of the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) careers.

[ citation needed ] The discipline of applied mathematics concerns itself with mathematical methods that are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry; thus, "applied mathematics" is a mathematical science with specialized knowledge. The term "applied mathematics" also describes the professional specialty in which mathematicians work on problems, often concrete but sometimes abstract. As professionals focused on problem solving, applied mathematicians look into the formulation, study, and use of mathematical models in science , engineering , business , and other areas of mathematical practice.

Pure mathematics Main article: Pure mathematics Pure mathematics is mathematics that studies entirely abstract concepts . From the eighteenth century onwards, this was a recognized category of mathematical activity, sometimes characterized as speculative mathematics , [ 12 ] and at variance with the trend towards meeting the needs of navigation , astronomy , physics , economics , engineering , and other applications.

Another insightful view put forth is that pure mathematics is not necessarily applied mathematics : it is possible to study abstract entities with respect to their intrinsic nature, and not be concerned with how they manifest in the real world.

[ 13 ] Even though the pure and applied viewpoints are distinct philosophical positions, in practice there is much overlap in the activity of pure and applied mathematicians.

To develop accurate models for describing the real world, many applied mathematicians draw on tools and techniques that are often considered to be "pure" mathematics. On the other hand, many pure mathematicians draw on natural and social phenomena as inspiration for their abstract research.

Mathematics teaching Many professional mathematicians also engage in the teaching of mathematics. Duties may include: teaching university mathematics courses; supervising undergraduate and graduate research; and serving on academic committees.

Consulting Many careers in mathematics outside of universities involve consulting. For instance, actuaries assemble and analyze data to estimate the probability and likely cost of the occurrence of an event such as death, sickness, injury, disability, or loss of property. Actuaries also address financial questions, including those involving the level of pension contributions required to produce a certain retirement income and the way in which a company should invest resources to maximize its return on investments in light of potential risk. Using their broad knowledge, actuaries help design and price insurance policies, pension plans, and other financial strategies in a manner which will help ensure that the plans are maintained on a sound financial basis.

As another example, mathematical finance will derive and extend the mathematical or numerical models without necessarily establishing a link to financial theory, taking observed market prices as input. Mathematical consistency is required, not compatibility with economic theory. Thus, for example, while a financial economist might study the structural reasons why a company may have a certain share price , a financial mathematician may take the share price as a given, and attempt to use stochastic calculus to obtain the corresponding value of derivatives of the stock ( see: Valuation of options ; Financial modeling ).

Occupations In 1938 in the United States, mathematicians were desired as teachers, calculating machine operators, mechanical engineers, accounting auditor bookkeepers, and actuary statisticians.

According to the Dictionary of Occupational Titles occupations in mathematics include the following.

[ 14 ] Mathematician Operations-Research Analyst Mathematical Statistician Mathematical Technician Actuary Applied Statistician Weight Analyst Prizes in mathematics There is no Nobel Prize in mathematics, though sometimes mathematicians have won the Nobel Prize in a different field, such as economics or physics. Prominent prizes in mathematics include the Abel Prize , the Chern Medal , the Fields Medal , the Gauss Prize , the Nemmers Prize , the Balzan Prize , the Crafoord Prize , the Shaw Prize , the Steele Prize , the Wolf Prize , the Schock Prize , and the Nevanlinna Prize .

The American Mathematical Society , Association for Women in Mathematics , and other mathematical societies offer several prizes aimed at increasing the representation of women and minorities in the future of mathematics.

Mathematical autobiographies Several well known mathematicians have written autobiographies in part to explain to a general audience what it is about mathematics that has made them want to devote their lives to its study. These provide some of the best glimpses into what it means to be a mathematician. The following list contains some works that are not autobiographies, but rather essays on mathematics and mathematicians with strong autobiographical elements.

The Book of My Life - Girolamo Cardano [ 15 ] A Russian Childhood - Sofya Kovaleskaya A Mathematician's Apology - G.H. Hardy [ 16 ] A Mathematician's Miscellany (republished as Littlewood's miscellany) - J. E. Littlewood [ 17 ] I Am a Mathematician - Norbert Wiener [ 18 ] I Want to be a Mathematician - Paul R. Halmos Adventures of a Mathematician - Stanislaw Ulam [ 19 ] Enigmas of Chance - Mark Kac [ 20 ] The Apprenticeship of a Mathematician - André Weil Indiscrete Thoughts - Gian-Carlo Rota A Mathematician Grappling with His Century - Laurent Schwartz Saunders Mac Lane: A Mathematical Autobiography - Saunders Mac Lane The Map of My Life - Goro Shimura Yesterday and Long Ago - V.I. Arnold Random Curves - Neal Koblitz Жизнеописание Льва Семеновича Понтрягина, математика, составленное им самим (trans. Biography of Lev Semionovich Pontryagin, Mathematician, Composed by Himself) - Lev Pontryagin Love and Math - Edward Frenkel Mathematics Without Apologies - Michael Harris [ 21 ] See also Mathematics portal Lists of mathematicians List of films about mathematicians Human computer – Person performing mathematical calculations, before electronic calculators Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Mathematical joke – Humor about mathematics or mathematicians A Mathematician's Apology – 1940 essay by British mathematician G. H. Hardy Men of Mathematics – Popular history book of mathematics by E.T. Bell Mental calculator – Arithmetical calculations using only the human brain Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Timeline of ancient Greek mathematicians Notes ^ Boyer 1991 , p. 43.

^ Boyer 1991 , p. 49.

^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Socrates Scholasticus: The Murder of Hypatia (late 4th Cent.) from Ecclesiastical History, Bk VI: Chap. 15" .

Internet History Sourcebooks Project .

Archived from the original on 2014-08-14 . Retrieved 2014-11-19 .

^ Abattouy, Renn & Weinig 2001 .

[ page needed ] ^ Röhrs, "The Classical Idea of the University", Tradition and Reform of the University under an International Perspective p.20 ^ Rüegg 2004 , pp. 5–6.

^ Rüegg 2004 , p. 12.

^ Rüegg 2004 , p. 13.

^ Rüegg 2004 , p. 16.

^ Rüegg 2004 , pp. 17–18.

^ Rüegg 2004 , p. 31.

^ See for example titles of works by Thomas Simpson from the mid-18th century: Essays on Several Curious and Useful Subjects in Speculative and Mixed Mathematicks , Miscellaneous Tracts on Some Curious and Very Interesting Subjects in Mechanics, Physical Astronomy and Speculative Mathematics .

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Simpson, Thomas" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 135.

^ Andy Magid, Letter from the Editor, in Notices of the AMS , November 2005, American Mathematical Society, p.1173.

[1] Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ "020 OCCUPATIONS IN MATHEMATICS" .

Dictionary Of Occupational Titles . Archived from the original on 2012-11-02 . Retrieved 2013-01-20 .

^ Cardano, Girolamo (2002), The Book of My Life (De Vita Propria Liber) , The New York Review of Books, ISBN 1-59017-016-4 ^ Hardy 2012 ^ Littlewood, J. E.

(1990) [Originally A Mathematician's Miscellany published in 1953], Béla Bollobás (ed.), Littlewood's miscellany , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-33702 X ^ Wiener, Norbert (1956), I Am a Mathematician / The Later Life of a Prodigy , The M.I.T. Press, ISBN 0-262-73007-3 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Ulam, S. M. (1976), Adventures of a Mathematician , Charles Scribner's Sons, ISBN 0-684-14391-7 ^ Kac, Mark (1987), Enigmas of Chance / An Autobiography , University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-05986-7 ^ Harris, Michael (2015), Mathematics without apologies / portrait of a problematic vocation , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-15423-7 Bibliography Abattouy, Mohammed; Renn, Jürgen; Weinig, Paul (2001). "Transmission as Transformation: The Translation Movements in the Medieval East and West in a Comparative Perspective".

Science in Context .

14 ( 1– 2). Cambridge University Press: 1– 12.

doi : 10.1017/S0269889701000011 .

S2CID 145190232 .

Boyer (1991).

A History of Mathematics .

Dunham, William (1994).

The Mathematical Universe . John Wiley.

Halmos, Paul (1985).

I Want to Be a Mathematician . Springer-Verlag.

Hardy, G.H.

(2012) [1940].

A Mathematician's Apology (Reprinted with foreword ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-60463-6 .

OCLC 942496876 .

Rüegg, Walter (2004). "Themes". In Rüegg, Walter (ed.).

A History of the University in Europe . Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-36107-1 .

Further reading Krantz, Steven G.

(2012), A Mathematician comes of age , The Mathematical Association of America , ISBN 978-0-88385-578-2 External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Mathematicians .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mathematicians .

Occupational Outlook: Mathematicians . Information on the occupation of mathematician from the US Department of Labor.

Sloan Career Cornerstone Center: Careers in Mathematics . Although US-centric, a useful resource for anyone interested in a career as a mathematician. Learn what mathematicians do on a daily basis, where they work, how much they earn, and more.

The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive Archived 2019-11-14 at the Wayback Machine . A comprehensive list of detailed biographies.

The Mathematics Genealogy Project Archived 2009-02-19 at the Wayback Machine . Allows scholars to follow the succession of thesis advisors for most mathematicians, living or dead.

Weisstein, Eric W.

"Unsolved Problems" .

MathWorld .

Middle School Mathematician Project Short biographies of select mathematicians assembled by middle school students.

Career Information for Students of Math and Aspiring Mathematicians [ permanent dead link ] from MathMajor v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kflzh
Cached time: 20250817225442
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.705 seconds
Real time usage: 0.925 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4756/1000000
Revision size: 21409/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 101252/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5715/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 91887/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.479/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21247780/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  828.584      1 -total
 22.24%  184.248      1 Template:Reflist
 16.21%  134.284      8 Template:Annotated_link
  8.87%   73.491      1 Template:Math_topics_TOC
  8.51%   70.477      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.42%   69.787      2 Template:Cite_web
  7.18%   59.504      1 Template:Short_description
  6.01%   49.797      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  5.75%   47.607      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.54%   45.887      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18902:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817225442 and revision id 1298737602. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematician&oldid=1298737602 " Categories : Mathematics occupations Mathematicians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 10:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mathematician 101 languages Add topic

