Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relationship to moral anti-realism 2 Moral relativism and ethical subjectivism 3 Terminology 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ethical subjectivism 7 languages Español Français 한국어 עברית Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical position Ethical subjectivism (also known as moral subjectivism and moral non-objectivism ) [ 1 ] is the meta-ethical view which claims that: Ethical sentences express propositions .

Some such propositions are true.

The truth or falsity of such propositions is ineliminably dependent on the (actual or hypothetical) attitudes of people.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This makes ethical subjectivism a form of cognitivism (because ethical statements are the types of things that can be true or false).

[ 4 ] Ethical subjectivism stands in opposition to moral realism , which claims that moral propositions refer to objective facts, independent of human opinion; [ 5 ] to error theory , which denies that any moral propositions are true in any sense; and to non-cognitivism , which denies that moral sentences express propositions at all.

[ 6 ] Relationship to moral anti-realism [ edit ] Ethical subjectivism is a form of moral anti-realism that denies the "metaphysical thesis" of moral realism, (the claim that moral truths are ordinary facts about the world).

[ 7 ] Instead ethical subjectivism claims that moral truths are based on the mental states of individuals or groups of people.  The moral realist is committed to some version of the following three statements: [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The semantic thesis: Moral statements have meaning, they express propositions, or are the kind of things that can be true or false.

The alethic thesis: Some moral propositions are true.

The metaphysical thesis: The metaphysical status of moral facts is robust and ordinary, not importantly different from other facts about the world.

Moral anti-realism is the denial of at least one of these claims.

[ 5 ] Ethical subjectivists deny the third claim, instead arguing that moral facts are not metaphysically ordinary, but rather dependent on mental states, (individual's beliefs about what is right and wrong).

[ 3 ] Moral non-cognitivists deny the first claim, while error theorists deny the second claim.

[ 10 ] There is some debate as to whether moral realism should continue to require the metaphysical thesis, and therefore if ethical subjectivists should be considered moral realists.

[ 11 ] Geoffrey Sayre-McCord argues that moral realism should not require mind-independence since there are morally relevant psychological facts which are necessarily mind-dependent, which would make ethical subjectivism a version of moral realism. This has led to a distinction being made between robust moral realism (which requires all three of the theses) and minimal moral realism (which requires only the first two, and is therefore compatible with ethical subjectivism).

[ 12 ] Moral relativism and ethical subjectivism [ edit ] Moral relativism claims that statements are true or false based on who is saying them: they include indexicals in the same way that the truth of the statement "I am in Senegal" is dependent on who is making that statement.

[ 13 ] Depending on the variety of moral relativism, these statements may be indexed to a particular society (i.e., cultural relativism , when I say stealing is wrong, it is only true if stealing is not acceptable in my culture), or indexed to an individual (individualistic relativism).

[ 14 ] Furthermore, moral relativism is the view where an actor's moral codes are locally derived from their culture.

[ 15 ] The rules within moral codes are equal to each other and are only deemed "right" or "wrong" within their specific moral codes.

[ 15 ] Relativism is opposite to Universalism because there is not a single moral code for every agent to follow.

[ 15 ] Relativism differs from Nihilism because it validates every moral code that exists whereas nihilism does not.

[ 15 ] When it comes to relativism, Russian philosopher and writer, Fyodor Dostoevsky , coined the phrase "If God doesn't exist, everything is permissible". That phrase was his view of the consequences for rejecting theism as a basis of ethics. American anthropologist Ruth Benedict argued that there is no single objective morality and that moral codes necessarily vary by culture.

[ 16 ] Ethical subjectivism is a completely distinct concept from moral relativism .

[ 17 ] Ethical subjectivism claims that the truth or falsehood of ethical claims is dependent on the mental states and attitudes of people, but these ethical truths may be universal (i.e. one person or group's mental states may determine what is right or wrong for everyone).

[ 18 ] The term "ethical subjectivism" covers two distinct theories in ethics. According to cognitive versions of ethical subjectivism, the truth of moral statements depends upon people's values, attitudes, feelings, or beliefs. Some forms of cognitivist ethical subjectivism can be counted as forms of realism, others are forms of anti-realism.

[ 19 ] David Hume is a foundational figure for cognitive ethical subjectivism. On a standard interpretation of his theory, a trait of character counts as a moral virtue when it evokes a sentiment of approbation in a sympathetic, informed, and rational human observer.

[ 20 ] Similarly, Roderick Firth 's ideal observer theory held that right acts are those that an impartial, rational observer would approve of.

[ 21 ] William James , another ethical subjectivist, held that an end is good (to or for a person) just in the case it is desired by that person (see also ethical egoism ). According to non-cognitive versions of ethical subjectivism, such as emotivism, prescriptivism, and expressivism, ethical statements cannot be true or false, at all: rather, they are expressions of personal feelings or commands.

[ 22 ] For example, on A. J. Ayer 's emotivism, the statement, "Murder is wrong" is equivalent in meaning to the emotive, "Murder, Boo!" [ 23 ] While moral relativism and ethical subjectivism positions are often held together, they do not entail each other.

[ 24 ] For example, someone that claims that whatever their king wants to happen is the morally right thing for everyone to do would be an ethical subjectivist (right and wrong are based on mental states), but they would not be a moral relativist (right and wrong are the same for everyone).

[ 25 ] Conversely, a moral relativist could deny moral subjectivism if they thought that the morally right thing to do was to follow the written laws of your country (this morality is relativist since "the laws of your country" picks out different laws for different individuals, but not subjectivist since it is dependent on the written laws, which are not in anyone's head).

[ 26 ] Some universalist forms of subjectivism include ideal observer theory (which claims that moral propositions are about what attitudes a hypothetical ideal observer would hold). Although divine command theory is considered by some to be a form of ethical subjectivism, [ 27 ] defenders of the perspective that divine command theory is not a form of ethical subjectivism say this is based on a misunderstanding: that divine command proponents claim that moral propositions are about what attitudes God holds, but this understanding is deemed incorrect by some, such as Robert Adams who claims that divine command theory is concerned with whether a moral command is or isn't "contrary to the commands of (a loving) God".

[ 28 ] Terminology [ edit ] There is some debate among philosophers around the use of the term "ethical subjectivism" as this term has historically referred to the more specific position that ethical statements are merely reports of one's own mental states (saying that killing is wrong just means you disapprove of killing).

[ 29 ] While this is an ethically subjective position (the truth of your statement does depend on your mental states), it is not the only one. Due to this ambiguity, some philosophers have advocated that the general position discussed here be referred to as non-objectivism.

[ 29 ] References [ edit ] ^ Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , Non-objectivism (as it will be called here) allows that moral facts exist but holds that they are, in some manner to be specified, constituted by mental activity...The present discussion uses the label "non-objectivism" instead of the simple "subjectivism" since there is an entrenched usage in metaethics for using the latter to denote the thesis that in making a moral judgment one is reporting (as opposed to expressing) one's own mental attitudes (e.g., "Stealing is wrong" means "I disapprove of stealing").

^ Richard Brandt (1959).

Ethical theory; the problems of normative and critical ethics . Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. p. 153.

ISBN 0132904039 .

LCCN 59010075 .

[Objectivism and subjectivism] have been used more vaguely, confusedly, and in more different senses than the others we are considering. We suggest as a convenient usage, however, that a theory be called subjectivist if and only if, according to it, any ethical assertion implies that somebody does, or somebody of a certain sort under certain conditions would, take some specified attitude toward something.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Harrison, Jonathan (2006). Borchert, Donald M. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of philosophy (2nd ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale/Macmillan Reference USA.

ISBN 0-02-865780-2 .

OCLC 61151356 .

A subjectivist ethical theorist is a theory according to which moral judgements about men or their actions are judgements about the way people react to these men and actions - that is, the way they think or feel about them.

^ van Roojen, Mark (2018), "Moral Cognitivism vs. Non-Cognitivism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , Cognitivism is the denial of non-cognitivism. Thus it holds that moral statements do express beliefs and that they are apt for truth and falsity. But cognitivism need not be a species of realism since a cognitivist can be an error theorist and think all moral statements false.

^ a b Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , As a first approximation, then, moral anti-realism can be identified as the disjunction of three theses: i) moral noncognivitism ii) moral error theory iii) moral non-objectivism.

^ "Subjectivism" .

BBC . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ Vayrynen, Pekka (2006).

Encyclopedia of philosophy . Donald M. Borchert (2nd ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale/Macmillan Reference USA. pp.

379– 382.

ISBN 0-02-865780-2 .

OCLC 61151356 .

No single description is likely to capture all realist views, but a reasonably accurate rule is to understand moral realism as the conjunction of three theses: The semantic thesis: The primary semantic role of moral predicates (such as "right" and "wrong") is to refer to moral properties (such as rightness and wrongness), so that moral statements (such as "honesty is good" and "slavery is unjust") purport to represent moral facts, and express propositions that are true or false (or approximately true, largely false and so on).  The alethic thesis: Some moral propositions are in fact true.  The metaphysical thesis: Moral propositions are true when actions and other objects of moral assessment have the relevant moral properties (so that the relevant moral facts obtain), where these facts and properties are robust: their metaphysical status, whatever it is, is not relevantly different from that of (certain types of ordinary non-moral facts and properties).

^ Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 ^ Vayrynen, Pekka (2006).

Encyclopedia of philosophy . Donald M. Borchert (2nd ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale/Macmillan Reference USA. pp.

379– 382.

ISBN 0-02-865780-2 .

OCLC 61151356 .

No single description is likely to capture all realist views, but a reasonably accurate rule is to understand moral realism as the conjunction of three theses: The semantic thesis: The primary semantic role of moral predicates (such as "right" and "wrong") is to refer to moral properties (such as rightness and wrongness), so that moral statements (such as "honesty is good" and "slavery is unjust") purport to represent moral facts, and express propositions that are true or false (or approximately true, largely false and so on).  The alethic thesis: Some moral propositions are in fact true.  The metaphysical thesis: Moral propositions are true when actions and other objects of moral assessment have the relevant moral properties (so that the relevant moral facts obtain), where these facts and properties are robust: their metaphysical status, whatever it is, is not relevantly different from that of (certain types of ordinary non-moral facts and properties).

^ Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 ^ Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , Another general debate that the above characterization prompts is whether the "non-objectivism clause" deserves to be there. Geoffrey Sayre-McCord, for example, thinks that moral realism consists of endorsing just two claims: that moral judgments are truth apt (cognitivism) and that they are often true (success theory). (See Sayre-McCord 1986; also his entry for "moral realism" in this encyclopedia.) His motivation for this is that to make "mind-independence" a requirement of realism in general would lead to counter-intuitive implications. "Independence from the mental may be a plausible requirement for realism when we're talking about macro-physical objects but it's a non-starter when it comes to realism in psychology (psychological facts won't be independent of the mental)" (1986: 3). Sayre-McCord is motivated by the desire for a realism/anti-realism "template," which can be applied with equal coherence to any domain.

^ Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , In deference to the influence that Sayre-McCord's views have had on recent metaethics, perhaps the judicious terminological decision is to distinguish minimal moral realism—which denies (i) and (ii)—from robust moral realism—which in addition denies (iii).

^ Joyce, Richard (2020), "Moral Anti-Realism (Supplement on Moral Objectivity and Moral Relativism)" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-10-17 , Relativism holds that moral claims contain an essential indexical element, such that the truth of any such claim requires relativization to some individual or group. According to such a view, it is possible that when John asserts "Stealing is wrong" he is saying something true, but that when Jenny asserts "Stealing is wrong" she is saying something false.

^ Joyce, Richard (2020), "Moral Anti-Realism (Supplement on Moral Objectivity and Moral Relativism)" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-10-17 , An individualistic relativism sees the vital difference as lying in the persons making the utterance or in the persons about whom the judgment is made; a cultural relativism sees the difference as stemming from the culture that the speaker inhabits or from the culture of those about whom the judgment is made.

^ a b c d Wreen, Michael (July 2018). "What Is Moral Relativism?".

Philosophy .

93 (3): 337– 354.

doi : 10.1017/S0031819117000614 .

S2CID 171526831 .

ProQuest 2056736032 .

^ "Moral Relativism and Objectivism" . University of California, Santa Cruz . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ Joyce, Richard (2020), "Moral Anti-Realism (Supplement on Moral Objectivity and Moral Relativism)" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-10-17 ^ Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , Non-objectivism (as it will be called here) allows that moral facts exist but holds that they are, in some manner to be specified, constituted by mental activity.

^ Thomas Pölzler (2018).

"How to Measure Moral Realism" .

Review of Philosophy and Psychology .

9 (3): 647– 670.

doi : 10.1007/s13164-018-0401-8 .

PMC 6132410 .

PMID 30220945 .

^ Rayner, Sam (2005).

"Hume's Moral Philosophy" .

Macalester Journal of Philosophy .

14 (1): 6– 21.

^ "A Substantive Revision to Firth's Ideal Observer Theory" (PDF) .

Stance .

3 .

Ball State University : 55– 61. April 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-06-12 . Retrieved 2023-06-28 .

^ Marchetti, Sarin (21 December 2010).

"William James on Truth and Invention in Morality" .

European Journal of Pragmatism and American Philosophy .

II (2).

doi : 10.4000/ejpap.910 .

^ "24.231 Ethics – Handout 3 Ayer's Emotivism" (PDF) .

Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

MIT OpenCouseWare .

^ Joyce, Richard (2020), "Moral Anti-Realism (Supplement on Moral Objectivity and Moral Relativism)" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-10-17 , In short, the non-objectivism vs. objectivism and the relativism vs. absolutism polarities are orthogonal to each other, and it is the former pair that is usually taken to matter when it comes to characterizing anti-realism.

^ Joyce, Richard (2020), "Moral Anti-Realism (Supplement on Moral Objectivity and Moral Relativism)" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-10-17 , ...the non-objectivist need not be a relativist. Suppose the moral facts depend on the attitudes or opinions of a particular group or individual (e.g., "X is good" means "Caesar approves of X," or "The Supreme Court rules in favor of X," etc.), and thus moral truth is an entirely mind-dependent affair. Since, in this case, all speakers' moral utterances are made true or false by the same mental activity, then this is not strictly speaking a version of relativism, but is, rather, a relation-designating account of moral terms (see Stevenson 1963: 74 for this distinction).

^ Joyce, Richard (2020), "Moral Anti-Realism (Supplement on Moral Objectivity and Moral Relativism)" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-10-17 , perhaps what determines the relevant difference is an entirely mind-independent affair, making for an objectivist (and potentially realist) relativism.

^ "George Hourani is one such philosopher who claims this by referring to Divine Command theory as 'theistic subjectivism'.".

The Ethics and Metaphysics of Divine Command Theory ^ "Mark Murphy further explains that a command from God suffices as an 'objective property of actions', as opposed to the attitude within a mind".

Theological Voluntarism ^ a b Joyce, Richard (2016), "Moral Anti-Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-08 , The present discussion uses the label "non-objectivism" instead of the simple "subjectivism" since there is an entrenched usage in metaethics for using the latter to denote the thesis that in making a moral judgment one is reporting (as opposed to expressing) one's own mental attitudes (e.g., "Stealing is wrong" means "I disapprove of stealing"). So understood, subjectivism is a kind of non-objectivist theory, but, as we shall see below, there are many other kinds of non-objectivist theory, too.

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethical_subjectivism&oldid=1300945769 " Categories : Subjectivism Metaethics Ethical theories Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethical subjectivism 7 languages Add topic

