Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 By country or territory Toggle By country or territory subsection 2.1 Afghanistan 2.2 Australia 2.3 Austria 2.4 Azerbaijan 2.5 Bangladesh 2.6 Belgium 2.7 Bhutan 2.8 Bosnia and Herzegovina 2.8.1 Brčko District 2.9 Botswana 2.10 Brazil 2.11 Brunei 2.12 Canada 2.12.1 Alberta 2.12.2 British Columbia 2.12.3 Mi'kma'ki 2.12.4 New Brunswick 2.12.5 Northwest Territories 2.12.6 Ontario 2.12.7 Quebec 2.13 Chile 2.14 China 2.14.1 Hong Kong 2.14.2 Macao 2.14.3 Mainland China 2.15 Colombia 2.16 Czechia 2.17 France 2.18 Germany 2.19 Hungary 2.20 India 2.21 Indonesia 2.22 Iran 2.23 Iraq 2.24 Japan 2.25 Kenya 2.26 Malawi 2.27 Malaysia 2.28 Malta 2.29 Mauritius 2.30 Myanmar 2.31 Nauru 2.32 Nepal 2.33 New Zealand 2.34 Northern Cyprus 2.35 Norway 2.36 Pakistan 2.37 Peru 2.38 Philippines 2.38.1 Legislative 2.38.1.1 National 2.38.1.2 Regional 2.38.1.3 Provincial 2.38.1.4 City 2.38.2 Administrative 2.38.2.1 Current 2.38.2.2 Historical 2.38.3 Special-purpose districts 2.38.4 Informal districts 2.39 Poland 2.40 Portugal 2.41 Russia 2.42 Serbia 2.43 Slovakia 2.44 Slovenia 2.45 South Africa 2.46 South Korea 2.47 Sri Lanka 2.48 Sweden 2.49 Switzerland 2.50 Taiwan 2.51 Thailand 2.52 Turkey 2.53 Uganda 2.54 Ukraine 2.55 United Kingdom 2.55.1 England 2.55.2 Northern Ireland 2.55.3 Scotland 2.55.4 Wales 2.56 United States 2.56.1 Federal District 2.56.2 Legislative constituencies 2.56.3 Federal judicial districts 2.56.4 Single-purpose districts 2.56.5 Municipalities 2.56.6 Municipal utility districts 2.57 Vietnam 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents District 77 languages العربية Aragonés Aymar aru Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Català Čeština ChiShona ChiTumbuka Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lingála मैथिली Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Administrative division in some countries, managed by a local government For other uses, see District (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "District" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ekistics Terms Neighbourhood Town City Conurbation Metropolis Megacity Megalopolis Settlement hierarchy Lists Largest cities Densest neighborhoods Densest cities proper Densest metro areas Cities portal v t e A district is a type of administrative division that in some countries is managed by the local government . Across the world, areas known as "districts" vary greatly in size, spanning regions or counties , several municipalities , subdivisions of municipalities, school district , or political district .

Etymology [ edit ] The word "district" in English is a loan word from French .

[ 1 ] It comes from Medieval Latin districtus–"exercising of justice, restraining of offenders".

[ 2 ] The earliest known English-language usage dates to 1611, in the work of lexicographer Randle Cotgrave .

[ 1 ] By country or territory [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Afghanistan In Afghanistan , a district ( Persian / Pashto : ولسوالۍ Wuleswali ) is a subdivision of a province. There are almost 400 districts in the country.

Australia [ edit ] Main articles: State electoral districts and Cadastral divisions of Australia Electoral districts are used in state elections. Districts were also used in several states as cadastral units for land titles. Some were used as squatting districts.

New South Wales had several different types of districts used in the 21st century.

Austria [ edit ] Main article: District (Austria) In Austria , the word Bezirk is used with different meanings in three different contexts: Some of the tasks of the administrative branch of the national and regional governments are fulfilled by the 95 district administrative offices ( Bezirkshauptmannschaften ). The area a district administrative office is responsible for is often, although informally, called a district ( Bezirk ). A number of statutory cities , currently 15, are not served by any district administrative office. Their respective municipal bureaucracies handle the tasks normally performed by the district administrative office.

The cities of Vienna and Graz are divided into municipal districts ( Stadtbezirke ), assisting the respective municipal governments. In Vienna, the constituents of each district elect a district council ( Bezirksvertretung ); the district council in turn elects a district chairperson ( Bezirksvorsteher ). Although the city vests its districts with a limited amount of budgetary autonomy, district councils and chairpersons have little real responsibility. In particular, they do not legislate. Most of the districts of Vienna were independent municipalities at some point; district councils and chairpersons symbolize the town councils and mayors they used to have.

From the point of view of the judiciary of Austria , the country is subdivided into 115 judicial districts ( Gerichtsbezirke ), each corresponding to one of the country's 115 lowest-level trial courts.

Azerbaijan [ edit ] Main article: Subdivisions of Azerbaijan Azerbaijan is administratively divided into the following subdivisions: 59 districts ( rayonlar ; sing.– rayon ), 11 cities ( şəhərlər ; sing.– şəhər ), 1 autonomous republic ( muxtar respublika ), which itself contains: 7 districts 1 city The rayons are further divided into municipalities ( bələdiyyə ).

Additionally, Azerbaijan is subdivided into 9 (economic) regions ( İqtisadi Rayonlar ; sing.– İqtisadi Rayon ). This is not an administrative division. Each region contains a number of districts. The Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic forms a separate, 10th economic region.

1. Absheron
2. Ganja-Qazakh
3. Shaki-Zaqatala
4. Lankaran
5. Quba-Khachmaz	
6. Aran
7. Upper Karabakh
8. Kalbajar-Lachin
9. Daglig-Shirvan
10. Nakhchivan Bangladesh [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Bangladesh Bangladeshi districts are local administrative units. In all, there are 64 districts in Bangladesh. Originally, there were 21 greater districts with several subdivisions in each district. In 1984, the government made all these subdivisions into districts. Each district has several sub-districts called Upazila in Bengali with a total 493 Upzillas.

Belgium [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Antwerp In Belgian municipalities with more than 100,000 inhabitants, on the initiative of the local council, sub-municipal administrative entities with elected councils may be created. As such, only Antwerp , having over 460,000 inhabitants, became subdivided into nine districts ( Dutch : districten ).

The Belgian arrondissements (also in French as well as in Dutch ), an administrative level between province (or the capital region) and municipality, or the lowest judicial level, are in English, sometimes called districts as well.

Bhutan [ edit ] Bhutanese districts ( dzongkhag ) are local administrative units consisting of village blocks called gewog . Some have subdistricts called dungkhag .

Bosnia and Herzegovina [ edit ] In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a district is a self-governing administrative unit.

Brčko District [ edit ] Brčko District in northeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina is formally part of both the Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The Assembly of the Brčko District has 29 seats.

Botswana [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Botswana Districts are the first-level administrative divisions of Botswana , alongside town councils and city councils. Each of the ten districts have their own district councils.

[ 3 ] Brazil [ edit ] Brazilian municipalities are subdivided into districts. Small municipalities usually have only one urban district, which contains the city itself, consisting of the seat of the local government, where the municipality's prefeitura and câmara de vereadores (City Hall and City Council, respectively, the Executive and Legislative local bodies) are located. The rural districts and groups of urban districts (mainly in large cities) may also present a sub local Executive body, named subprefeitura .

Brunei [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Brunei A district is known locally as daerah and it is the first-level administrative division of Brunei. There are four districts in the country, namely Brunei-Muara , Tutong , Belait and Temburong . Each district is administered by a Jabatan Daerah (District Office), which is headed by a Pegawai Daerah (District Officer). All district offices are government departments under the Ministry of Home Affairs ( Malay : Kementerian Hal Ehwal Dalam Negeri ).

Canada [ edit ] Alberta [ edit ] In Alberta , the municipal districts and improvement districts are types of rural municipalities .

[ 4 ] They are recognized as census subdivisions by Statistics Canada , [ 5 ] which form parts of census divisions .

British Columbia [ edit ] In the province of British Columbia , there are several kinds of administrative districts by that name.  The usual usage is a reference to district municipalities , which are a class of municipality in the same hierarchy as city, town, or village.  Most are styled, e.g., " District of Mission " or "District of Wells" , though some are styled, e.g., "Corporation of Delta" or " Township of Langley ".

Within the area of municipal powers, regional districts –  which are somewhat analogous to counties in other jurisdictions, a number of municipalities, and unincorporated areas – are always referred to as "regional districts" to distinguish them from district municipalities and other kinds of district.

Other kinds of districts in British Columbia are: Electoral districts (some early ridings, as electoral districts are commonly known, included "district" in their title, e.g.

New Westminster District ) Forest districts, which are a set of administrative regions of the British Columbia Ministry of Forests Land districts, which are the underlying cadastral survey system for the province and are the primary locational reference used in government databases and references. The primary use of "district" in combinations such as the Lillooet District or New Westminster District was a reference to the land district, though sometimes to mining divisions.

School districts , also often referred to simply as "districts", when in context.

Other types of regional subdivision, according to the ministry or agency, are generally styled "region" or "area".  These include as Ministry of Environment regions, health regions , and regional management planning areas such as the Muskwa-Kechika Management Planning Area .

Mi'kma'ki [ edit ] Situated across the Atlantic provinces and the Maritimes provinces , the traditional country of the Mi'kmaw Nation organizes itself into historically 7 or 8 districts.

[ 6 ] These districts are Epekwitk and Piktuk , Eske'kewa'ki, Kespe'kewa'ki, Kespukwitk, Sikniktewa'ki, their central fire or capital district Unama'ki , and Ktaqamkuk . Although Canada and the provinces hardly recognize the legitimacy of Mi'kma'ki , the nation remains and still retains functions as a Wabanaki country .

[ 7 ] New Brunswick [ edit ] New Brunswick has numerous local service districts , 7 school districts , 10 federal electoral districts and 55 provincial electoral districts .

Northwest Territories [ edit ] In western and northern Canada, the federal government created districts as subdivisions of the Northwest Territories 1870–1905, partly on the model of the districts created in the Province of Canada [ 8 ] [ citation needed ] .  The first district created was the District of Keewatin in 1876 followed by four more districts in 1882. Gradually, these districts became separate territories (such as Yukon ), separate provinces (such as Alberta and Saskatchewan ) or were absorbed into other provinces.

Ontario [ edit ] In Ontario , a district is a statutory subdivision of the province, but, unlike a county, a district is not incorporated.  Most districts are composed of unincorporated lands, mostly Crown land .  Originally present-day Southern Ontario (then part of the Province of Quebec and after 1791, Upper Canada ) was divided into districts in 1788 [1] .  Districts continued to operation until 1849 when they were replaced by counties by the Province of Canada .

The current Ontario districts such as Algoma and Nipissing were first created by the Province of Canada in 1858 prior to Confederation for the delivery of judicial and provincial government services to sparsely populated areas from the district seat (e.g.

Sault Ste. Marie ). Some districts may have District Social Service Administration Boards, which are designed to provide certain social services. The boundaries of a federal census division may correspond to those of a district.

Quebec [ edit ] In Quebec , districts are municipal electoral subdivisions of boroughs , which are subdivisions of cities. They function in a similar manner to what is elsewhere known as a ward .

Chile [ edit ] Main article: Administrative divisions of Chile China [ edit ] Hong Kong [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Hong Kong Hong Kong is divided into eighteen districts, each with a district council .

Macao [ edit ] Main article: Municipalities and parishes of Macau Further information: Municipal Affairs Bureau Mainland China [ edit ] Main article: District (China) On Mainland China , the district ( Chinese : 市辖区 ; pinyin : shìxiá qū ) is a subdivision of any of various city administrative units, including direct-administered municipalities , sub-provincial municipalities , and prefecture-level cities . Districts have county-level status.

Modern districts are a recent innovation. In the context of pre-modern China , the English translation "district" is typically associated with xian ( 縣 ; xiàn ), another Chinese administrative division. The xian is translated as " county " in the context of modern China.

Colombia [ edit ] In Colombia, a district is one of ten special administrative units: Barranquilla (Special Industrial Port District) Cartagena Tourism and Cultural District Bogotá (Capital District) Santa Marta (Historical, Tourism and Cultural District) Tunja (Historical and Cultural District) Popayán (Special, Ecotouristic, Historical and Universitarian District) Turbo (Special Port District) Tumaco (Special Industrial, Port, Biodiverse and Ecotouristic District) Cúcuta (Special Border and Touristic District) Buenaventura (Special Industrial, Port, Biodiverse and Ecotouristic District) Czechia [ edit ] A "district" in Czechia is an okres (plural okresy ). After a reform in 2002, the districts lost administrative power to regions ( kraje ) and selected towns ( pověřené obce ) and became statistical zones.

France [ edit ] French districts were the first subdivision of the départements from the 4 March 1790 to the 28 pluviôse an VIII (17 February 1800). Then, in the 20th century, districts were a type of intercommunity, they've been replaced by communauté de communes and communautés d'agglomération after 1999.

Germany [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Germany In Germany , a district ( Kreis ) is an administrative unit between the Länder ( German federal states ) and the local / municipal levels ( Gemeinden ). As of 2011, most of the 402 German districts are Landkreise , rural districts. 107 larger cities (usually with more than 100,000 inhabitants) that do not belong to a district are considered as urban districts ( Kreisfreie Städte or Stadtkreise ).

A local subdistrict is called a Gemarkung , and is mostly a smaller rural area (with similar concepts in Austria and Switzerland). A Gemarkung is usually associated with and named after a central town or village. Areas in such subdistricts and their usage are documented in central registries (German: Kataster ) and have been historically used for taxation.

In some states, there is additional level of administration between the Länder and the Landkreise called Regierungsbezirk ( government district ).

District ( Bezirk ) was also an administrative subdivision of the German Democratic Republic from 1952.

See Administrative division of the German Democratic Republic City district ( Stadtbezirk or Ortsbezirk ) is the primary subdivision category of many Kreisfreie Städte .

Hungary [ edit ] 175 districts were established on January 1, 2013. The existing 19 counties are subdivided into 6–18 districts per county. The capital city of Budapest does not belong to any counties and is already divided to 23 districts.

India [ edit ] Main article: Districts of India See also: Subdivisions of India Districts of India India's districts are local administrative units inherited from the British Raj .  They generally form the tier of local government immediately below that of India 's subnational states and territories .  Where warranted, districts may further be grouped into administrative divisions, which form an intermediate level between the district and the subnational state (or union territory ).

A district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner / Collector, who is responsible for the overall administration and the maintenance of law and order.  The district collector may belong to IAS ( Indian Administrative Service ).  Other key responsibilities include the collection of revenue , land management, co-ordination and disaster management.  Usually, the Deputy Commissioner/District Collector is granted magisterial powers under section 20 of Criminal Procedure Code, and designated as the District Magistrate .  The official designations are "Collector and District Magistrate" or "Deputy Commissioner and District Magistrate".

Districts are most frequently further sub-divided into smaller administrative units, called either tahliks or mandalss or mavattams , depending on the region. These units have specific local responsibilities, including in particular coordinating revenue collection.
An intermediate level (the sub-division ) between district and tehsil/taluka may be formed by grouping these units under the oversight of Assistant Commissioners , Sub-collectors or Sub-divisional magistrate . Each district includes one or two cities (or large towns), a few smaller towns and dozens of villages. Most of the Indian districts have the same name as their main town or city.

A district in Kerala As of April 2016, the National Informatics Centre of the Government of India , lists a total of 664 districts in India, more than the number of parliamentary constituencies (545).

[ 9 ] This number went up to a total of 723 districts in 2019.

[ 10 ] Indonesia [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Indonesia In Western New Guinea , one of the seven regions of Indonesia , a distrik is a subdivision of a regency or a city. Formerly it was called a kecamatan . In translations of most official documents, kecamatan itself is translated into English as "district", but some other documents (especially from older era) translated it to "subdistrict", which is equivalent to a kelurahan in recent translations. This translation ambiguity has caused confusions among foreigners.

Distrik or kecamatan do not have legal autonomy to govern themselves, because they are only administrative extensions of a regency or a city.

Iran [ edit ] Main articles: Provinces of Iran and Counties of Iran Iran is subdivided into thirty one provinces ( Persian : استان ostān ), each governed from a local center, usually the largest local city, which is called the capital ( Persian : Markaz ) of that province. The provinces of Iran further subdivided into counties called ( Persian : شهرستان shahrestān ), an area inside an ostān , and consists of a city center, few bakhsh ( Persian : بخش ) and many villages around them. There are usually a few cities ( Persian : شهر shahr ) and rural agglomerations ( Persian : دهستان dehestān ) in each county. Rural agglomerations are a collection of a number of villages. One of the cities of the county is appointed as the capital of the county. The word shahrestān comes from the Persian words shahr and ostān , which mean city (or town ) and province , respectively. The nearest equivalent of shahrestān in English would be sub-province or county. Each shahrestān has a governmental office known as farmandari which coordinates different events and governmental offices. The farmandar , or the head of farmandari , is the governor of the shahrestān which is the highest governmental authority in the division.

Iraq [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Iraq In Iraq, they use the word qadaa for districts.  There are over a hundred districts, each district being within one of 18 Iraqi governorates , sometimes known as provinces.  The district generally (but not always) bears the name of a city within that district, usually the capital of that district.

Japan [ edit ] A district ( 郡 , gun ) is a local administrative unit comprising towns and villages but not cities .  See districts of Japan for a more complete description.  In 1923, its administrative role was abolished although it is still in use for addressing purposes.  "District" is also a translation of chiku , defined by Japan's planning law.

[ citation needed ] Kenya [ edit ] In Kenya , a district ( wilayah ) is a subdivision of a Province and is headed by a District Officer (DO).

Malawi [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Malawi Malawi is divided into 28 districts within three regions. Each district is headed by a District Commissioner.

Malaysia [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Malaysia A district is known as Daerah in Malay .  A district governed directly by the federal government is known as a Federal Territory , and they are Kuala Lumpur , Labuan , and Putrajaya .

In East Malaysia , a district is a subdivision within a division of a state.  For example, Tuaran is a district within the West Coast Division of Sabah .  A district is usually named after the main town or its administrative capital, for example, Sandakan town is the capital of the district of Sandakan, as well the capital of Sandakan Division (note: Sandakan district is a sub-division of Sandakan Division).

In Peninsular Malaysia , a district is a division of a state . A mukim is a subdivision of a district.  The mukim , is however, of less importance with respect to the administration of local government.

In Malaysia, each district will have a District Office, headed by a district officer, and is administered by a local government either being a District Council, Municipal Council, or a City Council. In some highly urbanized districts, there may be further subdivisions. For example, the district of Petaling in Selangor is administered by 3 local governments: Shah Alam City Council , Petaling Jaya City Council , and Subang Jaya Municipal Council . Another example is the district of Johor Bahru in Johor , which has 3 subdivisions: Johor Bahru City Council , Iskandar Puteri City Council , and Pasir Gudang Municipal Council . Conversely, there may be one local government administering more than one district, for example, Seberang Perai Municipal Council administers the districts of Central Seberang Perai , North Seberang Perai , and South Seberang Perai ; as well as Kuala Terengganu City Council , which administers the districts of Kuala Terengganu and Kuala Nerus .

An administrative district border and an electoral district border ( constituency ) transcend each other and do not correspond with each other in most instances.

Malta [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Malta Malta holds 13 Electoral Divisions for the unicameral (single-assembly) parliament. Each consists of a number of localities (although there is no requirement that electoral boundaries follow the boundaries of localities).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Mauritius [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Mauritius The districts of the Republic of Mauritius are the second-order administrative divisions after the Outer islands of the country . Mauritius is divided into nine districts which consist of 2 cities, 4 towns and 130 villages , the capital is Port Louis .

The island of Rodrigues used to be the tenth district of Mauritius but it gained autonomous status in 2002.

Myanmar [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Myanmar Nauru [ edit ] The districts of Nauru are the only subdivisions of the whole state.

Nepal [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Nepal Nepal is divided into 77 districts. Each district acts as an independent administrative unit. A district consists of two types of units like Rural Municipalities and Municipalities. Official documents like citizenship cards and passports are issued by the Chief of District Office (CDO). Constituencies for elections are also constructed according to the population distribution within the district.

New Zealand [ edit ] Main article: Districts of New Zealand A district in New Zealand is a territorial authority (second-tier local government unit) that has not gained the distinction of being proclaimed a city. Districts tend to be less urbanized, tend to cover more than one population center and a larger amount of rural area, and tend to have a smaller population than cities. While cities and districts are generally considered to be two different types of territorial authority, the area covered by a city is often known as its district—for example the term district plan is used equally in districts and cities. The Chatham Islands Territory is neither a district nor a city.

A district is not always a simple division of a region : several districts lie within two regions, and the Taupo District lies in four.

Northern Cyprus [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Northern Cyprus Norway [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Norway Pakistan [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Pakistan Districts of Pakistan are local administrative units inherited from the British Raj . They form third-level Administrative Division in Pakistan after Provinces and Divisions. Districts were generally grouped into administrative divisions, which in turn formed provinces . Pakistan has 160 districts (including ten in Azad Jammu and Kashmir ). They are known as zillas in Urdu . They comprise villages, towns, and cities. A district is headed by a district nazim (mayor), who is an elected official (in local body elections) and the local controller of the district level officers of all the departments under provincial government, while Deputy Commissioner is the executive head of the District usually Grade-18 officer from Pakistan Administrative Service . Deputy Commissioner is entrusted with overall responsibility of law & order, implementation of government schemes and is also authorized to hear revenue cases pertaining to the district. The district mayor ( nazim ) heads an elected district council composed of councilors, who represent various district-level constituencies. The councils have a constitutional requirement to be composed of a minimum of 33% women or more than that.

Peru [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Peru Philippines [ edit ] The usage of the term 'district' ( distrito ) in the Philippines has similarities to that in the United States.

Legislative [ edit ] National [ edit ] Main article: Legislative districts of the Philippines A constituency with a representative in the lower house of Congress is a congressional district .  However, the term congressional district has become synonymous in local parlance with 'representative district,' because, just like in the US, the word 'congress' ( konggreso ) has come to refer specifically to the lower house (the House of Representatives ).

A legislative district, which has an average population of about 250,000 to 500,000, may be composed of: (a.) an entire province,
(b.) within a province, a group of municipalities and cities (sometimes even including independent and highly urbanized cities geographically located in the province),
(c.) a single city,
(d.) a group of geographically adjacent independent cities and independent municipalities (currently the only example is the Pateros-Taguig , or
(e.) a group of barangays within a city.

Each province is guaranteed at least one representative to the lower house, even though it may not come close to having the same population as other legislative districts. Only voters within each district are allowed to vote in the election for the member of the House of Representatives from that district.

From 1916 to 1935, the Philippines were divided into 12 senatorial districts, of which 11 elected two members each, for a total of 22 out of the 24 members of the upper house of Congress (the Senate ). Since 1935 senators have been elected at large.

Regional [ edit ] In addition, each congressional district that falls under the jurisdiction of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (a total of 8) elects three members each to the country's only subnational legislative assembly .

Provincial [ edit ] There are provincial districts for the purpose of electing Sangguniang Panlalawigan (Provincial Council) members, which follow the congressional district arrangement, except that independent and highly urbanized cities whose charters prevent them from electing provincial officials are excluded. Also, provinces that comprise a lone congressional district are divided into at least two provincial districts.

City [ edit ] There are also city councilor districts for the purpose of electing Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Council) members, which follow the congressional district arrangement. In cases where the city does not form two or more congressional districts by itself, it is divided into at least two city council districts.

Administrative [ edit ] Current [ edit ] Districts exist as administrative entities only in local government, with limited powers or responsibilities. Certain cities, such as Manila , Iloilo and Davao , for administrative purposes, formally divide their jurisdictions into city districts composed of several barangays , but the extent of these district-level administrative powers vary. Several barangays (the lowest level of government) also have the word 'district' in their names – examples are those in Jala-jala and Zamboanga City . However, this is solely for the purpose of nomenclature, and does not imply a higher level of local government.

Historical [ edit ] During Spanish and early American colonial rule, certain areas of the Philippines were designated as 'districts,' mainly those that had not been formally organized into provinces or incorporated into existing ones.
In the American era, cities and municipalities were divided into city and municipal districts, which served as the lowest level of government before the creation of the barangay .

Special-purpose districts [ edit ] Special-purpose districts also exist in the Philippines, created for government departments and agencies. Examples are school districts for the Department of Education (DepEd), engineering districts for the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), and coast guard districts for the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG).

Informal districts [ edit ] Some cities and municipalities also extend the usage of the word 'district' to refer to certain areas, even without having any formal administrative purposes. Examples are the central business districts in Naga, Camarines Sur , and Makati .

Poland [ edit ] Main article: powiat The second-level unit of local government and administration in Poland, equivalent to a county, district or prefecture ( LAU-1 ) in other countries is called a powiat . As of 2008, there are 379 powiat-level entities in Poland: 314 land counties and 65 city counties. For a complete alphabetical listing, see list of counties in Poland .

Portugal [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Portugal Districts ( distritos ) are administrative divisions of Portugal . They were mainly used as the jurisdiction areas for the civil governors, the government officials that represented locally the Central Government . However, in 2011, the role of the civil governor was de facto extinct (although not de jure ), with the decision taken by the Government not to appoint new civil governors and to transfer its functions to other bodies. The district areas are now only used as the regional jurisdiction areas of some public bodies (like the Public Security Police district commands) and some private entities (like the district associations and championships of football).

Russia [ edit ] Main articles: Raion and Okrug In Russia , districts are administrative and municipal divisions of the federal subjects , as well as administrative divisions of larger cities ("city districts") which are commonly referenced as raion (Russian: Районы ) and okrug (Russian: Округа ) respectively.
The term "district" is also used to refer to the type of administrative division of the Sakha Republic — ulus (Russian: улус ; Yakut : улуус ).  The Sakha Republic is administratively divided into five cities under the Republic's jurisdiction and 33 uluses . The law of the Sakha Republic establishes that the terms ulus and "district" are equivalent.

[ 13 ] In historical context (for the Russian Empire ), the term "district" is often used to refer to uyezd .

Serbia [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Serbia Serbia is divided into twenty-nine districts ( okrug ) and the city of Belgrade , each of which is further divided into municipalities ( opština ) Slovakia [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Slovakia In Slovakia, a district ( okres ) is a local administrative unit.

Slovenia [ edit ] Main articles: Statistical regions of Slovenia and Municipalities of Slovenia South Africa [ edit ] Main article: Districts of South Africa Districts of South Africa In South Africa, the district municipality forms the layer of government below the provinces . A district municipality is in turn divided into several local municipalities .

This structure varies in the eight largest urban areas: Bloemfontein (seat of the Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality ), Cape Town ( City of Cape Town Metropolitan Municipality ), Durban (seat of the eThekwini Metropolitan Municipality ), East London / King Williams Town (seat of the Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality ), East Rand (seat of the Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality ), Johannesburg ( City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality ), Port Elizabeth incl.

Uitenhage (seat of the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality ) and Pretoria (seat of the City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality ), where a metropolitan municipality replaces both a district and a local municipality.

South Korea [ edit ] Main article: Subdivisions of South Korea A district ( gu ) is a subdivision of larger cities in South Korea.  Smaller cities have no districts, whereas districts in Seoul and six Metropolitan Cities are treated as a city in their own right.

Sri Lanka [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Sri Lanka For purposes of local government, the country of Sri Lanka is divided into nine provinces : Western , Central , Southern , Northern , Eastern , North Western , North Central , Uva , and Sabaragamuwa . (The Northern and Eastern Provinces have however, technically been jointly administered since 1988.) Each of the districts is divided into divisions. These were originally based on the feudal counties, the korale and rata . They were formerly known as 'D.R.O. Divisions' after the 'Divisional Revenue Officer'. Later the D.R.O.s became 'Assistant Government Agents' and the Divisions were known as 'A.G.A. Divisions'. Currently, the Divisions are administered by a 'Divisional Secretary', and are known as a 'D.S. Divisions'. Rural D.S. Divisions are also administered by a ' Pradeshiya Sabha ' (Sinhala for 'Regional Council'), which is elected.

Sweden [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Sweden Some municipalities in the Kingdom of Sweden have divided their territory into smaller areas, which often are assigned an administrative board responsible for certain elements of municipal governance within their district.  These areas take a variety of different Swedish names; however, "district" is usually the official English term for them.  The term "borough" is sometimes used in unofficial contexts.

Switzerland [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Switzerland In Switzerland , some cantons organize themselves into districts, while others dispense with districts and govern themselves at the Wahlkreise ( constituency or electoral district) level.

Taiwan [ edit ] Main article: District (Taiwan) In the Republic of China on Taiwan , the district ( Chinese : 區 ; pinyin : Qū ) is the 3rd level of the administrative division. It is a division of special municipality and provincial city of Taiwan Province . Currently, there are 157 districts in total from 5 special municipalities and 3 provincial cities.

Thailand [ edit ] A district ( amphoe ) is a subdivision of a province ( changwat ) in Thailand . Some provinces also contain minor districts ( กิ่งอำเภอ ), which are smaller than the average district.

Turkey [ edit ] In Turkey , a district ( Turkish : ilçe ) is an administrative subdivision of a province ( Turkish : il ). They are governed by a district governor/official ( Kaymakam ) appointed by the Ministry of the Interior, and a by the local population elected Mayor.

[ 14 ] See also Districts of Turkey .

Uganda [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Uganda Ukraine [ edit ] Main article: Raions of Ukraine In Ukraine , districts ( raions ) second level of administrative division of Ukraine and are primarily the most common division of Ukrainian regions, as well as administrative divisions of larger cities ("city districts").

United Kingdom [ edit ] England [ edit ] Main article: Districts of England Districts are the most recognizable form of local government in large parts of England . For those areas that retain two-tier local government, districts usually form the lower tier of that arrangement, with counties forming the upper tier. Districts tend to have responsibility for a number of areas including: Tax collection ( Council Tax and non-domestic rates ) Leisure services Refuse collection Housing Planning Arts and entertainment Environmental health Each district raises taxes from residents on behalf of itself, and the upper-tier authority through the Council Tax . It also raises income from business through the non-domestic rates system, which is coordinated nationally.

Northern Ireland [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Northern Ireland Northern Ireland is divided into 11 districts for local government purposes. The councils do not carry out the same range of functions as those in the rest of the United Kingdom; for example, they have no responsibility for education, road-building or housing (although they do nominate members to the advisory Northern Ireland Housing Council).

Their functions include waste and recycling services, leisure and community services, building control and local economic and cultural development. They are not planning authorities, but are consulted on some planning applications. The collection of rates (local tax) is handled by the Rate Collection Agency .

Scotland [ edit ] Main article: Districts of Scotland Further information: Subdivisions of Scotland Districts of Scotland were local government areas between 1975 and 1996.

Between 1930 and 1975, districts were subdivisions of counties , formed under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929 . See List of local government areas in Scotland 1930–75 . Scotland, since 1996, has been divided into 32 unitary council areas, and districts are no longer used.

Scotland has had other kinds of administrative areas which might be described as districts: Shires of Scotland , until 1975 Subdivisions of Scotland , councils or unitary authorities, from 1996, pursuant to the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 Committee areas , from 1996, within larger unitary authorities Wales [ edit ] There is no official use of the word district in Wales . The country is broken up into 22 unitary authorities . However, district may be used informally for a whole or unofficial part of a ward in a city.

United States [ edit ] Main article: List of United States congressional districts See also: District of Alaska This section may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( January 2017 ) There are several types of districts in the United States.

Federal District [ edit ] Satellite photograph of the District of Columbia.

The District of Columbia is the only part of the United States, excluding territories , that is not located within any of the fifty states.

Legislative constituencies [ edit ] A constituency with a representative in Congress is a congressional district . Each state is organized into one or more such districts; the exact number within each state is based on the most recent census . Only voters within each district are allowed to vote in the election for the member of the House of Representatives from that district. Overall, there are 435 congressional districts in the United States; each has roughly 760,000 people, with some variance.

A constituency with a representative in a state legislature is a legislative district .

City councils that are not elected at-large may have constituencies called districts or wards.

Federal judicial districts [ edit ] The territory over which a federal court has jurisdiction is a federal judicial district . In more than half of the states, a federal judicial district is coextensive with the state. In other states there is more than one such district.

Single-purpose districts [ edit ] The United States also has many types of special-purpose districts with limited powers of local government.

School districts are the most common, but other types of districts include community college districts , hospital districts, utility districts, irrigation districts, port districts, and public transit districts.

Many cities in the late 20th century adopted names for non-governmental districts as a way of increasing the recognition and identity of these distinct areas and neighborhoods. Perhaps most apparently in Los Angeles , various areas and neighborhoods within the city are specified as districts. For instance, Hollywood is a district of Los Angeles, whereas Beverly Hills and West Hollywood are independent incorporated cities , with their own governments and police departments. This can be confusing, as the difference between districts and neighboring cities is usually not readily apparent, for they all make up the Greater Los Angeles area. Typically, districts may or may not be distinguished at the boundary of the district with a "district sign" with the city's insignia; whereas at a city boundary, a city limit sign would usually be placed on the street with the city's name and population, at a minimum, but also often includes its elevation . The important distinction is that areas classified as districts are still part of the parent city and governed by the laws and ordinances of that city.

Various federal, regional, and local agencies such as the National Register of Historic Places recognized historic districts .

Municipalities [ edit ] From the late 18th century until the Philadelphia Act of Consolidation in 1854, districts were politically independent municipalities made up of densely populated neighborhoods adjacent to but outside the legal boundaries of the City of Philadelphia .

Northern Liberties , Southwark , and Spring Garden were among the ten largest municipalities by population in the United States.

Municipal utility districts [ edit ] A municipal utility district is a special-purpose district or other jurisdiction that provides services (such as electricity , natural gas , sewage treatment , waste collection / management , wholesale telecommunications , and water ) to district residents. Local residents may vote to establish a municipal utility district, which is represented by a board of directors elected by constituents.

[ 15 ] Municipal utilities are nonprofit government entities that serve at either the local or state level.

[ 16 ] In the United States, public utility districts ( PUD ) have similar functions to municipal utility districts, but are created by a local government body such as a city or county, and have no authority to levy taxes. They provide public utilities to the residents of that district.

[ 17 ] PUDs are created by a local government body, such as a city , county , or metropolitan service area (two or more communities joining for public utility purposes). Normally the districts are non-profit .

[ 18 ] PUDs are often governed by a commission , which may be appointed or elected .

Vietnam [ edit ] Main article: List of districts of Vietnam The term district in Vietnam refers to the second-level administrative unit, below provinces ( tỉnh ) and municipalities ( thành phố trực thuộc trung ương ). This second level unit is called a huyện (counties) in rural areas, while in urban areas districts are either quận (subdivisions of municipalities), Thành phố trực thuộc tỉnh (provincial cities) or thị xã (towns). As of 22 April 2020, [update] Vietnam had 707 "districts" including 77 provincial cities, 52 towns, 49 urban subdivisions, and 529 rural districts/counties (including 12 island districts/counties).

[ citation needed ] Vietnamese districts vary significantly in both population and area. Excluding the island districts, the most populous is Biên Hoà (provincial city) with 1,099,943 people; the least populous is the town of Mường Lay (12,125). Similarly, the largest district is Tương Dương (2,812.07 km 2 ) while the smallest is Cồn Cỏ with an area of only 2.3 km 2 .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Municipality Utility cooperative References [ edit ] ^ a b "district (n.)" .

Oxford English Dictionary . December 2024.

doi : 10.1093/OED/7108775299 .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2023 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ "district" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ "Botswana Government Ministries & Authorities" . Archived from the original on 6 June 2017.

^ "Types of Municipalities in Alberta" .

Alberta Municipal Affairs . Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 28 July 2013 .

^ "Interim List of Changes to Municipal Boundaries, Status, and Names: From January 2, 2012 to January 1, 2012" (PDF) .

Statistics Canada . 2012 . Retrieved 28 July 2013 .

^ Benwah, Jasen S.

"The French Shore" .

Benoit First Nation . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Meloney, Nic.

"Mi'kmaq districts invite PM to meet, redefine 'nation-to-nation' dealings" .

CBC News . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Careless, James Maurice Stockford.

"Province of Canada 1841-67" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ "list of districts of India by states" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2016 . Retrieved 22 April 2016 .

^ "Districts | Government of India Web Directory" .

www.goidirectory.gov.in . Archived from the original on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 15 August 2018 .

^ Gauci, Salv. (23 April 2012).

"Constitution of Malta. Article 61 – Electoral Divisions" (PDF) .

The Malta Government Gazette . No. 18904. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ "Electoral Divisions" .

Electoral Commission Malta . Retrieved 30 January 2019 .

^ Law Z#77-I of 6 July 1995 "On Administrative and Territorial Structure of the Sakha (Yakutia) Republic", with amendments ^ Jongerden, Joost (28 May 2007).

The Settlement Issue in Turkey and the Kurds: An Analysis of Spatial Policies, Modernity and War . BRILL. pp.

141 –143.

ISBN 978-90-474-2011-8 .

^ McGlinchy, Audrey (22 February 2016).

"Everything You Wanted To Know About MUDs But Were Too Afraid To Ask" .

KUT News . KUT Public Media . Retrieved 4 February 2025 .

^ Greer, Monica (2011).

Electricity cost modeling calculations . Burlington, MA: Academic Press/Elsevier. p. 48.

ISBN 978-185617726-9 .

^ "About Us" .

Cypress Forest Public Utility . Retrieved 24 July 2015 .

^ Slechta, Alfred F.; Culp, Gordon L. (1967). "Water reclamation studies at the South Tahoe public utility district".

Water Pollution Control Federation : 787– 814.

v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Half-canton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county County seat County town Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reserve/reservation Indian reservation (United States) Indian reserve (Canada) Municipality City municipality County municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Proto-state City-state Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Trade zone Free-trade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Enclave and exclave Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty Non-English terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Județ Kampong Kommun/Kunta Finland Sweden Län (Sweden) Landskap Finland Località Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njësi administrative Obec Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldybė Selsoviet Sitio Seniūnija Shahrestān Sum China Sýsla Tehsil Townlet Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komunë Köping Korale Län/Lääni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics .

See also Autonomous administration Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Greek administrative divisions Slavic administrative divisions NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐4zdpl
Cached time: 20250814220520
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.925 seconds
Real time usage: 1.136 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6030/1000000
Revision size: 57016/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 207088/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7413/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 66/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 104661/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.553/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21293275/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  899.044      1 -total
 18.39%  165.366      1 Template:Reflist
 11.04%   99.226     13 Template:Langx
 10.15%   91.280     48 Template:Main
 10.05%   90.385      1 Template:World_city_population_tables
  9.75%   87.688      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.43%   75.793     71 Template:Lang
  7.55%   67.892      1 Template:Short_description
  7.32%   65.848      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
  5.78%   51.924      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:156653:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220520 and revision id 1297704708. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=District&oldid=1297704708 " Category : Types of administrative division Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2022 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2019 Articles containing Pashto-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Azerbaijani-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013 Articles containing Swahili (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Filipino-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Yakut-language text Articles containing Slovak-language text Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Turkish-language text Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from January 2017 All articles needing rewrite Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents District 77 languages Add topic

