Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In geometry Toggle In geometry subsection 1.1 Conic section 1.2 Triangle 1.3 Rectangle 1.4 Hyperrectangle 1.5 Convex polygon 1.6 Convex polyhedron 1.7 Standard torus 1.8 Sphere 1.9 Other 2 Elsewhere 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Degeneracy (mathematics) 20 languages العربية Чӑвашла Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Limiting case which is different from the rest of the class This article is about degeneracy in mathematics. For the degeneracy of a graph, see Degeneracy (graph theory) . For other uses, see Degeneracy (disambiguation) .

In mathematics , a degenerate case is a limiting case of a class of objects which appears to be qualitatively different from (and usually simpler than) the rest of the class; [ 1 ] " degeneracy " is the condition of being a degenerate case.

[ 2 ] The definitions of many classes of composite or structured objects often implicitly include inequalities. For example, the angles and the side lengths of a triangle are supposed to be positive. The limiting cases, where one or several of these inequalities become equalities, are degeneracies. In the case of triangles, one has a degenerate triangle if at least one side length or angle is zero. Equivalently, it becomes a "line segment".

[ 3 ] Often, the degenerate cases are the exceptional cases where changes to the usual dimension or the cardinality of the object (or of some part of it) occur. For example, a triangle is an object of dimension two, and a degenerate triangle is contained in a line , [ 3 ] which makes its dimension one. This is similar to the case of a circle, whose dimension shrinks from two to zero as it degenerates into a point.

[ 1 ] As another example, the solution set of a system of equations that depends on parameters generally has a fixed cardinality and dimension, but cardinality and/or dimension may be different for some exceptional values, called degenerate cases. In such a degenerate case, the solution set is said to be degenerate.

For some classes of composite objects, the degenerate cases depend on the properties that are specifically studied. In particular, the class of objects may often be defined or characterized by systems of equations. In most scenarios, a given class of objects may be defined by several different systems of equations, and these different systems of equations may lead to different degenerate cases, while characterizing the same non-degenerate cases. This may be the reason for which there is no general definition of degeneracy, despite the fact that the concept is widely used and defined (if needed) in each specific situation.

A degenerate case thus has special features which makes it non-generic , or a special case . However, not all non-generic or special cases are degenerate. For example, right triangles , isosceles triangles and equilateral triangles are non-generic and non-degenerate. In fact, degenerate cases often correspond to singularities , either in the object or in some configuration space . For example, a conic section is degenerate if and only if it has singular points (e.g., point, line, intersecting lines).

[ 4 ] In geometry [ edit ] Conic section [ edit ] Main article: Degenerate conic A degenerate conic is a conic section (a second-degree plane curve , defined by a polynomial equation of degree two)  that fails to be an irreducible curve .

A point is a degenerate circle , namely one with radius 0.

[ 1 ] The line is a degenerate case of a parabola if the parabola resides on a tangent plane . In inversive geometry , a line is a degenerate case of a circle , with infinite radius.

Two parallel lines also form a degenerate parabola.

A line segment can be viewed as a degenerate case of an ellipse in which the semiminor axis goes to zero, the foci go to the endpoints, and the eccentricity goes to one.

A circle can be thought of as a degenerate ellipse, as the eccentricity approaches 0 and the foci merge.

[ 1 ] An ellipse can also degenerate into a single point.

A hyperbola can degenerate into two lines crossing at a point, through a family of hyperbolae having those lines as common asymptotes .

Triangle [ edit ] "Degenerate triangle" redirects here. For the use in computer-graphics meshes, see Glossary of computer graphics § degenerate triangles .

The three types of degenerate triangles, all of which contain zero area.

A degenerate triangle is a "flat" triangle in the sense that it is contained in a line segment . It has thus collinear vertices [ 3 ] and zero area. If the three vertices are all distinct, it has two 0° angles and one 180° angle. If two vertices are equal, it has one 0° angle and two undefined angles. If all three vertices are equal, all three angles are undefined.

Rectangle [ edit ] A rectangle with one pair of opposite sides of length zero degenerates to a line segment, with zero area. If both of the rectangle's pairs of opposite sides have length zero, the rectangle degenerates to a point.

Hyperrectangle [ edit ] A hyperrectangle is the n -dimensional analog of a rectangle. If its sides along any of the n axes has length zero, it degenerates to a lower-dimensional hyperrectangle, all the way down to a point if the sides aligned with every axis have length zero.

Convex polygon [ edit ] A convex polygon is degenerate if at least two consecutive sides coincide at least partially, or at least one side has zero length, or at least one angle is 180°. Thus a degenerate convex polygon of n sides looks like a polygon with fewer sides. In the case of triangles, this definition coincides with the one that has been given above.

Convex polyhedron [ edit ] A convex polyhedron is degenerate if either two adjacent facets are coplanar or two edges are aligned. In the case of a tetrahedron , this is equivalent to saying that all of its vertices lie in the same plane , giving it a volume of zero.

Standard torus [ edit ] In contexts where self-intersection is allowed, a double-covered sphere is a degenerate standard torus where the axis of revolution passes through the center of the generating circle, rather than outside it.

A torus degenerates to a circle when its minor radius goes to 0.

Sphere [ edit ] When the radius of a sphere goes to zero, the resulting degenerate sphere of zero volume is a point .

Other [ edit ] See general position for other examples.

Elsewhere [ edit ] A set containing a single point is a degenerate continuum .

Objects such as the digon and monogon can be viewed as degenerate cases of polygons : valid in a general abstract mathematical sense, but not part of the original Euclidean conception of polygons.

A random variable which can only take one value has a degenerate distribution ; if that value is the real number 0, then its probability density is the Dirac delta function .

A root of a polynomial is sometimes said to be degenerate if it is a multiple root , since generically the n roots of an n th degree polynomial are all distinct.

[ 1 ] This usage carries over to eigenproblems: a degenerate eigenvalue is a multiple root of the characteristic polynomial .

In quantum mechanics , any such multiplicity in the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian operator gives rise to degenerate energy levels . Usually any such degeneracy indicates some underlying symmetry in the system.

See also [ edit ] Degeneracy (graph theory) Degenerate form Trivial (mathematics) Pathological (mathematics) Vacuous truth References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Weisstein, Eric W.

"Degenerate" .

mathworld.wolfram.com . Retrieved 2019-11-29 .

^ "Definition of DEGENERACY" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2019-11-29 .

^ a b c "Mathwords: Degenerate" .

www.mathwords.com . Retrieved 2019-11-29 .

^ "Mathwords: Degenerate Conic Sections" .

www.mathwords.com . Retrieved 2019-11-29 .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐wkkl7
Cached time: 20250812011959
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.165 seconds
Real time usage: 0.223 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 568/1000000
Revision size: 8704/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 7843/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 701/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 15375/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.101/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4360066/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  187.888      1 -total
 45.42%   85.335      4 Template:Cite_web
 33.89%   63.676      1 Template:Short_description
 18.01%   33.832      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.57%   19.853      3 Template:Main_other
  9.65%   18.125      1 Template:SDcat
  9.03%   16.959      1 Template:About
  3.79%    7.116      1 Template:Redirect
  2.55%    4.796      1 Template:Main
  1.15%    2.166      1 Template:Math Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:232952:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812011959 and revision id 1283993326. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Degeneracy_(mathematics)&oldid=1283993326 " Category : Mathematical concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 April 2025, at 22:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Degeneracy (mathematics) 20 languages Add topic

