Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Astronomy 2 Observation 3 History 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Southern celestial hemisphere 20 languages Afrikaans Bikol Central Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Lëtzebuergesch Македонски مصرى Polski Português Русский Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Southern sky ) Southern half of the celestial sphere This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Southern celestial hemisphere" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A star chart of the entire Southern Sky, centered on the south celestial pole The southern celestial hemisphere , also called the Southern Sky , is the southern half of the celestial sphere ; that is, it lies south of the celestial equator . This arbitrary sphere, on which seemingly fixed stars form constellations , appears to rotate westward around a polar axis as the Earth rotates .

At all times, the entire Southern Sky is visible from the geographic South Pole ; less of the Southern Sky is visible the further north the observer is located. The northern counterpart is the northern celestial hemisphere .

Astronomy [ edit ] Earth rotating within the celestial sphere . In this view, the southern celestial hemisphere is below the celestial equator , the middle parallel (in cyan).

In the context of astronomical discussions or writing about celestial mapping , it may also simply then be referred to as the Southern Hemisphere.

[ citation needed ] For the purpose of celestial mapping, the sky is considered by astronomers as the inside of a sphere divided in two halves by the celestial equator .

[ according to whom?

] The Southern Sky or Southern Hemisphere is, therefore, that half of the celestial sphere that is south of the celestial equator. Even if this one is the ideal projection of the terrestrial equatorial onto the imaginary celestial sphere, the Northern and Southern celestial hemispheres should not be confused with descriptions of the terrestrial hemispheres of Earth itself.

[ according to whom?

] Observation [ edit ] Chart of the southern constellations from declination –40° to the south celestial pole by the Jesuit missionary François Noël published in Acta Eruditorum , 1711.

From the South Pole , in good visibility conditions, the Southern Sky features over 2,000 fixed stars that are easily visible to the naked eye , while about 20,000 to 40,000 with the aided eye.

[ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] In large cities, about 300 to 500 stars can be seen depending on the extent of light and air pollution .

[ citation needed ] The farther north, the fewer are visible to the observer.

[ citation needed ] The brightest star in the night sky is located in the southern celestial hemisphere and is larger than the Sun .

Sirius in the constellation of Canis Major has the brightest apparent magnitude of −1.46; it has a radius twice that of the Sun and is 8.6 light-years away.

Canopus and the next fixed star α Centauri , 4.2 light-years away, are also located in the Southern Sky, having declinations around −60°; too close to the south celestial pole for either to be visible from Central Europe .

[ 1 ] Of the 88 modern constellations , 45 are only visible from the Southern celestial hemisphere with 15 other constellations along the equator and have portions on the northern hemisphere. The southern constellations are: [ citation needed ] [ 2 ] Antlia Apus Aquarius Aquila Ara Caelum Canis Major Canis Minor Capricornus Carina Centaurus Cetus Chamaeleon Circinus Columba Corona Australis Corvus Crater Crux Dorado Eridanus Fornax Grus Horologium Hydra Hydrus Indus Leo Lepus Libra Lupus Mensa Monoceros Microscopium Musca Norma Octans Ophiuchus Orion Pavo Phoenix Pictor Pisces Piscis Austrinus Puppis Pyxis Reticulum Sagittarius Scorpius Sculptor Scutum Serpens Sextans Taurus Telescopium Triangulum Australe Tucana Vela Virgo Volans History [ edit ] The first telescopic chart of the Southern Sky was made by the English astronomer Edmond Halley , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] from the island of St Helena in the South Atlantic Ocean and published by him in 1678.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Astronomical coordinate systems Celestial spheres Northern celestial hemisphere References [ edit ] ^ David Ellyard, Wil Tirion: The Southern Sky Guide.

Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 2009, ISBN 978-0-521-71405-1 ^ "International Astronomical Union | IAU" .

www.iau.org . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ "Edmond Halley (1656–1742)" .

BBC . 2014 . Retrieved 2021-07-11 .

^ "Edmond Halley's southern star catalogue" . Retrieved 2023-07-26 .

^ Kanas, Nick (2012).

Star Maps: History, Artistry, and Cartography (2nd ed.). Chichester, UK: Springer. p. 123.

ISBN 978-1-4614-0917-5 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_celestial_hemisphere&oldid=1303737269 " Category : Astronomical coordinate systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 19:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Southern celestial hemisphere 20 languages Add topic

