Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Springs 3 Thunderbolts 4 Birth 5 Bellerophon 6 Perseus 7 Olympus 8 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 8.1 In heraldry 8.2 World War II emblem 8.3 In popular culture 9 Gallery 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Pegasus 82 languages Alemannisch العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mythological creature in Greek mythology For other uses, see Pegasus (disambiguation) .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(March 2018) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Pégase (mythologie)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Pégase (mythologie)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Pegasus Bellerophon riding Pegasus and slaying the Chimera , central medallion of a Gallo-Roman mosaic from Autun , Musée Rolin , 2nd to 3rd century AD.

Abode Hippocrene , Mount Helicon Genealogy Parents Poseidon and Medusa Siblings Chrysaor and several paternal half-siblings Silver denarius of Domitian with Pegasus on the reverse, dated 79–80 AD Pegasus ( Ancient Greek : Πήγασος , romanized : Pḗgasos ; Latin : Pegasus, Pegasos ) is a winged horse in Greek mythology , usually depicted as a white stallion. He was sired by Poseidon , in his role as horse-god, and foaled by the Gorgon Medusa . Pegasus was the brother of Chrysaor , both born from Medusa's blood when their mother was decapitated by Perseus . Greco-Roman poets wrote about his ascent to heaven after his birth and his obeisance to Zeus , who instructed him to bring lightning and thunder from Olympus .

Pegasus is the creator of Hippocrene , the fountain on Mount Helicon . He was captured by the Greek hero Bellerophon , near the fountain Peirene , with the help of Athena and Poseidon. Pegasus allowed Bellerophon to ride him in order to defeat the monster Chimera , which led to many more exploits. Bellerophon later fell from Pegasus's back while trying to reach Mount Olympus . Both Pegasus and Bellerophon were said to have died at the hands of Zeus for trying to reach Olympus. Other tales have Zeus bring Pegasus to Olympus to carry his thunderbolts.

Long honored as a constellation , Pegasus is a subject of very rich iconography, especially through ancient Greek pottery as well as paintings and sculptures of the Renaissance.

Etymology [ edit ] Pegasus on ancient cup of Marlik The poet Hesiod presents a folk etymology of the name Pegasus as derived from πηγή pēgē 'spring, well', referring to "the pegai of Okeanos , where he was born".

[ 1 ] A proposed etymology of the name is Luwian pihassas 'lightning', and Pihassassi , a local Luwian- Hittite name in southern Cilicia of a weather deity associated with thunder and lightning. The proponents of this etymology adduce the role of Pegasus, reported as early as Hesiod , as the bringer of thunderbolts to Zeus. That interpretation was first suggested in 1952 and remains widely accepted, [ 2 ] but Robin Lane Fox (2009) has criticized it as implausible.

[ 3 ] Springs [ edit ] According to early myths, everywhere the winged horse struck his hoof to the earth, an inspiring water spring burst forth. One of these springs was upon the Muses ' Mount Helicon , the Hippocrene ("horse spring").

[ 4 ] Antoninus Liberalis suggested, [ 5 ] that it was opened at the behest of Poseidon to prevent the mountain from swelling with rapture at the song of the Muses. Another spring associated with Pegasus was at Troezen .

[ 6 ] Hesiod relates how Pegasus was peacefully drinking from a spring when the hero Bellerophon captured him.

Thunderbolts [ edit ] Hesiod wrote that Pegasus carried thunderbolts for Zeus .

[ 7 ] Birth [ edit ] There are several versions of the birth of the winged stallion and his brother Chrysaor in the far distant place at the edge of Earth, Hesiod's "springs of Oceanus", which encircles the inhabited earth, where Perseus found Medusa : One is that they sprang from the blood issuing from Medusa's neck as Perseus was beheading her, [ 8 ] similar to the manner in which Athena was born from the head of Zeus after he swallowed her pregnant mother.

In another version, when Perseus beheaded Medusa, the brothers were born of the Earth, when the Gorgon's blood fell upon her. A variation of this story holds that they were formed from the mingling of Medusa's blood, pain, and sea foam, implying that Poseidon had involvement in their making.

The last version bears resemblance to Hesiod 's account of the birth of Aphrodite from the foam created when the severed genitals of Uranus were cast into the sea by Cronus .

Pedigree of Pegasus Sire Poseidon Cronus Uranus Gaïa or Nyx Gaïa or Nyx Gaïa Chaos Chaos Rhea Uranus Gaïa or Nyx Gaïa or Nyx Gaïa Chaos Chaos Dam Medusa Phorcys Pontus Ether or Uranus Gaïa Gaïa Chaos Chaos Ceto Pontus Ether or Uranus Gaïa Gaïa Chaos Chaos Bellerophon [ edit ] Bellerophon fighting the Chimera, side A of a black-figure double-belly cup of Siana made in Athens found in Camiros (Rhodes) Left: a Hellenistic Greek mosaic of Bellerophon riding Pegasus while slaying the Chimera , 300–270 BC, Archaeological Museum of Rhodes Right: a Roman mosaic of Bellerophon slaying the Chimera, 2nd to 3rd centuries AD, Musée de la Romanité Pegasus aided the hero Bellerophon in his fight against the Chimera . There are varying tales about how Bellerophon found Pegasus; the most common [ 9 ] being that the hero was told by Polyeidos to sleep in the temple of Athena , where the goddess visited him in the night and presented him with a golden bridle. The next morning, still clutching the bridle, Bellerophon found Pegasus drinking at the Pierian spring, caught him, and eventually tamed him.

Perseus [ edit ] Michaud's Biographie universelle relates that when Pegasus was born, he flew to where thunder and lightning are released. Then, according to certain versions of the myth, Athena tamed him and gave him to Perseus, who flew to Ethiopia to help Andromeda .

[ 10 ] Olympus [ edit ] Left , the head of Athena wearing the Corinthian helmet adorned with a griffin; right , Pegasus flying and between his legs, a triskele is displayed After Bellerophon fell off Pegasus while trying to reach Olympus, Pegasus and Athena left him and continued to Olympus where he was stabled with other steeds belonging to Zeus , and was given the task of carrying Zeus ' thunderbolts, along with other members of his entourage, his attendants / handmaidens / shield bearers / shieldmaidens , Astrape and Bronte .

Because of his years of faithful service to Zeus, Pegasus was later honoured with transformation into a constellation .

[ 11 ] On the day of his catasterism , when Zeus transformed him into a constellation, a single feather fell to Earth near the city of Tarsus .

[ 12 ] Legacy [ edit ] In heraldry [ edit ] The pegasus became a common element in British heraldry, appearing chiefly as a supporter or a crest . Pegasi may also appear upon escutcheons , although this is rare. A pegasus rampant is featured on the arms of the Inner Temple , while those of the Richardson family contain a rare depiction of a pegasus sejant.

[ 13 ] World War II emblem [ edit ] During World War II , the silhouetted image of Bellerophon the warrior, mounted on the winged Pegasus, was adopted by the United Kingdom 's newly raised parachute troops in 1941 as their upper sleeve insignia.

The emblem of the World War II, British Airborne Forces, Bellerophon riding the flying horse Pegasus The image clearly symbolized a warrior arriving at a battle by air, the same tactics used by paratroopers . The square upper-sleeve insignia comprised Bellerophon/Pegasus in light blue on a maroon background. One source suggests that the insignia was designed by famous English novelist Daphne du Maurier , who was wife of the commander of the 1st Airborne Division (and later the expanded British Airborne Forces), General Frederick "Boy" Browning . According to the British Army Website, the insignia was designed by the celebrated East Anglian painter Major Edward Seago in May 1942. The maroon background on the insignia was later used again by the Airborne Forces when they adopted the famous maroon beret in Summer 1942. The beret was the origin of the German nickname for British airborne troops, the Red Devils . Today's Parachute Regiment carries on the maroon beret tradition. The selection process for the elite Parachute Regiment is called Pegasus Company (often abbreviated to "P Company").

In 2015 it was announced that the units of 16 Air Assault Brigade would once again use the Pegasus insignia after a 15-year hiatus.

[ 14 ] During the airborne phase of the Normandy invasion on the night of 5–6 June 1944, British 6th Airborne Division captured all its key objectives in advance of the seaborne assault, including the capture and holding at all costs of a vital bridge over the Caen Canal , near Ouistreham . In memory of their tenacity, the bridge has been known ever since as Pegasus Bridge .

The Tuscan National Liberation Committee during the German occupation of Italy also had a Pegasus as its emblem. The winged horse is still featured on the Tuscan flag and coat of arms.

Wing of the Pegasus Airlines plane In popular culture [ edit ] Main article: Pegasus in popular culture The winged horse has provided an instantly recognizable corporate logo or emblem of inspiration.

Ecuador launched its weather satellite, named Pegaso ( pronounced [peˈɣaso] , Pegasus in Spanish), on 26 April 2013 but it was damaged by Russian space debris.

[ 15 ] Pegasus Airlines (Turkish: Pegasus Hava Taşımacılığı A.Ş.) is a low-cost airline headquartered in the Kurtköy area of Pendik, Istanbul , Turkey .

Mobil Oil has had a Pegasus as its company logo since its affiliation with Magnolia Petroleum Company in the 1930s.

TriStar Pictures famously uses a winged horse in their logo.

Gallery [ edit ] Bellerophon, Pegasus, and Athena, fresco of the 3rd style from Pompeii , first half of the 1st century Bronze figurine (Greece, sixth century BC) Bellerophon mounted on Pegasus fighting the Chimera, side A from an Attic red-figure pelike Bellerophon and the Chimera, edge of an Attic red-figure epinetron (thigh-protector used by a woman when weaving) Reel (probably an ear-stud) with representations of Pegasus and Chimaira Pegasus, Attic red-figure squat lekythos, 480–460 BC, from Sicily Parthian era bronze plate depicting Pegasus ( Pegaz in Persian), excavated in Masjed Soleyman , Khūzestān , Iran A 1914 illustration depicting Bellerophon riding Pegasus Bellerophon Taming Pegasus , by Jacques Lipchitz . 1977.

Columbia University , New York See also [ edit ] Uchchaihshravas Hybrid creatures in mythology List of fictional horses List of hybrid creatures in mythology Flying horses Ethiopian pegasus Haizum Hippogriff Luno the White Stallion Pegasides Pegasus and Dragon (statue) Qianlima Tulpar Unicorn Wind horse Winged unicorn References [ edit ] ^ Noted by Karl Kerényi , The Heroes of the Greeks , 1959:80: "In the name Pegasos itself the connection with a spring, pege , is expressed." ^ The connection of Pegasus with Pihassas was suggested by H.T. Bossert, "Die phönikisch-hethitischen Bilinguen vom Karatepe", Jahrbuch für kleinasiatische Forschung , 2 1952/53:333, P. Frei, "Die Bellerophontessaga und das Alte Testament", in B. Janowski, K. Koch and G. Wilhelm, eds., Religionsgeschichtliche Beziehungen zwischen Kleinasien, Nordsyrien und der Alte Testament , 1993:48f, and Hutter, "Der luwische Wettergott pihašsašsi under der griechischen Pegasos", in Chr. Zinko, ed.

Studia Onomastica et Indogermanica...

1995:79–98. Commentary was provided by R. S. P. Beekes in his Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. 1183.

^ "a storm god is not the origin of a horse. However, he had a like-sounding name, and Greek visitors to Cilicia may have connected their existing Pegasus with Zeus 's lightning after hearing about this 'Pihassassi' and his functions and assuming, wrongly, he was their own Pegasus in a foreign land."  Robin Lane Fox, Travelling Heroes in the Epic Age of Homer , Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 2009, ISBN 9780307271518 , pp. 207ff.

^ Pausanias , 9. 31. 3.

^ Antoninus Liberalis, Metamorphoses 9 ^ Pausanias,  2. 31. 9.

^ "Hesiod, Theogony, line 270" .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 281; Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 2. 42, et al.

Harris, Stephen L. and Gloria Platzner.

Classical Mythology: Images and Insights.

2nd ed. (New York: Mayfield Publishing), 1998. 234.

^ For example in Pindar , Olympian Ode 13.

^ Michaud, Joseph F. & Michaud, Louis G. (1833). Michaud Frères (ed.).

Biographie universelle, ancienne et moderne, ou Histoire, par ordre alphabétique, de la vie publique et privée de tous les hommes qui se sont fait remarquer par leurs écrits, leurs actions, leurs talents, leurs vertus ou leurs crimes (in French). Vol. 5 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 .

^ Aratus , Phaenomena 206; Scott Littleton, Mythology. The Illustrated Anthology of World Myth and Storytelling London: Duncan Baird, 2002:147.

ISBN 1-903296-37-4 ^ Grimal, Pierre (4 September 1996). Trans. by A. R. Maxwell-Hyslop (ed.).

The Dictionary of Classical Mythology . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. p. 349.

ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1 .

^ Arthur Charles Fox-Davies .

A Complete Guide to Heraldry , T.C. and E.C. Jack, London, 1909, 202, https://archive.org/details/completeguidetoh00foxduoft .

^ Farmer, Ben (22 October 2015).

"Paras win 15-year battle to reinstate Pegasus emblem" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 March 2018 .

^ "Ecuador Pegasus satellite fears over space debris crash – BBC News" . BBC News. 24 May 2013.

External links [ edit ] The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Pegasus) Media related to Pegasus at Wikimedia Commons Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Pegasus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Heraldry Authorities Grant of arms History Law of arms Officers of arms King of Arms herald pursuivant private Types National dominion civic Ecclesiastical papal Burgher Women Attributed Topics Armiger Augmentation abatement Ancient and modern Alliance courtesy Blazon Cadency distinction Canting Debased Field divisions variations Fraud Marshalling quartering impalement National traditions Societies Achievement Coat of arms Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Escutcheon Helmet Mantling pavilion Motto slogan Supporter Torse Charges Attitudes Erasure Fimbriation Lines Ordinaries Annulet Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron ( Łękawica ) Componée Cross Crozier head Chief Fess Flaunch Goutte Gyron Hamade Inescutcheon Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Bezant Saltire Beasts Bear Boar Bull/ox Dog/hound Camelopard Hind/stag Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Birds Alerion Black swan Cock Crow Dove Eagle Double-headed Triple-headed Szaszor Martlet Pelican Other Bee Crapaudy Dolphin Emmet Ged Lucy Mill Portcullis Reremouse Scallop Serpent Wolfsangel Legendary Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Chinese Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Musimon Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-griffin Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Winged lion Woodwose Wyvern Yale Plants Fleur-de-lis Laurel wreath Oak Quatrefoil Rose Shamrock Trefoil Thistle Turnip Waterlily/Seeblatt Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Ormonde/Wake Savoy Stafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rule of tincture Tricking Hatching Metals Argent (white) Or (gold) Colours Gules (red) Sable (black) Azure (blue) Vert (green) Purpure (purple) 1 Furs Ermine Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains Murrey (mulberry) Sanguine (blood red) Tenné Rare metals 1 Copper Buff (metal in the United States) Rare colours 1 Bleu celeste Brunâtre (brown) Buff (colour in Canada) Cendrée Ochre Orange Rose Realistic Proper Carnation Applications Bookplate Hatchment Flag banner of arms Badge Roll of arms Illyrian Seal equestrian Tabard Trophy of arms Related Mon Emblem socialist Logotype Phaleristics Vexillology Sigillography 1 Non-traditional, regional, or rarely used (sometimes considered unheraldic) List of oldest heraldry Heraldry portal resources Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bw867
Cached time: 20250817043544
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.121 seconds
Real time usage: 1.363 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4798/1000000
Revision size: 17572/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 445481/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9255/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66695/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.584/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20888228/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1007.343      1 -total
 36.94%  372.063     24 Template:Navbox
 18.07%  181.999      1 Template:Reflist
 15.04%  151.492      2 Template:Langx
 13.54%  136.380      1 Template:Greek_religion
 10.27%  103.412      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  8.27%   83.356      2 Template:ISBN
  8.13%   81.856      1 Template:Heraldic_creatures
  6.96%   70.120      1 Template:Infobox
  6.93%   69.819      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23986:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043544 and revision id 1305582278. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pegasus&oldid=1305582278 " Categories : Pegasus Medusa Children of Poseidon Mythological horses Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Culture articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages with Spanish IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Use dmy dates from August 2019 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 22:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pegasus 82 languages Add topic

