Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Pseudomathematics 10 languages العربية فارسی हिन्दी 日本語 Português Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pseudomath ) Work of mathematical cranks For broader coverage of this topic, see Pseudo-scholarship .

Squaring the circle : the areas of this square and this circle are both equal to π . Since 1882, it has been known that this figure cannot be constructed in a finite number of steps with an idealized compass and straightedge . Nevertheless, "proofs" of such constructions were still published even 50 years later .

Pseudomathematics , or mathematical crankery , is a mathematics -like activity that does not adhere to the framework of rigor of formal mathematical practice. Common areas of pseudomathematics are solutions of problems proved to be unsolvable or recognized as extremely hard by experts, as well as attempts to apply mathematics to non-quantifiable areas. A person engaging in pseudomathematics is called a pseudomathematician or a pseudomath .

[ 1 ] Pseudomathematics has equivalents in other scientific fields, and may overlap with other topics characterized as pseudoscience .

Pseudomathematics often contains mathematical fallacies whose executions are tied to elements of deceit rather than genuine, unsuccessful attempts at tackling a problem. Excessive pursuit of pseudomathematics can result in the practitioner being labelled a crank . Because it is based on non-mathematical principles, pseudomathematics is not related to misguided attempts at genuine proofs . Indeed, such mistakes are common in the careers of amateur mathematicians , some of whom go on to produce celebrated results.

[ 1 ] The topic of mathematical crankery has been extensively studied by mathematician Underwood Dudley , who has written several popular works about mathematical cranks and their ideas.

Examples [ edit ] One common type of approach is claiming to have solved a classical problem that has been proven to be mathematically unsolvable. Common examples of this include the following constructions in Euclidean geometry – using only a compass and straightedge : Squaring the circle : Given any circle drawing a square having the same area .

Doubling the cube : Given any cube drawing a cube with twice its volume .

Trisecting the angle : Given any angle dividing it into three smaller angles all of the same size.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] For more than 2,000 years, many people had tried and failed to find such constructions; in the 19th century they were all proven impossible.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] : 47 Another notable case were "Fermatists", who plagued mathematical institutions with requests to check their proofs of Fermat's Last Theorem .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Another common approach is to misapprehend standard mathematical methods, and to insist that the use or knowledge of higher mathematics is somehow cheating or misleading (e.g., the denial of Cantor's diagonal argument [ 9 ] : 40ff or Gödel's incompleteness theorems ).

[ 9 ] : 167ff History [ edit ] The term pseudomath was coined by the logician Augustus De Morgan , discoverer of De Morgan's laws , in his A Budget of Paradoxes (1872). De Morgan wrote: The pseudomath is a person who handles mathematics as the monkey handled the razor. The creature tried to shave himself as he had seen his master do; but, not having any notion of the angle at which the razor was to be held, he cut his own throat. He never tried a second time, poor animal! but the pseudomath keeps on at his work, proclaims himself clean-shaved, and all the rest of the world hairy.

[ 10 ] De Morgan named James Smith as an example of a pseudomath who claimed to have proved that π is exactly ⁠3 + 1 / 8 ⁠ .

[ 1 ] Of Smith, De Morgan wrote: "He is beyond a doubt the ablest head at unreasoning, and the greatest hand at writing it, of all who have tried in our day to attach their names to an error." [ 10 ] The term pseudomath was adopted later by Tobias Dantzig .

[ 11 ] Dantzig observed: With the advent of modern times, there was an unprecedented increase in pseudomathematical activity. During the 18th century, all scientific academies of Europe saw themselves besieged by circle-squarers, trisectors, duplicators, and perpetuum mobile designers, loudly clamoring for recognition of their epoch-making achievements. In the second half of that century, the nuisance had become so unbearable that, one by one, the academies were forced to discontinue the examination of the proposed solutions.

[ 11 ] The term pseudomathematics has been applied to attempts in mental and social sciences to quantify the effects of what is typically considered to be qualitative.

[ 12 ] More recently, the same term has been applied to creationist attempts to refute the theory of evolution , by way of spurious arguments purportedly based in probability or complexity theory , such as intelligent design proponent William Dembski 's concept of specified complexity .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] 0.999...

, often fallaciously [ 15 ] claimed to be distinct from 1 Indiana Pi Bill Eccentricity (behavior) Mathematical fallacy Pseudoscience References [ edit ] ^ a b c Lynch, Peter.

"Maths discoveries by amateurs and distractions by cranks" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 2019-12-11 .

^ Dudley, Underwood (1983).

"What To Do When the Trisector Comes" (PDF) .

The Mathematical Intelligencer .

5 (1): 20– 25.

doi : 10.1007/bf03023502 .

S2CID 120170131 .

^ Schaaf, William L. (1973).

A Bibliography of Recreational Mathematics, Volume 3 .

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . p. 161.

Pseudomath.

A term coined by Augustus De Morgan to identify amateur or self-styled mathematicians, particularly circle-squarers, angle-trisectors, and cube-duplicators, although it can be extended to include those who deny the validity of non-Euclidean geometries. The typical pseudomath has but little mathematical training and insight, is not interested in the results of orthodox mathematics, has complete faith in his own capabilities, and resents the indifference of professional mathematicians.

^ Johnson, George (1999-02-09).

"Genius or Gibberish? The Strange World of the Math Crank" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2019-12-21 .

^ Wantzel, P M L (1837). "Recherches sur les moyens de reconnaître si un problème de Géométrie peut se résoudre avec la règle et le compas".

Journal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées . 1.

2 : 366– 372.

^ Bold, Benjamin (1982) [1969].

Famous Problems of Geometry and How to Solve Them . Dover Publications.

^ Konrad Jacobs, Invitation to Mathematics , 1992, p. 7 ^ Underwood Dudley , Mathematical Cranks 2019, p. 133 ^ a b Dudley, Underwood (1992).

Mathematical Cranks . Mathematical Association of America.

ISBN 0-88385-507-0 .

^ a b De Morgan, Augustus (1915).

A Budget of Paradoxes (2nd ed.). Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Co.

^ a b Dantzig, Tobias (1954). "The Pseudomath".

The Scientific Monthly .

79 (2): 113– 117.

Bibcode : 1954SciMo..79..113D .

JSTOR 20921 .

^ Johnson, H. M. (1936). "Pseudo-Mathematics in the Mental and Social Sciences".

The American Journal of Psychology .

48 (2): 342– 351.

doi : 10.2307/1415754 .

ISSN 0002-9556 .

JSTOR 1415754 .

S2CID 146915476 .

^ Elsberry, Wesley ; Shallit, Jeffrey (2011). "Information theory, evolutionary computation, and Dembski's "complex specified information" ".

Synthese .

178 (2): 237– 270.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.318.2863 .

doi : 10.1007/s11229-009-9542-8 .

S2CID 1846063 .

^ Rosenhouse, Jason (2001).

"How Anti-Evolutionists Abuse Mathematics" (PDF) .

The Mathematical Intelligencer .

23 : 3– 8.

^ "Why Does 0.999… = 1?" .

Further reading [ edit ] Underwood Dudley (1987), A Budget of Trisections , Springer Science+Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4612-6430-9 . Revised and reissued in 1996 as The Trisectors , Mathematical Association of America.

ISBN 0-88385-514-3 .

Underwood Dudley (1997), Numerology: Or, What Pythagoras Wrought , Mathematical Association of America.

ISBN 0-88385-524-0 .

Clifford Pickover (1999), Strange Brains and Genius , Quill.

ISBN 0-688-16894-9 .

Bailey, David H.; Borwein, Jonathan M.; de Prado, Marcos López; Zhu, Qiji Jim (2014).

"Pseudo-Mathematics and Financial Charlatanism: The Effects of Backtest Overfitting on Out-of-Sample Performance" (PDF) .

Notices of the AMS .

61 (5): 458– 471.

doi : 10.1090/noti1105 .

v t e Pseudoscience List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Terminology Cargo cult science Charlatan Crank Fringe theory Fringe science Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Pseudomathematics Junk science Paranormal Pathological science Quackery Snake oil Superseded scientific theory True-believer syndrome Voodoo Science Topics characterized as pseudoscience Medicine Acupuncture Aromatherapy Adrenal fatigue Alternative medicine Anthroposophic medicine Applied kinesiology Ayurveda Bates method Biorhythms Bloodletting Body memory Chiropractic Chromotherapy Correactology Cryonics Crystal healing Cupping Detoxification Colon cleansing Doctrine of signatures Doktor Koster's Antigaspills Ear candling Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Energy medicine Fad diet FasciaBlaster Germ theory denialism HIV/AIDS denialism Homeopathy Humorism Iridology Leaky gut syndrome LGBTQ chemicals conspiracy theory Lunar effect Macrobiotic diet Magnet therapy Miracle Mineral Supplement Naturopathy Palmistry Panchagavya Patent medicine Phrenology Primal therapy Radionics Reiki Traditional medicine Traditional Chinese medicine Trepanning Vertebral subluxation Wind turbine syndrome Young blood transfusion Social science 2012 phenomenon Ancient astronauts Arabian Judah theory Catastrophism Conspiracy theory 5G conspiracy 9/11 conspiracy theories Chemtrail conspiracy theory Climate change denial COVID-19 misinformation Moon landing conspiracy theories Opposition to water fluoridation Conversion therapy Expanding Earth Theory Generational theory Generationism Strauss–Howe generational theory Hollow Earth theory Indigo children Japhetic theory Mediumship Nazi archaeology Nibiru cataclysm Parapsychology Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Genocide denial Historical negationism Holocaust denial Tartarian Empire Pseudolaw Recovered-memory therapy Past life regression Scientific racism Aryan race Melanin theory Myers–Briggs Type Indicator Enneagram of Personality Physics Anti-gravity Cold fusion Faster-than-light travel Perpetual motion Quantum mysticism Reactionless drive Dean drive EMDrive Teleportation Tractor beam Water-fueled car Other Alchemy Aquatic ape hypothesis Astrology Biodynamic agriculture Biological transmutation Creation science Cryptozoology Dianetics Auditing Dowsing Electronic voice phenomenon Eugenics Facilitated communication Feng shui Flat Earth theory Modern flat Earth beliefs Graphology Intelligent design Laundry ball Law of attraction Levitation Lysenkoism Numerology Orgone Polygraph Pseudoscientific metrology Rapid prompting method Statement analysis Ufology Voice stress analysis Water memory Promoters of pseudoscience Sucharit Bhakdi Del Bigtree Igor and Grichka Bogdanoff Brigitte Boisselier Rhonda Byrne Robert Charroux Deepak Chopra Clonaid Vernon Coleman Michael Crichton Ignatius L. Donnelly Gaia, Inc.

Max Gerson Nicholas Gonzalez Goop (company) Graham Hancock David Icke William Donald Kelley Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

Corentin Louis Kervran The Light (newspaper) Mike Lindell Jenny McCarthy Joseph Mercola Judy Mikovits Ministry of Ayush Theodor Morell Hans Alfred Nieper Mehmet Oz Raël ( Claude Vorilhon ) Robby Starbuck Randolph Stone Paul Joseph Watson Andrew Wakefield Related topics Bogdanov affair Bourgeois pseudoscience Demarcation problem Scientific method Suppressed research in the Soviet Union Resources Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Cults of Unreason An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science Fortean Times James Randi Educational Foundation Quackwatch Skeptical Inquirer The Demon-Haunted World The Natural History of Quackery The Psychology of the Occult The Ragged Edge of Science The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience The Skeptic's Dictionary v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pseudomathematics&oldid=1279154778 " Categories : Pseudomathematics Pseudoscience Pseudo-scholarship Philosophy of mathematics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 21:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pseudomathematics 10 languages Add topic

