Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Occultism 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Emanationism 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mode by which all things are derived from the first reality, or principle For other uses, see Emanation (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Emanationism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Emanationism is a speculative theory in the cosmology or cosmogony of certain religious and philosophical systems, that posits the concept of emanation . According to this theory, emanation, from the Latin emanare meaning "to flow from" or "to pour forth or out of", is the mode by which all existing things are derived from a 'first reality', or first principle . In the emanationist concept all things are derived from this first reality or perfect God, by consecutive steps of degradation, to a lower degree of this first reality or God: at every consecutive step the emanating beings are less pure, less perfect, less divine. Emanationism posits a transcendent principle from which everything is derived, as opposed to creationism , that considers the universe to be created by a sentient God who is separate from creation, and to materialism , which posits no underlying subjective and/or ontological nature behind phenomena, all phenomena being considered immanent .

Origins [ edit ] Emanationism is a cosmological theory which asserts that all things "flow" from an underlying principle or reality, usually called the Absolute or Godhead . Any teachings which involve emanation are usually in opposition to creation ex nihilo as emanation advocates that everything has always existed and has not been "created" from nothing.

Kleinman (2007) writes: Underlying the worldview of traditional cosmology is the idea that the universe is an emanation of a unitary divine principle. Although this idea has been blended with the revealed creationist doctrines of the major monotheistic religions , orthodox theologians have generally regarded it with suspicion. They have relegated it to the shadowy spheres of mysticism , pantheism , and the occult, which have always been at odds with orthodoxy. The traditional view is summed in the doctrine of emanation formulated by Plotinus.

[ 1 ] The primary classical exponent of emanationism was the neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus , who in his Enneads described all things phenomenal and otherwise as an emanation ( Greek : ἀπορροή aporrhoe (Ennead ΙΙ.3.2) or ἀπόρροια aporrhoia (II.3.11)) from the One (ἕν, hen ). In 5.1.6, emanationism is compared to a diffusion from the One, of which there are three primary hypostases , the One, the Intellect (νοῦς, nous ), and the Soul (ψυχή, psyche ).

Another advocate of emanationism was Michael Servetus , who was burned at the stake for his nontrinitarian cosmology.

[ 2 ] Occultism [ edit ] Emanationism is a common teaching found in occult and esoteric writings. According to Owen (2005) : Theosophy draws on Neoplatonic emanationism, in particular the concept of separation from and return to the Absolute, and reworks the Eastern concepts of karma and reincarnation to provide an evolutionary theory of both humankind and the universe.

[ 3 ] Theosophy contends that all organisms—including animals and human beings—and all matter "flow" from a pure spiritual formation in the Absolute to a material one over time to become materialised and that they will later return to the Absolute after the cosmic cycle of life.

As Morgan summarises: " The Secret Doctrine laid out an emanationist view of the development of the physical universe, a process of ebb and flow in which spirit gradually unfolded itself in matter, attaining consciousness , and returning to spirit in a higher and more realised form." [ 4 ] According to the emanationist cosmology of Madame Blavatsky all monads emerge from divine unity at the beginning of a cosmic cycle and return to this source at its close.

[ 5 ] Blavatsky in her book The Key to Theosophy (1889) wrote that: "We believe in a universal divine principle, the root of all, from which all proceeds, and within which all shall be at the end of the great cycle of being." [ 6 ] Occultist Samael Aun Weor taught emanationism from his studies with the Kabbalah and Gnosticism . He mapped out a complex esoteric cosmology with matter flowing from different planes of existence all existing in the absolute . As Dawson (2007) comments: As with esoteric thought in general, Weor holds that the universe originated in the ordering activity of the absolute upon chaotic primordial matter, giving rise to (emanating) the subsequent planes of the created order ( Pleroma ).

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Aeon – Class of being in Gnosticism Anathem – 2008 science fiction novel by Neal Stephenson Emanation in the Eastern Orthodox Church – Neoplatonic belief Jerusalem: The Emanation of the Giant Albion – Prophetic book by William Blake Panentheism – Belief that the divine pervades all of space and time and also extends beyond it References [ edit ] ^ Kleinman, Robert (2007).

Four Faces of the Universe: An Integrated View of the Cosmos . Lotus Press. p. 186.

ISBN 978-0940985919 .

OCLC 271862709 .

^ Friedman, Jerome (1978).

Michael Servetus: A Case Study in Total Heresy . p. 134.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Owen, A. (2005).

The Place of Enchantment: British Occultism and the Culture of the Modern . p. 26.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Morgan, S. (2010).

Women, Gender and Religious Cultures in Britain, 1800–1940 . p. 218.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Shook, John R.; Hull, Richard T. (2005).

The Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers . Vol. 1: A–C. p. 252.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Dixon, Joy (2001).

Divine Feminine: Theosophy and Feminism in England . p. 47.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Dawson, Andrew (2007).

New Era, New Religions: Religious Transformation in Contemporary Brazil . p. 100.

[ full citation needed ] Further reading [ edit ] Low, Colin (2004).

"Emanation & Ascent in Hermetic Kabbalah" (PDF) .

Presentation and notes on emanation and the roots of Hermetic Kabbalah.

v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emanationism&oldid=1291030924 " Categories : Classical theism Divinity Esoteric cosmology Kabbalah Neoplatonism Religious cosmologies Spiritual evolution Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2024 CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2022 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 17:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emanationism 30 languages Add topic

