Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Probability theory 2 Mathematical analysis Toggle Mathematical analysis subsection 2.1 Differential equations 2.2 Spherical harmonics 3 Algebra 4 Discrete mathematics 5 Physics 6 Computer science 7 Others Toggle Others subsection 7.1 In popular culture 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents List of things named after Pierre-Simon Laplace 2 languages Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "List of things named after Pierre-Simon Laplace" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This is a list of things named after Pierre-Simon Laplace Probability theory [ edit ] de Moivre-Laplace theorem that approximates binomial distribution with a normal distribution Laplace–Bayes estimator Laplace distribution Laplace–Gauss distribution Asymmetric Laplace distribution Log-Laplace distribution Multivariate Laplace distribution Wrapped asymmetric Laplace distribution Laplace functional Laplace motion Laplace's rule of succession Laplace smoothing Mathematical analysis [ edit ] Laplace principle (large deviations theory) Laplace series Laplace transform Two-sided Laplace transform Laplace–Carson transform Laplace–Stieltjes transform Inverse Laplace transform Laplace's method for approximating integrals Laplace limit , concerning series solutions to Kepler's equation Laplacian vector field Differential equations [ edit ] Laplace's equation Laplace operator Discrete Laplace operator Laplace–Beltrami operator Laplacian , see Laplace operator Infinity Laplacian p-Laplacian Laplace operators in differential geometry Young–Laplace equation Laplace invariant Spherical harmonics [ edit ] Laplace series (Fourier–Laplace series) Laplace expansion (potential) Laplace coefficient: see Laplace expansion (potential) Algebra [ edit ] Laplace expansion of determinants of matrices Discrete mathematics [ edit ] Laplace matrices in graph theory Physics [ edit ] Laplace's demon Laplace equation for irrotational flow Laplace force Laplace number Laplace plane Laplace's invariable plane Laplace pressure Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector Laplace resonance Laplace's tidal equations Computer science [ edit ] Harris–Laplace detector Laplace mechanism Laplacian smoothing Others [ edit ] The asteroid 4628 Laplace is named for Laplace.

[ 1 ] A spur of the Montes Jura on the moon is known as Promontorium Laplace .

The tentative working name of the European Space Agency Europa Jupiter System Mission is the "Laplace" space probe .

French submarine Laplace LaplacesDemon is Bayesian software Institut Pierre Simon Laplace In popular culture [ edit ] Laplace no Ma , a video game about Laplace's demon In Kamen Rider Fourze the Libra Horoscopes develops an ability called "The eye of Laplace" In Mega Man Star Force 3 Solo gains a wizard named Laplace.

In Pokémon , the Japanese name of Lapras is Laplace (ラプラス).

[ 2 ] In Goddess of Victory: Nikke , one of the Nikkes in the Matis squad is named Laplace. All three members of Matis are named for famous scientists: Laplace, Maxwell , and Drake .

The idea of the Laplace Demon has been cited several times in Japanese pop culture: In the Super Robot Wars serial, Elemental Lord of the Wind Cybuster is said to be equipped with the Laplace Demon which can alter the Laws of Probabilities.

In Gundam UC , the titular machine, the Gundam Unicorn, has the La+ (Laplus; Laplace) operative system, which is the key to obtain the Box of Laplace—a repository of secret information whose possession could change the course of the world.

In Mushoku Tensei , the Demon God who tried to rule the world was called Laplace.

In That Time I Got Reincarnated as a Slime , Laplace is a name of one member of The Moderate Harlequin Alliance.

In Rascal Does Not Dream of Bunny Girl Senpai , Tomoe Koga is nicknamed "Laplace's Demon".

See also [ edit ] All pages with titles containing Laplace All pages with titles containing Laplacian References [ edit ] ^ Schmadel, L. D. (2003).

Dictionary of Minor Planet Names (5th rev. ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 3-540-00238-3 .

^ "Lapras (Pokémon) - Bulbapedia, the community-driven Pokémon encyclopedia" .

Bulbapedia . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_things_named_after_Pierre-Simon_Laplace&oldid=1265496196 " Categories : Lists of things named after mathematicians Lists of things named after astronomers Pierre-Simon Laplace Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2013 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 27 December 2024, at 06:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of things named after Pierre-Simon Laplace 2 languages Add topic

