Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sexual propagation 2 Asexual propagation 3 Heated propagator 4 Seed propagation mat 5 See also 6 References 7 External links 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Plant propagation 14 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Simple English தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of growing new plants Gentian seedlings in a plant nursery Plant propagation is the process by which new plants grow from various sources, including seeds , cuttings , and other plant parts. Plant propagation can refer to both man-made and natural processes.

Propagation typically occurs as a step in the overall cycle of plant growth. For seeds, it happens after ripening and dispersal ; for vegetative parts, it happens after detachment or pruning; for asexually-reproducing plants, such as strawberry , it happens as the new plant develops from existing parts.

[ 1 ] Countless plants are propagated each day in horticulture and agriculture .

Plant propagation is vital to agriculture and horticulture, not just for human food production but also for forest and fibre crops ,  as well as traditional and herbal medicine . It is also important for plant breeding .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Sexual propagation [ edit ] One way to germinate an avocado seed Further information: Germination Seeds and spores can be used for reproduction (e.g.

sowing ). Seeds are typically produced from sexual reproduction within a species because genetic recombination has occurred. A plant grown from seeds may have different characteristics from its parents. Some species produce seeds that require special conditions to germinate, such as cold treatment . The seeds of many Australian plants and plants from southern Africa and the American west require smoke or fire to germinate. Some plant species, including many trees , do not produce seeds until they reach maturity, which may take many years. Seeds can be difficult to acquire, and some plants do not produce seed at all. Some plants (like certain [ 4 ] plants modified using genetic use restriction technology ) may produce seed, but not a fertile seed.

[ 5 ] In certain cases, this is done to prevent the accidental spreading of these plants, for example by birds and other animals.

[ 6 ] Asexual propagation [ edit ] Rose cuttings under plastic bottle greenhouse Plant roots , stems , and leaves have a number of mechanisms for asexual or vegetative reproduction , which horticulturists employ to multiply or clone plants rapidly, such as in tissue culture and grafting .

[ 7 ] Plants are produced using material from a single parent and as such, there is no exchange of genetic material, therefore vegetative propagation methods almost always produce plants that are identical to the parent.

In some plants, seeds can be produced without fertilization and the seeds contain only the genetic material of the parent plant. Therefore, propagation via asexual seeds or apomixis is asexual reproduction but not vegetative propagation .

[ 6 ] Softwood stem cuttings rooting in a controlled environment Techniques for vegetative propagation include: Air or ground layering Division Grafting and bud grafting , widely used in fruit tree propagation Micropropagation Offsets Stolons (runners) Storage organs such as bulbs , corms , tubers , and rhizomes Striking or cuttings Twin-scaling Heated propagator [ edit ] Electric propagator, filled with pepper plant seedlings, in front of a house window.

A heated propagator is a horticultural device to maintain a warm and damp environment for seeds and cuttings to grow in. They generally provide bottom heat (maintained at a particular temperature) and high humidity , which is essential in successful seed germination and in helping cuttings to take root. In colder climates they are sometimes used for plants like peppers and sweet peas which need warmer environments (about 15°C, for the plants listed) in order to germinate. If excessive condensation forms on the inside of the lid, the gardener can open the ventilating holes to regulate the temperature a little.

Non-electric propagators (mainly a seed tray and a clear plastic lid) are a lot cheaper to purchase than a heated propagator, but without the constant regulated warmth and bottom heat provided by a heated propagator, growth of seedlings tends to be slower and less consistent (with increased risk of seeds failing to germinate).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Seed propagation mat [ edit ] An electric seed-propagation mat is a heated rubber mat covered by a metal cage that is used in gardening . The mats are made so that planters containing seedlings can be placed on top of the metal cage without the risk of starting a fire . Another example is a seedling heat mat , multiple layers of durable, water resistant plastic material with insulated heating coils embedded inside (similar to underfloor heating systems, but with rubber mat instead of flooring).

[ 10 ] In extreme cold, gardeners place a loose plastic cover over the planters/mats which creates a sort of miniature greenhouse . The constant and predictable heat allows people to raise seedlings in the winter months when the weather is generally too cold for seedlings to survive naturally outside. When combined with a lighting system , many plants can be grown indoors using these mats.

[ 11 ] This can increase the variety of plants that a gardener can use.

See also [ edit ] Plant propagation on Wikiversity Adventitious Clonal colony Fruit tree propagation Orthodox seed Recalcitrant seed Selection methods in plant breeding based on mode of reproduction Propagation of grapevines Weeping willow (tree) is an ornamental tree ( Salix babylonica and related hybrids Propagation of Christmas trees Hemerochory Escaped plant References [ edit ] ^ "Vegetative plant propagation" .

Science Learning Hub . Retrieved 2021-06-15 .

^ Wang, Wenle; Xu, Jinfan; Fang, Huiyong; Li, Zhijun; Li, Minhui (2020-09-01).

"Advances and challenges in medicinal plant breeding" .

Plant Science .

298 : 110573.

doi : 10.1016/j.plantsci.2020.110573 .

ISSN 0168-9452 .

PMID 32771174 .

^ Bradshaw, John E. (2017).

"Plant breeding: past, present and future" .

Euphytica .

213 (3).

doi : 10.1007/s10681-016-1815-y .

ISSN 0014-2336 .

^ Hybrids of plant species being sterile, hybrids of same species are not ^ GMO plant made to produce infertile seeds ^ a b Moore, Kathleen A.; Bradley, Lucy K. (February 2022).

North Carolina Extension Gardener Handbook: Second Edition . University of North Carolina Press. pp. Chapter - 13.

ISBN 978-1-4696-6973-1 .

Read online ^ "Asexual Propagation" .

horti culture . Retrieved 9 April 2022 .

^ "13 heated propagators for nurturing your plants in 2023" .

BBC Gardeners World Magazine . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

^ "Heated propagators: tried and tested" .

The English Garden . 17 January 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

^ Sheehan, Lindsay (6 January 2021).

"5 Best Seedling Heat Mats For Faster Germination" .

Rural Sprout . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ Dyer, Mary H. (5 October 2022).

"What Does A Heat Mat Do – Using A Heat Mat For Seedlings" .

Gardening Know How . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Reference Guide to plant care handling and merchandising Bibliography [ edit ] Charles W. Heuser (1997).

The Complete Book of Plant Propagation . Taunton Press.

ISBN 1561582344 .

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plant_propagation&oldid=1298109819 " Categories : Plant reproduction Horticultural techniques Agronomy Forest management Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 14:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plant propagation 14 languages Add topic

