Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By religion Toggle By religion subsection 1.1 Ancient Greece 1.2 Hinduism 1.3 Christianity 1.4 Baháʼí Faith 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Inclusivism 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Norsk bokmål Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that many different sets of beliefs are true This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is missing information about the term's other applications.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Inclusivism is one of several approaches in religious studies , anthropology , or civics to understand the relationship between different religions , societies , cultures , political factions etc. It asserts that there is beauty in the variety of different schools of thoughts , and that they can coexist .

[ citation needed ] It stands in contrast to exclusivism , which asserts that only one way is true and all others are erroneous.

Within religious studies and theology , inclusivism is the belief that, although only one belief system is true, aspects of its truth can be found in other religions. This is contrasted from religious pluralism , which asserts that all beliefs are equally valid within a believer's particular context.

[ 1 ] Broadly speaking, there are two schools of Inclusivist thought: Relativistic inclusivism, which asserts that the believer's own views are true only in their particular context, and believers of other traditions have their own validity.

Absolutist inclusivism, which asserts that an unknown set of assertions are Absolutely True, that no human being currently living has yet ascertained absolute truth, but that all human beings have partially ascertained absolute truth.

By religion [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ancient Greece [ edit ] Interpretatio graeca was the tendency of ancient Greek writers to equate foreign divinities to members of their own pantheon.

Herodotus , for example, refers to the ancient Egyptian gods Amon , Osiris , and Ptah as " Zeus ," " Dionysus ," and " Hephaestus ," respectively. This could be seen as an example of inclusivism as well as syncretism .

Syncretism functioned as an essential feature of Ancient Greek religion. Later on, Hellenism , a consequence of Alexander the Great 's belief that he was the son of a god, reinforced by the Oracle of Zeus-Ammon at Siwa in Egypt, itself showed syncretic features, essentially blending Persian, Anatolian, Egyptian (and eventually Etruscan-Roman) elements within Hellenic formulations. After the Hellenization of the Egyptian culture initiated by Ptolemy I Soter , Isis became known as " Queen of Heaven " and was worshipped in many aspects and by many names besides that of Hera .

Hinduism [ edit ] A well-known hymn in the Hindu Rigveda claims that "Truth is One, though the sages know it variously", proclaiming a pluralistic view of religion.

Krishna , an Avatar of Vishnu , the supreme deity in Vaishnavism , said in the Gita , "In whatever way men identify with Me, in the same way do I carry out their desires; men pursue My path... in all ways" (Gita 4:11).

[ 2 ] He also said that "Whatever deity or form a devotee worships, I make his faith steady. However, their wishes are only granted by Me" (Gita 7:21–22). Another quote in the Gita states: "O Arjuna , even those devotees who worship other lesser deities (e.g., Devas , for example) with faith, they also worship Me, but in an improper way because I am the Supreme Being. I alone am the enjoyer of all sacrificial services (Seva, Yajna ) and Lord of the universe" (Gita 9:23).

[ 3 ] Christianity [ edit ] Not to be confused with Progressive Christianity , List of Christian denominations affirming LGBTQ people , or Inclusive Church .

Inclusive Christianity , also called inclusive theology , [ 4 ] is an interpretation of the Bible that maintains that God desires and has the power to save individuals irrespective of the tradition in which they are born.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Some Christian supporters of the inclusive view make a distinction between Christians and believers in maintaining that all Christians are believers. However, not all believers are Christians. In this line of thought, Christians are believers in the universal truth and follow and confess it under the biblical name "Jesus Christ". At the same time, they argue, some non-Christian believers of other religions, traditions, and disciplines would partially trust in the same one and only truth but under a different linguistic name. Inclusive Christians support these claims by citing certain passages from the Bible.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Inclusive theology is rooted in a wider movement called " interfaith " [ 9 ] that aims to create unity among various religions. The inclusive interpretation is a minority view in some churches but is considered an official theological doctrine in others.

[ citation needed ] Christian supporters of inclusivism include Augustus Hopkins Strong , [ 10 ] C. S. Lewis , [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Clark Pinnock , [ 14 ] Karl Rahner , John E. Sanders , Terrance L. Tiessen, and Robert Brush (contributor to The Arminian Magazine ). While Billy Graham mostly preached "salvation by faith in Christ alone" throughout his 60-year ministry as an evangelist , he later made controversial comments that bordered on inclusivism. He stated that he did not like to refer to it by that term because he was concerned that many people mean universalism when they refer to inclusivism. Graham said, "I used to play God but I can’t do that any more. I used to believe that pagans in far-off countries were lost and were going to Hell —if they did not have the Gospel of Jesus Christ preached to them. I no longer believe that," he said carefully. "I believe that there are other ways of recognizing the existence of God—through nature, for instance—and plenty of other opportunities, therefore, of saying ’yes’ to God." [ 15 ] Some Evangelical [ who?

] and Reformed Protestant scholars believe that God judges all people based on their response to the Holy Spirit , citing Romans 2 :14–15 as evidence that those following a natural moral law are still following God.

[ a ] [ 16 ] Some interpret this text more inclusively, suggesting that non-Christians also inherently possess a part of God's wisdom in their hearts as an integral aspect of who they are. They interpret Genesis 20:9–11 and 1 Corinthians 5:1 to illustrate that there are non-Christians or non-Jews who, guided by their inherent understanding of God's law, may lead lives that are more pleasing to God than those of some Jews and Christians.

[ 17 ] By Romans 1 :19–20, inclusive Christians often argue that this description would imply that God—in parts—can be recognized by any human being, no matter their religion or cultural background, as well as independent from its geographic and/or its chronologic whereabouts. This would also include the domain of modern science as it studies the universe, as implied in Psalm 19 :2–5.

[ 18 ] Other verses cited as supporting inclusivism include Acts 17 :23–28, wherein Paul says that the (pagan) Greeks had been worshiping God without knowing it and that their poets have partially recognized the true nature of God.

[ 17 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Inclusive Christians from various denominations argue that Colossians 1:16 suggests the universe, in its creatureliness, is part of God's being and integral to the eternal reality of the Christ .

[ 21 ] Another Christian Biblical proof text inclusive believers use is Acts 10 :1–48, which would state that whoever fears God and does good works is accepted by him, regardless of nation. In addition, the Parable of the Sheep and the Goats ( Matthew 25 :31–46) portrays the judgment of the nations as being based on each individual's compassion toward others, not on their religious background.

[ citation needed ] It is often argued that the connection between the biblical verses in Genesis 2:7 and Genesis 7:21-22 serves as strong evidence that every living organism contains essential elements of the living God within itself, specifically through the breath of God.

[ 22 ] Inclusive interpretations of the Christian Bible, as understood by many inclusive Christians, suggest that God can be experienced in other religions and disciplines, such as science. However, these interpretations typically emphasize that to experience a deep and intimate relationship with God, connecting with the person of Jesus and acknowledging the reality of the Logos is essential. Furthermore, they assert that a complete relationship with God involves recognizing Jesus's and God's inclusive and universal nature. This encompasses a personal relationship with Jesus and an understanding of the broader, inclusive concept of divinity.

[ 23 ] The doctrine of inclusivism is held by Unitarian Universalism , a liberal religion with Christian origins, [ 24 ] [ 25 ] some Roman Catholics [ 26 ] [ 27 ] and Seventh-day Adventists , asserting that while Christianity is the "one true faith", other faiths are at least partially true.

An alternative use for the term "inclusive theology" [ 28 ] has to do with a movement called feminist theology , which aims to include more women in religious clergy roles that have been historically unavailable to women.

From an inclusive theological perspective, it is believed that a faith community can nurture the development of corresponding religious, spiritual, ecclesiastical, and interdisciplinary institutions. Examples of this are the Pontifical Academy of Sciences , the Pontifical Council for Culture , or the Dicastery for Interreligious Dialogue .

[ 29 ] In all Catholic Church institutions, relationships with other disciplines and religions are nurtured due to the Bible's fundamental inclusivist theological understanding.

[ 30 ] Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] Shoghi Effendi , the head of the Baháʼí Faith in the first half of the 20th century, stated: The fundamental principle enunciated by Bahá'u'lláh , the followers of His Faith firmly believe, is that religious truth is not absolute but relative, that Divine Revelation is a continuous and progressive process, that all the great religions of the world are divine in origin, that their basic principles are in complete harmony, that their aims and purposes are one and the same, that their teachings are but facets of one truth, that their functions are complementary, that they differ only in the nonessential aspects of their doctrines, and that their missions represent successive stages in the spiritual evolution of human society.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Ger toshav Pope John Paul II's Catechism of the Catholic Church on Islam Karl Rahner Anonymous Christian Ecumenism Notes [ edit ] ^ Davies and Allison wrote: Rather did he hold the position stated in the Apocalypse of Sedrach : 'there are nations which have no law, yet fulfill the law; they are not baptized, but my divine Spirit enters them and they are converted to my baptism, and I receive them with my righteous ones in the bosom of Abraham . [There were rabbis who taught that righteous heathen would be saved: t. Sanh . 13.2; b. Sanh . 105a. Recall also Paul's thoughts in [Rom 2.14-16: Gentiles who do the law written on their hearts may have good consciences on the last day.] The context, however, does not explicitly teach two judgements; and we are not persuaded that 'the least' are to be identified with Christians (see below). Further, we have little doubt before Matthew, the scene concerned all humanity. At the same time, 25.31-46 may very well imply that Matthew thought salvation possible for those outside the church. We are reminded of Karl Rahner's so-called 'anonymous Christian'.

References [ edit ] ^ Marbaniang, Domenic (January 2007).

"Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, Exclusivism" .

ResearchGate . Bangalore, India: ACTS Academy of Higher Education . Retrieved 5 August 2022 .

^ Jeffery D. Long: In: BHAGAVĀN ŚRĪ KṚṢṆA: DEEP RELIGIOUS PLURALIST? - Religious Pluralism in the Bhagavad Gītā chapter 2 Religious Pluralism in the Bhagavad Gītā , page 6, 2010, Journal of Vaiṣṇava Studies, Gainesville, FL, 32609, www.academia.edu and www.ivsjournal.com, last retrieved 07-02-2025 ^ Jeffery D. Long: In: BHAGAVĀN ŚRĪ KṚṢṆA: DEEP RELIGIOUS PLURALIST? - Religious Pluralism in the Bhagavad Gītā chapter 2 Religious Pluralism in the Bhagavad Gītā , page 7, 2010, Journal of Vaiṣṇava Studies, Gainesville, FL, 32609, www.academia.edu and www.ivsjournal.com, last retrieved 08-15-2025 ^ Queen, Chuck.

"The Need for an Inclusive Faith" .

Progressive Christianity . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Coppel, Paula.

"Inclusive Christianity" .

Unity . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Williams, Thomas D. (20 April 2006).

"Inclusive Christianity" . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Richard Rohr OFM: The Universal Christ: How a Forgotten Reality Can Change Everything We See, Hope For, and Believe . In: A Universal and Personal God, page 24  (eBook-Format) Durnell Wiley first published in 2019, ISBN 978-0-281-07862-2 ^ Gavin D’Costa: Theology and Religious Pluralism: The Challenge of Other Religions . page 80 New York, Basil Blackwell , published in 1986, ISBN 978-0631145189 ^ "Interfaith" . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Strong, Anthony H. (1907) [1886].

Systematic Theology . Old Tappan, NJ: Revell. pp.

842– 43.

OCLC 878559610 .

^ Lewis, 1967, Mere Christianity , New York: Macmillan, 65.

^ John Sanders, 1992, No Other Name: An Investigation into the Destiny of the Unevangelized , Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 251–57.

^ John Sanders, 1992, No Other Name: An Investigation into the Destiny of the Unevangelized , Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 249–51.

^ Clark Pinnock, 1992, A Wideness in God's Mercy: The Finality of Jesus Christ in a World of Religions , Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

^ "I Can't Play God Anymore" interview with James M. Beam, McCall's Magazine , January 1978, pp. 154–58 ^ Davies, W. D.; Allison, Dale C.: A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel According to Saint Matthew . In: Vol. 3. T&T Clark published in: 1997 and 2004 ISBN 978-0-567-08518-4 ^ a b Dr. J. V. Fesko: Die Schöpfung bezeugt den Schöpfer: Die klassisch-reformierte Theologie und die Verteidigung des Glaubens . In: evangelium21.net 81375 Munich GER., first published in: Tabletalk Magazin Edition July 2019 Ligonier Ministries .

^ Peter C. Hägele: In: Naturwissenschaftler reden von Gott chapter Menschen, Makromoleküle und Modelle , page 4 (eBook-Format), 2016, author Hrsg. Barbara Drossel, Brunnen Verlag Giessen GER., ISBN 978-3-7655-7370-5 ^ Peter C. Bouteneff: In: The future of Interreligious Dialogue: A Multireligious Conversation on Nostra Aetate chapter 8 Nostra Aetate: Views from a sibling on inclusivism and pluralism , page 145, 2017, Orbis Books, Maryknoll, New York 10545, ISBN 978-1-62698-245-1 ^ Peter Feldmeier: In: Perils and Possibilities of Multiple Religions Belonging: Test Case in Roman Catholicism chapter 2 Preliminary foundations: theology of religions , page 76, 2017, De Gruyter Open - magazin "Open Theology", De Gruyter Brill, Berlin, www.degruyterbrill.com, last retrieved 06-28-2025 ^ Richard Rohr OFM: The Universal Christ: How a Forgotten Reality Can Change Everything We See, Hope For, and Believe . In: A Universal and Personal God, pages 20-22 (eBook-Format) Durnell Wiley first published in 2019, ISBN 978-0-281-07862-2 ^ Dana M. Pike: The Latter-day Saint Reimaging of “the Breath of Life” (Genesis 2:7) - The Breath of Life” in the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament . In: https://byustudies.byu.edu/article/the-latter-day-saint-reimaging-of-the-breath-of-life-genesis-27/ , last checked 07.27.2023 ^ Richard Rohr OFM: The Universal Christ: How a Forgotten Reality Can Change Everything We See, Hope For, and Believe . In: A Universal and Personal God, pages 22-23 (eBook-Format) Durnell Wiley first published in 2019, ISBN 978-0-281-07862-2 ^ Keller, R.S.; Ruether, R.R.; Cantlon, M. (2006).

Encyclopedia of Women and Religion in North America: Women in North American Catholicism . Indiana University Press. p. 1273.

ISBN 978-0-253-34688-9 . Retrieved 2023-02-17 .

^ Gallagher, E.V.; Willsky-Ciollo, L. (2021).

New Religions: Emerging Faiths and Religious Cultures in the Modern World [2 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 634.

ISBN 978-1-4408-6236-6 . Retrieved 2023-02-17 .

^ "Nostra aetate" . Vatican.

Archived from the original on 2008-12-20 . Retrieved 2014-06-25 .

^ Peter Feldmeier: In: Perils and Possibilities of Multiple Religions Belonging: Test Case in Roman Catholicism chapter 3.1 History through Vatican II , page 78, 2017, De Gruyter Open - magazin "Open Theology", De Gruyter Brill, Berlin, www.degruyterbrill.com, last retrieved 07-02-2025 ^ Randy L. Maddox (September 1986).

"Toward an Inclusive Theology: The Systematic Implications of the Feminist Critique" . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Peter Feldmeier: In: Perils and Possibilities of Multiple Religions Belonging: Test Case in Roman Catholicism chapter 3.2 Beyound Vatican II , page 80-81, 2017, De Gruyter Open - magazin "Open Theology", De Gruyter Brill, Berlin, www.degruyterbrill.com, last retrieved 07-02-2025 ^ The Holy See: Statement by Card. Tarcisio Bertone Secretary Of State , last retrieved December 2023, First published September 2006.

^ The Faith of Bahá'u'lláh" in World Order, Vol. 7, No. 2 (1972–73) ^ "The Faith of Bahá'u'lláh: A World Religion" . Bahai. Archived from the original on 2005-02-27 . Retrieved 2005-01-30 .

v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Religious pluralism Category:Religious pluralism Topics Belief system Comparative religion Comparative theology Dogmatism History of religious pluralism Inclusivism Indifferentism Interfaith dialogue Interfaith marriage Mirari vos Moral relativism vs Traditionalist School Confessionalism (politics) Multifaith space Multiple religious belonging Perennialism Cambridge Platonists Philosophy of religion Religious pluralism Religious syncretism Separation of church and state Spiritual but not religious Syncretism Toleration Universalism Persons Eknath Easwaran Jacques Dupuis (Jesuit) John Hick Hajj Muhammad Legenhausen John Courtney Murray Swami Vivekananda Emanuel Swedenborg Paul F. Knitter Religions Buddhism and Christianity Buddhism and Hinduism Three teachings Religion portal Philosophy portal v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐t2l49
Cached time: 20250816102234
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.635 seconds
Real time usage: 0.792 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3873/1000000
Revision size: 20896/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 398326/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12236/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122109/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.321/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7051593/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  545.155      1 -total
 31.14%  169.749     22 Template:Navbox
 29.70%  161.925      2 Template:Reflist
 18.17%   99.057      8 Template:Cite_web
 16.64%   90.709      1 Template:Philosophy_of_religion
 13.31%   72.569      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.63%   63.377      4 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.77%   53.243      1 Template:Short_description
  9.76%   53.182      3 Template:Ambox
  9.08%   49.480      1 Template:Religious_text_primary Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1105623:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816102234 and revision id 1306035962. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inclusivism&oldid=1306035962 " Categories : Religious pluralism Theology Christian theology Interfaith dialogue Philosophy of religion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from February 2011 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from February 2011 Articles to be expanded from August 2022 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from August 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inclusivism 12 languages Add topic

