Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Affiliated institutes 2 History 3 Description 4 Publications and projects 5 W. E. B. Du Bois Medal 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Hutchins Center for African and African American Research Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research institute in Massachusetts, US The Hutchins Center for African and African American Research , also known as the Hutchins Center , is affiliated with Harvard University . The Center supports scholarly research on the history and culture of people of African descent around the world, facilitates collaboration and aims to increase public awareness of the subject. It was established as the W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute in May 1975, making it the oldest research center focused on the study of the history, culture, and society of Africans and African Americans , with the rebranding as the Hutchins Center occurring in 2013.

Affiliated institutes [ edit ] The Hutchins Center includes or supports a number of research institutes and projects, including the Hiphop Archive and Research Institute, the Afro-Latin American Research Institute, the Image of the Black Archive & Library, the Project on Race & Gender in Science & Medicine, the History Design Studio and the Jazz Research Initiative. It is also home to the Ethelbert Cooper Gallery of African & African American Art, also known as the Cooper Gallery.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The Center was established as the W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute in May 1975, making it the oldest research center focused on the study of the history, culture, and society of Africans and African Americans .

[ 2 ] It  was named after the first African American to be awarded a Ph.D.

from Harvard in 1895, William Edward Burghardt Du Bois . It was established to create fellowships that would "facilitate the writing of doctoral dissertations in areas related to Afro-American Studies".

[ 2 ] The Hutchins Center was launched in September 2013, named in honor of a $15 million gift from the Hutchins Family Foundation endowed by Glenn Hutchins . It continued to incorporate the W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Description [ edit ] The Hutchins Center supports scholarly research on the history and culture of people of African descent around the world, facilitates collaboration and aims to increase public awareness of the subject.

[ 5 ] As of December 2020 [update] Henry Louis Gates Jr.

is the director of the Center.

[ 6 ] Publications and projects [ edit ] The Center publishes Transition Magazine , [ 7 ] and is connected to the Du Bois Review (edited by W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of the Social Sciences at Harvard Lawrence D. Bobo ).

[ 8 ] The African American National Biography Project is a joint project of the Hutchins Center and Oxford University Press .

[ 9 ] The Center supported the establishment of the Centre for the Study of the Legacies of British Slave-ownership at University College London . The Centre's online database, the Legacies of British Slave-ownership, is free for public use.

[ 10 ] W. E. B. Du Bois Medal [ edit ] In 2000, the Hutchins Center  began awarding the W. E. B. Du Bois Medal, which is considered Harvard's highest honor in the field of African and African American studies.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Institutes & Research" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ a b The W. E. B. Du Bois Institute for African and African American Research (2007).

Annual Report 2007 (PDF) (Report). Harvard University.

^ Rocheleau, Matt (18 September 2013).

"Harvard announces launch of Hutchins Center for African and African American Research through $15m gift" .

Boston.com . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "Home" .

Hutchins Family Foundation . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "About The Hutchins Center" .

About The Hutchins Center . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "Henry Louis Gates, Jr" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "Transition Magazine" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "Du Bois Review" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "African American National Biography (AANB)" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ "Home" .

Legacies of British Slave-ownership . University College London . Retrieved 12 December 2020 .

^ "W. E. B. Du Bois Medal Recipients" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . Retrieved 12 December 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hutchins_Center_for_African_and_African_American_Research&oldid=1192784924 " Categories : Black studies organizations Harvard University research institutes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 31 December 2023, at 08:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hutchins Center for African and African American Research Add languages Add topic

