Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Intellectual origins 2.2 Dating the emergence of nationalism 2.3 19th century 2.3.1 France 2.3.2 Russia 2.3.3 Latin America 2.3.4 Germany 2.3.5 Italy 2.3.6 Spain 2.3.7 Greece 2.3.8 Serbia 2.3.9 Poland 2.3.10 Bulgaria 2.3.11 Jewish Nationalism 2.4 20th century 2.4.1 China 2.4.2 Greece 2.4.3 Africa 2.4.4 Middle East 2.4.5 Breakup of Yugoslavia 2.5 21st century 3 Political science 4 Sociology Toggle Sociology subsection 4.1 Primordialist evolutionary interpretation 4.2 Marxist interpretations 5 Types Toggle Types subsection 5.1 Anti-colonial 5.2 Civic and liberal 5.3 Creole 5.4 Ethnic 5.5 Economic 5.6 Gendered and muscular 5.7 Integral, pan and irredentism 5.8 Left-wing 5.9 National-anarchism 5.10 Nativist 5.11 Racial 5.12 Religious 5.13 Territorial 5.14 Sport 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Nationalism 146 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Twi Тыва дыл Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political ideology that promotes the interests of a nation Not to be confused with Patriotism .

This article is about the ideology. For other uses, see Nationalist (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Nationalism is an idea or movement that holds that the nation should be congruent with the state .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] As a movement, it presupposes the existence [ 3 ] and tends to promote the interests of a particular nation, [ 4 ] especially with the aim of gaining and maintaining its sovereignty ( self-governance ) over its perceived homeland to create a nation-state . It holds that each nation should govern itself, free from outside interference ( self-determination ), that a nation is a natural and ideal basis for a polity , [ 5 ] and that the nation is the only rightful source of political power.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] It further aims to build and maintain a single national identity , based on a combination of shared social characteristics such as culture , ethnicity , geographic location , language , politics (or the government ), religion , traditions and belief in a shared singular history , [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and to promote national unity or solidarity .

[ 4 ] There are various definitions of a "nation", which leads to different types of nationalism .

[ 9 ] The two main divergent forms are ethnic nationalism and civic nationalism .

Beginning in the late 18th century, particularly with the French Revolution and the spread of the principle of popular sovereignty or self determination , the idea that "the people" should rule was developed by political theorists.

[ 10 ] Three main theories have been used to explain the emergence of nationalism: Primordialism developed alongside nationalism during the Romantic era and held that there have always been nations. This view has since been rejected by most scholars, [ 11 ] who view nations as socially constructed and historically contingent.

[ 12 ] [ 9 ] Perennialism, a softer version of primordialism which accepts that nations are modern phenomena but with long historical roots, is subject to academic debate.

[ 13 ] Modernization theory , currently the most commonly accepted theory of nationalism, [ 14 ] adopts a constructivist approach and proposes that nationalism emerged due to processes of modernization , such as industrialization, urbanization, and mass education, which made national consciousness possible.

[ 12 ] [ 15 ] Proponents of this theory describe nations as " imagined communities " and nationalism as an " invented tradition " in which shared sentiment provides a form of collective identity and binds individuals together in political solidarity.

[ 12 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Ethnosymbolism explains nationalism as a product of symbols, myths, and traditions, and is associated with the work of Anthony D. Smith .

[ 10 ] The moral value of nationalism, the relationship between nationalism and patriotism , and the compatibility of nationalism and cosmopolitanism are all subjects of philosophical debate.

[ 12 ] Nationalism can be combined with diverse political goals and ideologies such as conservatism ( national conservatism and right-wing populism ) or socialism ( left-wing nationalism ).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In practice, nationalism is seen as positive or negative depending on its ideology and outcomes. Nationalism has been a feature of movements for freedom and justice, [ 22 ] has been associated with cultural revivals, [ 23 ] and encourages pride in national achievements.

[ 24 ] It has also been used to legitimize racial, ethnic, and religious divisions, suppress or attack minorities, undermine human rights and democratic traditions, [ 12 ] and start wars, being frequently cited as a cause of both world wars.

[ 25 ] Terminology [ edit ] A postcard from 1916 showing national personifications of some of the Allies of World War I , each holding a national flag Title page from the second edition (Amsterdam 1631) of De jure belli ac pacis The terminological use of "nations", "sovereignty" and associated concepts were significantly refined with the writing by Hugo Grotius of De jure belli ac pacis in the early 17th century.

[ how?

] Living in the times of the Eighty Years' War between Spain and the Netherlands and the Thirty Years' War between Catholic and Protestant European nations, Grotius was deeply concerned with matters of conflicts between nations in the context of oppositions stemming from religious differences. The word nation was also applied before 1800 in Europe in reference to the inhabitants of a country as well as to collective identities that could include shared history, law, language, political rights, religion and traditions, in a sense more akin to the modern conception.

[ 26 ] Nationalism as derived from the noun designating 'nations' is a newer word; in the English language, dating to around 1798.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ better source needed ] The term gained wider prominence in the 19th century.

[ 29 ] The term increasingly became negative in its connotations after 1914.

Glenda Sluga notes that "The twentieth century, a time of profound disillusionment with nationalism, was also the great age of globalism ." [ 30 ] Academics define nationalism as a political principle that holds that the nation and state should be congruent.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 31 ] According to Lisa Weeden, nationalist ideology presumes that "the people" and the state are congruent.

[ 32 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Nationalist historiography Intellectual origins [ edit ] Anthony D. Smith describes how intellectuals played a primary role in generating cultural perceptions of nationalism and providing the ideology of political nationalism: Wherever one turns in Europe, their seminal position in generating and analysing the concepts, myths, symbols and ideology of nationalism is apparent. This applies to the first appearance of the core doctrine and to the antecedent concepts of national character, genius of the nation and national will.

[ 33 ] Smith posits the challenges posed to traditional religion and society in the Age of Revolution propelled many intellectuals to "discover alternative principles and concepts, and a new mythology and symbolism, to legitimate and ground human thought and action".

[ 34 ] He discusses the simultaneous concept of 'historicism' to describe an emerging belief in the birth, growth, and decay of specific peoples and cultures, which became "increasingly attractive as a framework for inquiry into the past and present and [...] an explanatory principle in elucidating the meaning of events, past and present".

[ 35 ] The Prussian scholar Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803) originated the term [ clarification needed ] in 1772 in his "Treatise on the Origin of Language" stressing the role of a common language.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] He attached exceptional importance to the concepts of nationality and of patriotism  –  "he that has lost his patriotic spirit has lost himself and the whole world about himself", whilst teaching that "in a certain sense every human perfection is national".

[ 38 ] Erica Benner identifies Herder as the first philosopher to explicitly suggest "that identities based on language should be regarded as the primary source of legitimate political authority or locus of political resistance".

[ 39 ] Herder also encouraged the creation of a common cultural and language policy amongst the separate German states .

[ 40 ] Dating the emergence of nationalism [ edit ] Scholars frequently place the beginning of nationalism in the late 18th century or early 19th century with the American Declaration of Independence or with the French Revolution , [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] though there is ongoing debate about its existence in varying forms during the Middle Ages and even antiquity .

[ 44 ] The consensus is that nationalism as a concept was firmly established by the 19th century.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] In histories of nationalism, the French Revolution (1789) is seen as an important starting point, not only for its impact on French nationalism but even more for its impact on Germans and Italians and on European intellectuals.

[ 48 ] The template of nationalism, as a method for mobilizing public opinion around a new state based on popular sovereignty, went back further than 1789: philosophers such as Rousseau and Voltaire , whose ideas influenced the French Revolution, had themselves been influenced or encouraged by the example of earlier constitutionalist liberation movements, notably the Corsican Republic (1755–1768) and American Revolution (1775–1783).

[ 49 ] Due to the Industrial Revolution , there was an emergence of an integrated, nation-encompassing economy and a national public sphere , where British people began to mobilize on a state-wide scale, rather than just in the smaller units of their province, town or family.

[ 50 ] The early emergence of a popular patriotic nationalism took place in the mid-18th century and was actively promoted by the British government and by the writers and intellectuals of the time.

[ 51 ] National symbols , anthems, myths , flags and narratives were assiduously constructed by nationalists and widely adopted. The Union Jack was adopted in 1801 as the national one.

[ 52 ] Thomas Arne composed the patriotic song " Rule, Britannia!

" in 1740, [ 53 ] and the cartoonist John Arbuthnot invented the character of John Bull as the personification of the English national spirit in 1712.

[ 54 ] The political convulsions of the late 18th century associated with the American and French revolutions massively augmented the widespread appeal of patriotic nationalism.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Napoleon Bonaparte's rise to power further established nationalism when he invaded much of Europe. Napoleon used this opportunity to spread revolutionary ideas, resulting in much of the 19th-century European Nationalism.

[ 57 ] Some scholars argue that variants of nationalism emerged prior to the 18th century. American philosopher and historian Hans Kohn wrote in 1944 that nationalism emerged in the 17th century.

[ 58 ] In Britons, Forging the Nation 1707–1837 , Linda Colley explores how the role of nationalism emerged in about 1700 and developed in Britain reaching full form in the 1830s. Writing shortly after World War I , the popular British author H. G. Wells traced the origin of European nationalism to the aftermath of the Reformation , when it filled the moral void left by the decline of Christian faith: [A]s the idea of Christianity as a world brotherhood of men sank into discredit because of its fatal entanglement with priestcraft and the Papacy on the one hand and with the authority of princes on the other, and the age of faith passed into our present age of doubt and disbelief, men shifted the reference of their lives from the kingdom of God and the brotherhood of mankind to these apparently more living realities, France and England, Holy Russia, Spain, Prussia.... **** In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the general population of Europe was religious and only vaguely patriotic; by the nineteenth it had become wholly patriotic.

[ 59 ] 19th century [ edit ] Main article: International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919) Senator Johan Vilhelm Snellman (1806–1881) was one of the most influential Fennomans and Finnish nationalists in the 19th century.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] The political development of nationalism and the push for popular sovereignty culminated with the ethnic/national revolutions of Europe and in the Ottoman Empire.

[ 65 ] During the 19th century nationalism became one of the most significant political and social forces in history; it is typically listed among the top causes of World War I .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Napoleon's conquests of the German and Italian states around 1800–1806 played a major role in stimulating nationalism and the demands for national unity.

[ 68 ] English historian J. P. T. Bury argues: Between 1830 and 1870 nationalism had thus made great strides. It inspired great literature, quickened scholarship, and nurtured heroes. It had shown its power both to unify and to divide. It had led to great achievements of political construction and consolidation in Germany and Italy; but it was more clear than ever a threat to the Ottoman and Habsburg empires, which were essentially multi-national. European culture had been enriched by the new vernacular contributions of little-known or forgotten peoples, but at the same time such unity as it had was imperiled by fragmentation. Moreover, the antagonisms fostered by nationalism had made not only for wars, insurrections, and local hatreds—they had accentuated or created new spiritual divisions in a nominally Christian Europe.

[ 69 ] France [ edit ] Main article: French nationalism Further information: French–German enmity and Revanchism A painting by Alphonse-Marie-Adolphe de Neuville from 1887 depicting French students being taught about the lost provinces of Alsace-Lorraine , taken by Germany in 1871 Nationalism in France gained early expressions in France's revolutionary government. In 1793, that government declared a mass conscription ( levée en masse ) with a call to service: Henceforth, until the enemies have been driven from the territory of the Republic, all the French are in permanent requisition for army service. The young men shall go to battle; the married men shall forge arms in the hospitals; the children shall turn old linen to lint; the old men shall repair to the public places, to stimulate the courage of the warriors and preach the unity of the Republic and the hatred of kings.

[ 70 ] This nationalism gained pace after the French Revolution came to a close. Defeat in war, with a loss in territory, was a powerful force in nationalism. In France, revenge and return of Alsace-Lorraine was a powerful motivating force for a quarter century after their defeat by Germany in 1871. After 1895, French nationalists focused on Dreyfus and internal subversion, and the Alsace issue petered out.

[ 71 ] The French reaction was a famous case of Revanchism ("revenge") which demands the return of lost territory that "belongs" to the national homeland. Revanchism draws its strength from patriotic and retributionist thought and it is often motivated by economic or geo-political factors. Extreme revanchist ideologues often represent a hawkish stance, suggesting that their desired objectives can be achieved through the positive outcome of another war. It is linked with irredentism, the conception that a part of the cultural and ethnic nation remains "unredeemed" outside the borders of its appropriate nation state. Revanchist politics often rely on the identification of a nation with a nation state, often mobilizing deep-rooted sentiments of ethnic nationalism, claiming territories outside the state where members of the ethnic group live, while using heavy-handed nationalism to mobilize support for these aims. Revanchist justifications are often presented as based on ancient or even autochthonous occupation of a territory since "time immemorial", an assertion that is usually inextricably involved in revanchism and irredentism, justifying them in the eyes of their proponents.

[ 72 ] The Dreyfus Affair in France 1894–1906 made the battle against treason and disloyalty a central theme for conservative Catholic French nationalists. Dreyfus, a Jew, was an outsider, that is in the views of intense nationalists, not a true Frenchman, not one to be trusted, not one to be given the benefit of the doubt. True loyalty to the nation, from the conservative viewpoint, was threatened by liberal and republican principles of liberty and equality that were leading the country to disaster.

[ 73 ] Russia [ edit ] Main article: Russian nationalism The Millennium of Russia monument which was built in 1862 in celebration of one thousand years of Russian history Before 1815, the sense of Russian nationalism was weak—what sense there was focused on loyalty and obedience to the tsar . The Russian motto " Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality " was coined by Count Sergey Uvarov and it was adopted by Emperor Nicholas I as the official ideology of the Russian Empire .

[ 74 ] Three components of Uvarov's triad were: Orthodoxy – Orthodox Christianity and protection of the Russian Orthodox Church .

Autocracy – unconditional loyalty to the House of Romanov in return for paternalist protection for all social estates .

Nationality ( Narodnost , has been also translated as national spirit ) [ 75 ] – recognition of the state-founding role on Russian nationality.

By the 1860s, as a result of educational indoctrination, and due to conservative resistance to ideas and ideologies which were transmitted from Western Europe , a pan-Slavic movement had emerged and it produced both a sense of Russian nationalism and a nationalistic mission to support and protect pan-Slavism. This Slavophile movement became popular in 19th-century Russia. Pan-Slavism was fueled by, and it was also the fuel for Russia's numerous wars against the Ottoman Empire which were waged in order to achieve the alleged goal of liberating Orthodox nationalities, such as Bulgarians , Romanians , Serbs and Greeks , from Ottoman rule . Slavophiles opposed the Western European influences which had been transmitted to Russia and they were also determined to protect Russian culture and traditions.

Aleksey Khomyakov , Ivan Kireyevsky , and Konstantin Aksakov are credited with co-founding the movement.

[ 76 ] Latin America [ edit ] Main article: Latin American Wars of Independence An upsurge in nationalism in Latin America in the 1810s and 1820s sparked revolutions that cost Spain nearly all of its colonies which were located there.

[ 77 ] Spain was at war with Britain from 1798 to 1808, and the British Royal Navy cut off its contacts with its colonies, so nationalism flourished and trade with Spain was suspended. The colonies set up temporary governments or juntas which were effectively independent from Spain. These juntas were established as a result of Napoleon's resistance failure in Spain. They served to determine new leadership and, in colonies like Caracas, abolished the slave trade as well as the Indian tribute.

[ 78 ] The division exploded between Spaniards who were born in Spain (called "peninsulares") versus those of Spanish descent born in New Spain (called "criollos" in Spanish or " creoles " in English). The two groups wrestled for power, with the criollos leading the call for independence. Spain tried to use its armies to fight back but had no help from European powers. Indeed, Britain and the United States worked against Spain, enforcing the Monroe Doctrine .

[ 79 ] Spain lost all of its American colonies, except Cuba and Puerto Rico, in a complex series of revolts from 1808 to 1826.

[ 80 ] Germany [ edit ] Main article: German nationalism Revolutionaries in Vienna with German tricolor flags , May 1848 In the German states west of Prussia, Napoleon abolished many of the old or medieval relics, such as dissolving the Holy Roman Empire in 1806.

[ 81 ] He imposed rational legal systems and demonstrated how dramatic changes were possible. His organization of the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806 promoted a feeling of nationalism.

Nationalists sought to encompass masculinity in their quest for strength and unity.

[ 82 ] It was Prussian chancellor Otto von Bismarck who achieved German unification through a series of highly successful short wars against Denmark, Austria and France which thrilled the pan-German nationalists in the smaller German states. They fought in his wars and eagerly joined the new German Empire, which Bismarck ran as a force for balance and peace in Europe after 1871.

[ 83 ] In the 19th century, German nationalism was promoted by Hegelian-oriented academic historians who saw Prussia as the true carrier of the German spirit, and the power of the state as the ultimate goal of nationalism. The three main historians were Johann Gustav Droysen (1808–1884), Heinrich von Sybel (1817–1895) and Heinrich von Treitschke (1834–1896). Droysen moved from liberalism to an intense nationalism that celebrated Prussian Protestantism, efficiency, progress, and reform, in striking contrast to Austrian Catholicism, impotency and backwardness. He idealized the Hohenzollern kings of Prussia. His large-scale History of Prussian Politics (14 vol 1855–1886) was foundational for nationalistic students and scholars. Von Sybel founded and edited the leading academic history journal, Historische Zeitschrift and as the director of the Prussian state archives published massive compilations that were devoured by scholars of nationalism.

[ 84 ] The most influential of the German nationalist historians, was Treitschke who had an enormous influence on elite students at Heidelberg and Berlin universities.

[ 85 ] Treitschke vehemently attacked parliamentarianism, socialism, pacifism, the English, the French, the Jews, and the internationalists. The core of his message was the need for a strong, unified state—a unified Germany under Prussian supervision. "It is the highest duty of the State to increase its power," he stated. Although he was a descendant of a Czech family, he considered himself not Slavic but German: "I am 1000 times more the patriot than a professor." [ 86 ] Adolf Hitler being welcomed by a crowd in Sudetenland , where the pro-Nazi Sudeten German Party gained 88% of ethnic-German votes in May 1938 [ 87 ] German nationalism, expressed through the ideology of Nazism , may also be understood as trans-national in nature. This aspect was primarily advocated by Adolf Hitler , who later became the leader of the Nazi Party . This party was devoted to what they identified as an Aryan race , residing in various European countries, but sometime mixed with alien elements such as Jews.

[ 88 ] Meanwhile, the Nazis rejected many of the well-established citizens within those same countries, such as the Romani and Jews, whom they did not identify as Aryan. A key Nazi doctrine was lebensraum (living space), which was a vast undertaking to transplant Aryans throughout Poland , much of Eastern Europe and the Baltic nations , and all of western Russia and Ukraine.

Lebensraum was thus a vast project for advancing the Aryan race far outside of any particular nation or national borders. Nazi goals were focused on advancing the Aryan race as they perceived it, the modification of the human race via eugenics , and the eradication of human beings that they deemed inferior. But their goals were trans-national and intended to spread across as much of the world as they could achieve. Although Nazism glorified German history, it also embraced the supposed virtues and achievements of the Aryan race in other countries, [ 89 ] including India.

[ 90 ] The Nazis' Aryanism longed for now-extinct species of superior bulls once used as livestock by Aryans and other features of Aryan history that never resided within the borders of Germany as a nation.

[ 91 ] Italy [ edit ] Main article: Italian nationalism See also: Italian Fascism and Italian unification People cheering as Giuseppe Garibaldi enters Naples in 1860 Italian nationalism emerged in the 19th century and was the driving force for Italian unification or the Risorgimento (meaning the "Resurgence" or "Revival"). It was the political and intellectual movement that consolidated the different states of the Italian peninsula into the single state of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. The memory of the Risorgimento is central to Italian nationalism but it was based in the liberal middle classes and ultimately proved a bit weak.

[ 92 ] The new government treated the newly annexed South as a kind of underdeveloped province due to its "backward" and poverty-stricken society, its poor grasp of standard Italian (as Italo-Dalmatian dialects of Neapolitan and Sicilian were prevalent in the common use) and its local traditions.

[ citation needed ] The liberals had always been strong opponents of the pope and the very well organized Catholic Church . The liberal government under the Sicilian Francesco Crispi sought to enlarge his political base by emulating Otto von Bismarck and firing up Italian nationalism with an aggressive foreign policy. It partially crashed and his cause was set back. Of his nationalistic foreign policy, historian R. J. B. Bosworth says: [Crispi] pursued policies whose openly aggressive character would not be equaled until the days of the Fascist regime. Crispi increased military expenditure, talked cheerfully of a European conflagration, and alarmed his German or British friends with these suggestions of preventative attacks on his enemies.  His policies were ruinous, both for Italy's trade with France, and, more humiliatingly, for colonial ambitions in East Africa. Crispi's lust for territory there was thwarted when on 1 March 1896, the armies of Ethiopian Emperor Menelik routed Italian forces at Adowa [...] in what has been defined as an unparalleled disaster for a modern army. Crispi, whose private life and personal finances [...] were objects of perennial scandal, went into dishonorable retirement.

[ 93 ] Italy joined the Allies in the First World War after getting promises of territory, but its war effort was not honored after the war and this fact discredited liberalism paving the way for Benito Mussolini and a political doctrine of his own creation, Fascism . Mussolini's 20-year dictatorship involved a highly aggressive nationalism that led to a series of wars with the creation of the Italian Empire , an alliance with Hitler's Germany, and humiliation and hardship in the Second World War. After 1945, the Catholics returned to government and tensions eased somewhat, but the former two Sicilies remained poor and partially underdeveloped (by industrial country standards). In the 1950s and early 1960s, Italy had an economic boom that pushed its economy to the fifth place in the world.

The working class in those decades voted mostly for the Communist Party , and it looked to Moscow rather than Rome for inspiration and was kept out of the national government even as it controlled some industrial cities across the North. In the 21st century, the Communists have become marginal but political tensions remained high as shown by Umberto Bossi 's Padanism in the 1980s [ 94 ] (whose party Lega Nord has come to partially embrace a moderate version of Italian nationalism over the years) and other separatist movements spread across the country.

[ citation needed ] Spain [ edit ] After the War of the Spanish Succession , rooted in the political position of the Count-Duke of Olivares and the absolutism of Philip V , the assimilation of the Crown of Aragon by the Castilian Crown through the Decrees of Nova planta was the first step in the creation of the Spanish nation-state. As in other contemporary European states, political union was the first step in the creation of the Spanish nation-state, in this case not on a uniform ethnic basis, but through the imposition of the political and cultural characteristics of the dominant ethnic group, in this case the Castilians, over those of other ethnic groups, who became national minorities to be assimilated.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] In fact, since the political unification of 1714, Spanish assimilation policies towards Catalan-speaking territories ( Catalonia , Valencia , the Balearic Islands , part of Aragon ) and other national minorities, as Basques and Galicians , have been a historical constant.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] The nationalization process accelerated in the 19th century, in parallel to the origin of Spanish nationalism , the social, political and ideological movement that tried to shape a Spanish national identity based on the Castilian model, in conflict with the other historical nations of the State. Politicians of the time were aware that despite the aggressive policies pursued up to that time, the uniform and monocultural "Spanish nation" did not exist, as indicated in 1835 by Antonio Alcalà Galiano , when in the Cortes del Estatuto Real he defended the effort: "To make the Spanish nation a nation that neither is nor has been until now." [ 102 ] Building the nation (as in France , it was the state that created the nation, and not the opposite process) is an ideal that the Spanish elites constantly reiterated, and, one hundred years later than Alcalá Galiano, for example, we can also find it in the mouth of the fascist José Pemartín , who admired the German and Italian modeling policies: [ 103 ] "There is an intimate and decisive dualism, both in Italian fascism and in German National Socialism. On the one hand, the Hegelian doctrine of the absolutism of the state is felt. The State originates in the Nation, educates and shapes the mentality of the individual; is, in Mussolini's words, the soul of the soul." And will be found again two hundred years later, from the socialist Josep Borrell : [ 104 ] "The modern history of Spain is an unfortunate history that meant that we did not consolidate a modern State. Independentists think that the nation makes the State. I think the opposite. The State makes the nation. A strong State, which imposes its language, culture, education." The creation of the tradition of the political community of Spaniards as common destiny over other communities has been argued to trace back to the Cortes of Cádiz .

[ 105 ] From 1812 on, revisiting the previous history of Spain, Spanish liberalism tended to take for granted the national conscience and the Spanish nation.

[ 106 ] A by-product of 19th-century Spanish nationalist thinking is the concept of Reconquista , which holds the power of propelling the weaponized notion of Spain being a nation shaped against Islam .

[ 107 ] The strong interface of nationalism with colonialism is another feature of 19th-century nation building in Spain, with the defence of slavery and colonialism in Cuba being often able to reconcile tensions between mainland elites of Catalonia and Madrid throughout the period.

[ 108 ] During the first half of 20th century (notably during the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera and the dictatorship of Franco ), a new brand of Spanish nationalism with a marked military flavour and an authoritarian stance (as well as promoting policies favouring the Spanish language against the other languages in the country) as a means of modernizing the country was developed by Spanish conservatives, fusing regenerationist principles with traditional Spanish nationalism.

[ 109 ] The authoritarian national ideal resumed during the Francoist dictatorship, in the form of National-Catholicism , [ 109 ] which was in turn complemented by the myth of Hispanidad .

[ 110 ] A distinct manifestation of Spanish nationalism in modern Spanish politics is the interchange of attacks with competing regional nationalisms.

[ 111 ] Initially present after the end of Francoism in a rather diffuse and reactive form, the Spanish nationalist discourse has been often self-branded as " constitutional patriotism " since the 1980s.

[ 112 ] Often ignored as in the case of other State nationalisms, [ 113 ] its alleged "non-existence" has been a commonplace espoused by prominent figures in the public sphere as well as the mass-media in the country.

[ 114 ] Beginning in 1821, the Greek War of Independence began as a rebellion by Greek revolutionaries against the ruling Ottoman Empire.

Greece [ edit ] During the early 19th century, inspired by romanticism , classicism , former movements of Greek nationalism and failed Greek revolts against the Ottoman Empire (such as the Orlofika revolt in southern Greece in 1770, and the Epirus-Macedonian revolt of Northern Greece in 1575), Greek nationalism led to the Greek war of independence .

[ 115 ] The Greek drive for independence from the Ottoman Empire in the 1820s and 1830s inspired supporters across Christian Europe , especially in Britain, which was the result of western idealization of Classical Greece and romanticism. France, Russia and Britain critically intervened to ensure the success of this nationalist endeavor.

[ 116 ] Serbia [ edit ] Main articles: History of Serbia , History of Serbs , and Serbian nationalism Breakup of Yugoslavia For centuries the Orthodox Christian Serbs were ruled by the Muslim Ottoman Empire .

[ 117 ] The success of the Serbian Revolution against Ottoman rule in 1817 marked the birth of the Principality of Serbia . It achieved de facto independence in 1867 and finally gained international recognition in 1878. Serbia had sought to liberate and unite with Bosnia and Herzegovina to the west and Old Serbia ( Kosovo and Vardar Macedonia ) to the south. Nationalist circles in both Serbia and Croatia (part of Austria-Hungary ) began to advocate for a greater South Slavic union in the 1860s, claiming Bosnia as their common land based on shared language and tradition.

[ 118 ] In 1914, Serb revolutionaries in Bosnia assassinated Archduke Ferdinand.

Austria-Hungary , with German backing, tried to crush Serbia in 1914, thus igniting the First World War in which Austria-Hungary dissolved into nation states.

[ 119 ] In 1918, the region of Banat, Bačka and Baranja came under control of the Serbian army, later the Great National Assembly of Serbs, Bunjevci and other Slavs voted to join Serbia; the Kingdom of Serbia joined the union with State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs on 1 December 1918, and the country was named Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes . It was renamed Yugoslavia in 1929, and a Yugoslav identity was promoted, which ultimately failed. After the Second World War, Yugoslav Communists established a new socialist republic of Yugoslavia . That state broke up again in the 1990s.

[ 120 ] Poland [ edit ] Main articles: History of Poland and Polish nationalism The cause of Polish nationalism was repeatedly frustrated before 1918. In the 1790s, the Habsburg monarchy , Prussia and Russia invaded, annexed, and subsequently partitioned Poland . Napoleon set up the Duchy of Warsaw , a new Polish state that ignited a spirit of nationalism. Russia took it over in 1815 as Congress Poland with the tsar proclaimed as "King of Poland". Large-scale nationalist revolts erupted in 1830 and 1863–64 but were harshly crushed by Russia, which tried to make the Polish language , culture and religion more like Russia's. The collapse of the Russian Empire in the First World War enabled the major powers to re-establish an independent Poland, which survived until 1939. Meanwhile, Poles in areas controlled by Germany moved into heavy industry but their religion came under attack by Bismarck in the Kulturkampf of the 1870s. The Poles joined German Catholics in a well-organized new Centre Party , and defeated Bismarck politically. He responded by stopping the harassment and cooperating with the Centre Party.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] In the late 19th and early 20th century, many Polish nationalist leaders endorsed the Piast Concept . It held there was a Polish utopia during the Piast Dynasty a thousand years before, and modern Polish nationalists should restore its central values of Poland for the Poles. Jan Poplawski had developed the "Piast Concept" in the 1890s, and it formed the centerpiece of Polish nationalist ideology, especially as presented by the National Democracy Party , known as the "Endecja," which was led by Roman Dmowski . In contrast with the Jagiellon concept, there was no concept for a multi-ethnic Poland.

[ 123 ] General Simón Bolívar (1783–1830), a leader of independence in Latin America The Piast concept stood in opposition to the "Jagiellon Concept," which allowed for multi-ethnicism and Polish rule over numerous minority groups such as those in the Kresy . The Jagiellon Concept was the official policy of the government in the 1920s and 1930s.

Soviet dictator Josef Stalin at Tehran in 1943 rejected the Jagiellon Concept because it involved Polish rule over Ukrainians and Belarusians . He instead endorsed the Piast Concept, which justified a massive shift of Poland's frontiers to the west.

[ 124 ] After 1945 the Soviet-back puppet communist regime wholeheartedly adopted the Piast Concept, making it the centerpiece of their claim to be the "true inheritors of Polish nationalism". After all the killings, including Nazi German occupation, terror in Poland and population transfers during and after the war, the nation was officially declared as 99% ethnically Polish.

[ 125 ] In current Polish politics, Polish nationalism is most openly represented by parties linked in the Liberty and Independence Confederation coalition.

[ citation needed ] As of 2020 the Confederation, composed of several smaller parties, had 11 deputies (under 7%) in the Sejm .

Bulgaria [ edit ] Main articles: National awakening of Bulgaria , Bulgarian National Awakening , Bulgarian National Revival , and April Uprising of 1876 Bulgarian modern nationalism emerged under Ottoman rule in the late 18th and early 19th century, under the influence of western ideas such as liberalism and nationalism, which trickled into the country after the French Revolution.

The Bulgarian national revival started with the work of Saint Paisius of Hilendar , who opposed Greek domination of Bulgaria's culture and religion. His work Istoriya Slavyanobolgarskaya ("History of the Slav-Bulgarians"), which appeared in 1762, was the first work of Bulgarian historiography. It is considered Paisius' greatest work and one of the greatest pieces of Bulgarian literature. In it, Paisius interpreted Bulgarian medieval history with the goal of reviving the spirit of his nation.

His successor was Saint Sophronius of Vratsa , who started the struggle for an independent Bulgarian church. An autonomous Bulgarian Exarchate was established in 1870/1872 for the Bulgarian diocese wherein at least two-thirds of Orthodox Christians were willing to join it.

In 1869 the Internal Revolutionary Organization was initiated.

The April Uprising of 1876 indirectly resulted in the re-establishment of Bulgaria in 1878 .

Jewish Nationalism [ edit ] Jewish nationalism arose in the latter half of the 19th century, largely as a response to the rise of nation-states. Traditionally Jews lived under uncertain and oppressive conditions. In western Europe, Jews not subject to such restrictions since emancipation of early 19th century often assimilated into the dominant culture. Both assimilation and the traditional second-class status of Jews were considered as threats to the Jewish identity by Jewish nationalists. The method of combatting these threats were different among different national movements among Jews.

Zionism , ultimately the most successful of Jewish nationalist movements, advocated in the creation of a Jewish state in the Land of Israel .

Labour Zionism hoped that the new Jewish state would be based on socialist principles. They imagined a new Jew that, in contrast to the Jews of the diaspora, was strong, worked the land, and spoke Hebrew .

Religious Zionism instead had various religious reasonings for returning to Israel. Although according to historian David Engel, Zionism was more about fear that Jews would end up dispersed and unprotected, rather than fulfilling old prophecies of historical texts.

[ 126 ] The efforts of the Zionist movement culminated in the establishment of the State of Israel .

Jewish Territorialism split from the Zionist Movement in 1903, arguing for a Jewish state no matter where . As more Jews moved to Palestine , the main territorialist organization lost support, eventually disbanding in the 1925.

[ 127 ] Smaller territorialist movements lasted until the establishment of the State of Israel .

Jewish Autonomism and Bundism instead advocated for Jewish national autonomy within the territory they already lived in. Most manifestations of this movement were left-wing in nature, and actively anti-Zionist . While successful among Eastern European Jews in the early 20th century, it lost most of its support due to the Holocaust , although some support lasted through the 20th century.

20th century [ edit ] China [ edit ] Main article: Chinese nationalism The awakening of nationalism across Asia helped shape the history of the continent. The key episode was the decisive defeat of Russia by Japan in 1905, demonstrating the military advancement of non-Europeans in a modern war. The defeat quickly led to manifestations of a new interest in nationalism in China, as well as Turkey and Persia.

[ 128 ] In China Sun Yat-sen (1866–1925) launched his new party the Kuomintang (National People's Party) in defiance of the decrepit Empire, which was run by outsiders. The Kuomintang recruits pledged: [F]rom this moment I will destroy the old and build the new, and fight for the self-determination of the people, and will apply all my strength to the support of the Chinese Republic and the realization of democracy through the Three Principles, ... for the progress of good government, the happiness and perpetual peace of the people, and for the strengthening of the foundations of the state in the name of peace throughout the world.

[ 129 ] The Kuomintang largely ran China until the Communists took over in 1949. But the latter had also been strongly influenced by Sun's nationalism as well as by the May Fourth Movement in 1919. It was a nationwide protest movement about the domestic backwardness of China and has often been depicted as the intellectual foundation for Chinese Communism.

[ 130 ] The New Culture Movement stimulated by the May Fourth Movement waxed strong throughout the 1920s and 1930s. Historian Patricia Ebrey says: Nationalism, patriotism, progress, science, democracy, and freedom were the goals; imperialism , feudalism , warlordism , autocracy, patriarchy , and blind adherence to tradition were the enemies. Intellectuals struggled with how to be strong and modern and yet Chinese, how to preserve China as a political entity in the world of competing nations.

[ 131 ] In 1911, following the Xinhai Revolution , Sun's multicultural form of Chinese nationalism manifested as Zhonghua minzu , a concept that promoted the idea of Five Races Under One Union , that sidelined Han Chinese supremacy in favor of coexistence alongside Manchus , Mongols , Chinese Muslims ( Hui / Uyghurs ), and Tibetans , all of which were supposedly equal branches of the Chinese nation.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] : 19 The rhetorical move, as China historian Joseph Esherick points out, was based on practical concerns about imperial threats from the international environment and conflicts on the Chinese frontiers.

[ 134 ] Greece [ edit ] Main article: Greek nationalism Nationalist irredentist movements Greek advocating for Enosis (unity of ethnically Greek states with the Hellenic Republic to create a unified Greek state), used today in the case of Cyprus , as well as the Megali Idea , the Greek movement that advocated for the reconquering of Greek ancestral lands from the Ottoman Empire (such as Crete , Ionia , Pontus , Northern Epirus , Cappadocia , Thrace among others) that were popular in the late 19th and early to 20th centuries, led to many Greek states and regions that were ethnically Greek to eventually unite with Greece and the Greco-Turkish war of 1919 .

The 4th of August regime was a fascist or fascistic nationalist authoritarian dictatorship inspired by Mussolini's Fascist Italy and Hitler 's Germany and led by Greek general Ioannis Metaxas from 1936 to his death in 1941. It advocated for the Third Hellenic Civilization, a culturally superior Greek civilization that would be the successor of the First and Second Greek civilizations, that were Ancient Greece and the Byzantine empire respectively. It promoted Greek traditions , folk music and dances , classicism as well as medievalism .

Africa [ edit ] Main articles: African nationalism and History of Africa Kenneth Kaunda , an anti-colonial political leader from Zambia , pictured at a nationalist rally in colonial Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia ) in 1960 In the 1880s the European powers divided up almost all of Africa (only Ethiopia and Liberia were independent). They ruled until after World War II when forces of nationalism grew much stronger. In the 1950s and the 1960s, colonial holdings became independent states. The process was usually peaceful but there were several long bitter bloody civil wars, as in Algeria, [ 135 ] Kenya [ 136 ] and elsewhere.

Across Africa, nationalism drew upon the organizational skills that natives had learned in the British and French, and other armies during the world wars. It led to organizations that were not controlled by or endorsed by either the colonial powers or the traditional local power structures that had been collaborating with the colonial powers. Nationalistic organizations began to challenge both the traditional and the new colonial structures and finally displaced them. Leaders of nationalist movements took control when the European authorities exited; many ruled for decades or until they died off. These structures included political, educational, religious, and other social organizations. In recent decades, many African countries have undergone the triumph and defeat of nationalistic fervor, changing in the process the loci of the centralizing state power and patrimonial state.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] South Africa , a British colony, was exceptional in that it became virtually independent by 1931. From 1948, it was controlled by white Afrikaner nationalists, who focused on racial segregation and white minority rule, known as apartheid . It lasted until 1994, when multiracial elections were held . The international anti-apartheid movement supported black nationalists until success was achieved, [ verification needed ] and Nelson Mandela was elected president.

[ 140 ] Middle East [ edit ] Arab nationalism , a movement toward liberating and empowering the Arab peoples of the Middle East, emerged during the late 19th century, inspired by other independence movements of the 18th and 19th centuries. As the Ottoman Empire declined and the Middle East was carved up by the Great Powers of Europe, Arabs sought to establish their own independent nations ruled by Arabs, rather than foreigners.

Syria was established in 1920; Transjordan (later Jordan ) gradually gained independence between 1921 and 1946; Saudi Arabia was established in 1932; and Egypt achieved gradually gained independence between 1922 and 1952. The Arab League was established in 1945 to promote Arab interests and cooperation between the new Arab states.

The Zionist movement, emerged among European Jews in the 19th century. In 1882, Jews, from Europe, began to emigrate to Ottoman Palestine with the goal of establishing a new Jewish homeland. The majority and local population in Palestine, Palestinian Arabs were demanding independence from the British Mandate.

Breakup of Yugoslavia [ edit ] Main article: Breakup of Yugoslavia This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There was a rise in extreme nationalism after the Revolutions of 1989 had triggered the collapse of communism in the 1990s. That left many people with no identity. The people under communist rule had to integrate, but they now found themselves free to choose. That made long-dormant conflicts rise and create sources of serious conflict.

[ 141 ] When communism fell in Yugoslavia, serious conflict arose, which led to a rise in extreme nationalism.

In his 1992 article Jihad vs. McWorld, Benjamin Barber proposed that the fall of communism would cause large numbers of people to search for unity and that small-scale wars would become common, as groups will attempt to redraw boundaries, identities, cultures and ideologies.

[ 142 ] The fall of communism also allowed for an "us vs. them" mentality to return.

[ 143 ] Governments would become vehicles for social interests, and the country would attempt to form national policies based on the majority culture, religion or ethnicity.

[ 141 ] Some newly sprouted democracies had large differences in policies on matters, which ranged from immigration and human rights to trade and commerce.

The academic Steven Berg felt that the root of nationalist conflicts was the demand for autonomy and a separate existence.

[ 141 ] That nationalism can give rise to strong emotions, which may lead to a group fighting to survive, especially as after the fall of communism, political boundaries did not match ethnic boundaries.

[ 141 ] Serious conflicts often arose and escalated very easily, as individuals and groups acted upon their beliefs and caused death and destruction.

[ 141 ] When that happens, states unable to contain the conflict run the risk of slowing their progress at democratization.

Yugoslavia was established after the First World War and joined three acknowledged ethnic groups: Serbs, Croats and Slovenes . The national census numbers from 1971 to 1981 measured an increase from 1.3% to 5.4% in the population that ethnically identified itself as Yugoslavs .

[ 144 ] That meant that the country, almost as a whole, was divided by distinctive religious, ethnic and national loyalties after nearly 50 years.

Nationalist separatism of Croatia and Slovenia from the rest of Yugoslavia has basis in historical imperialist conquests of the region ( Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Empire ) and existence within separate spheres of religious, cultural and industrial influence – Catholicism, Protenstantism, Central European cultural orientation in the northwest, versus Orthodoxy, Islam and Orientalism in the southeast. Croatia and Slovenia were subsequently more economically and industrially advanced and remained as such throughout existence of both forms of Yugoslavia.

[ 143 ] In the 1970s, the leadership of the separate territories in Yugoslavia protected only territorial interests, at the expense of other territories. In Croatia, there was almost a split within the territory between Serbs and Croats so that any political decision would kindle unrest, and tensions could cross adjacent territories: Bosnia and Herzegovina.

[ 144 ] Bosnia had no group with a majority; Muslim, Serb, Croat, and Yugoslavs stopped leadership from advancing here as well. Political organizations were not able to deal successfully with such diverse nationalisms. Within the territories, leaderships would not compromise. To do so would create a winner in one ethnic group and a loser in another and raise the possibility of a serious conflict. That strengthened the political stance promoting ethnic identities and caused intense and divided political leadership within Yugoslavia.

Changes in national boundaries in post-Soviet and post-Yugoslav states after the revolutions of 1989 were followed by a resurgence of nationalism.

In the 1980s, Yugoslavia began to break into fragments.

[ 134 ] Economic conditions within Yugoslavia were deteriorating. Conflict in the disputed territories was stimulated by the rise in mass nationalism and ethnic hostilities.

[ 144 ] The per capita income of people in the northwestern territory, encompassing Croatia and Slovenia, was several times higher than that of the southern territory. That, combined with escalating violence from ethnic Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo, intensified economic conditions.

[ 144 ] The violence greatly contributed to the rise of extreme nationalism of Serbs in Serbia and the rest of Yugoslavia. The ongoing conflict in Kosovo was propagandized by a communist Serb, Slobodan Milošević , to increase Serb nationalism further. As mentioned, that nationalism gave rise to powerful emotions which grew the force of Serbian nationalism by highly nationalist demonstrations in Vojvodina, Serbia, Montenegro, and Kosovo. Serbian nationalism was so high that Slobodan Milošević ousted leaders in Vojvodina and Montenegro, repressed Albanians within Kosovo and eventually controlled four of the eight regions/territories.

[ 144 ] Slovenia, one of the four regions not under communist control, favoured a democratic state.

In Slovenia, fear was mounting because Milošević would use the militia to suppress the country, as had occurred in Kosovo.

[ 144 ] Half of Yugoslavia wanted to be democratic, the other wanted a new nationalist authoritarian regime. In fall of 1989, tensions came to a head, and Slovenia asserted its political and economic independence from Yugoslavia and seceded. In January 1990, there was a total break with Serbia at the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, an institution that had been conceived by Milošević to strengthen unity and later became the backdrop for the fall of communism in Yugoslavia.

In August 1990, a warning to the region was issued when ethnically divided groups attempted to alter the government structure. The republic borders established by the Communist regime in the postwar period were extremely vulnerable to challenges from ethnic communities. Ethnic communities arose because they did not share the identity with everyone within the new post-communist borders, [ 144 ] which threatened the new governments. The same disputes were erupting that were in place prior to Milošević and were compounded by actions from his regime.

Also, within the territory, the Croats and the Serbs were in direct competition for control of government. Elections were held and increased potential conflicts between Serbian and Croat nationalism. Serbia wanted to be separate and to decide its own future based on its own ethnic composition, but that would then give Kosovo encouragement to become independent from Serbia. Albanians in Kosovo were already practically independent from Kosovo, but Serbia did not want to let Kosovo become independent. Albanian nationalists wanted their own territory, but that would require a redrawing of the map and threaten neighboring territories. When communism fell in Yugoslavia, serious conflict arose, which led to the rise in extreme nationalism.

Nationalism again gave rise to powerful emotions, which evoked, in some extreme cases, a willingness to die for what one believed, a fight for the survival of the group.

[ 141 ] The end of communism began a long period of conflict and war for the region. For six years, 200,000–500,000 people died in the Bosnian War.

[ 145 ] All three major ethnicities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Bosnian Muslims, Croats, Serbs) suffered at the hands of each other.

[ 143 ] [ verification needed ] The war garnered assistance from groups, Muslim, Orthodox, and Western Christian, and from state actors, which supplied all sides; Saudi Arabia and Iran supported Bosnia; Russia supported Serbia; Central European and the West, including the US, supported Croatia; and the Pope supported Slovenia and Croatia.

21st century [ edit ] Main article: Neo-nationalism Ethnic armies in Myanmar that are involved in the Myanmar civil war (2021–present) The rise of globalism in the late 20th century led to a rise in nationalism and populism in Europe and North America. That trend was further fueled by increased terrorism in the West (the September 11 attacks in the United States being a prime example), increasing unrest and civil wars in the Middle East, and waves of Muslim refugees, especially from the Syrian Civil War , flooding into Europe (as of 2016 [update] the refugee crisis appears to have peaked).

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Nationalist groups like Germany's Pegida , France's National Front and the UK Independence Party gained prominence in their respective nations advocating restrictions on immigration to protect the local populations.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] Since 2010, Catalan nationalists have led a renewed Catalan independence movement and declared Catalan independence . The movement has been opposed by Spanish nationalists .

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] In the 2010s, the Greek economic crisis and waves of immigration have led to a significant rise of Fascism and Greek nationalism across Greece, especially among the youth.

[ 152 ] In Russia, exploitation of nationalist sentiments allowed Vladimir Putin to consolidate power.

[ 153 ] This nationalist sentiment was used in Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 and other actions in Ukraine.

[ 149 ] Nationalist movements gradually began to rise in Central Europe as well, particularly Poland, under the influence of the ruling party, Law and Justice (led by Jarosław Kaczyński ).

[ 154 ] In Hungary, the anti-immigration rhetoric and stance against foreign influence is a powerful national glue promoted the ruling Fidesz party (led by Viktor Orbán ).

[ 155 ] Nationalist parties have also joined governing coalitions in Bulgaria , [ 156 ] Slovakia , [ 157 ] Latvia [ 158 ] and Ukraine .

[ 159 ] In India, Hindu nationalism has grown in popularity with the rise of the Bharatiya Janata Party , a right-wing party which has been ruling India at the national level since 2014.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] The rise in religious nationalism comes with the rise of right-wing populism in India, with the election and re-election of populist leader Narendra Modi as Prime Minister, who promised economic prosperity for all and an end to corruption. Militant Buddhist nationalism is also on the rise in Myanmar , Thailand and Sri Lanka .

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] In Japan, nationalist influences in the government developed over the course of the early 21st century, largely from the far right [ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] ultra-conservative [ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] Nippon Kaigi organization.

[ 170 ] The new movement has advocated re-establishing Japan as a military power and pushed revisionist historical narratives denying events such as the Nanking Massacre .

[ 170 ] A referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom was held on 18 September 2014. The proposal was defeated, with 55.3% voting against independence. In a 2016 referendum , the British populace unexpectedly voted to withdraw the United Kingdom from the European Union (known as Brexit ). As the promise of continued European Union membership was a core feature of the anti-independence campaign during the Scottish referendum, there have been calls for a second referendum on Scottish independence .

[ 171 ] Former Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro , sometimes called the "Tropical Trump", with United States President Donald Trump The 2016 United States presidential campaign saw the unprecedented rise of Donald Trump , a businessman with no political experience who ran on a populist/nationalist platform and struggled to gain endorsements from mainstream political figures, even within his own party. Trump's slogans " Make America Great Again " and " America First " exemplified his campaign's repudiation of globalism and its staunchly nationalistic outlook. His unexpected victory in the election was seen as part of the same trend that had brought about the Brexit vote.

[ 172 ] On 22 October 2018, two weeks before the mid-term elections President Trump openly proclaimed that he was a nationalist to a cheering crowd at a rally in Texas in support of re-electing Senator Ted Cruz who was once an adversary.

[ 173 ] On 29 October 2018 Trump equated nationalism to patriotism, saying "I'm proud of this country and I call that ''nationalism.'' [ 174 ] In 2016, Rodrigo Duterte became president of the Philippines running a distinctly nationalist campaign. Contrary to the policies of his recent predecessors, he distanced the country from the Philippines' former ruler, the United States, and sought closer ties with China (as well as Russia).

[ 175 ] In 2017, Turkish nationalism propelled President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to gain unprecedented power in a national referendum .

[ 176 ] Reactions from world leaders were mixed, with Western European leaders generally expressing concern [ 177 ] while the leaders of many of the more authoritarian regimes as well as President Trump offered their congratulations.

[ 178 ] Political science [ edit ] Many political scientists have theorized about the foundations of the modern nation-state and the concept of sovereignty. The concept of nationalism in political science draws from these theoretical foundations. Philosophers like Machiavelli , Locke , Hobbes , and Rousseau conceptualized the state as the result of a " social contract " between rulers and individuals.

[ 179 ] Max Weber provides the most commonly used definition of the state, "that human community which successfully lays claim to the monopoly of legitimate physical violence within a certain territory".

[ 180 ] According to Benedict Anderson , nations are " Imagined Communities ", or socially constructed institutions.

[ 181 ] Many scholars have noted the relationship between state-building , war , and nationalism. John Etherington argues nationalism is inherently exclusionary and thus potentially violent, [ 182 ] while Jeffrey Herbst posits that external threats can foster nationalist sentiment: "External threats have such a powerful effect on nationalism because people realize in a profound manner that they are under threat because of who they are as a nation; they are forced to recognize that it is only as a nation that they can successfully defeat the threat".

[ 183 ] With increased external threats, the state's extractive capacities increase. He links the lack of external threats to countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, post-independence, to weak state nationalism and state capacity .

[ 183 ] Barry Posen argues that nationalism increases the intensity of war, and that states deliberately promote nationalism with the aim of improving their military capabilities.

[ 184 ] Most new nation-states since 1815 have emerged through decolonization.

[ 41 ] Adria Lawrence has argued that nationalism in the colonial world was spurred by failures of colonial powers to extend equal political rights to the subjects in the colonies, thus prompting them to pursue independence.

[ 185 ] Michael Hechter has argued similarly that "peripheral nationalisms" formed when empires prevented peripheral regions from having autonomy and local rule.

[ 186 ] Sociology [ edit ] The sociological or modernist interpretation of nationalism and nation-building argues that nationalism arises and flourishes in modern societies that have an industrial economy capable of self-sustainability, a central supreme authority capable of maintaining authority and unity, and a centralized language understood by a community of people.

[ 187 ] Modernist theorists note that this is only possible in modern societies, while traditional societies typically lack the prerequisites for nationalism. They lack a modern self-sustainable economy, have divided authorities, and use multiple languages resulting in many groups being unable to communicate with each other.

[ 187 ] Prominent theorists who developed the modernist interpretation of nations and nationalism include: Carlton J. H. Hayes , Henry Maine , Ferdinand Tönnies , Rabindranath Tagore , Émile Durkheim , Max Weber , Arnold Joseph Toynbee and Talcott Parsons .

[ 187 ] In his analysis of the historical changes and development of human societies, Henry Maine noted that the key distinction between traditional societies defined as "status" societies based on family association and functionally diffuse roles for individuals and modern societies defined as "contract" societies where social relations are determined by rational contracts pursued by individuals to advance their interests. Maine saw the development of societies as moving away from traditional status societies to modern contract societies.

[ 188 ] In his book Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (1887), Ferdinand Tönnies defined a Gemeinschaft ("community") as being based on emotional attachments as attributed with traditional societies while defining a Gesellschaft ("society") as an impersonal society that is modern. Although he recognized the advantages of modern societies, he also criticized them for their cold and impersonal nature that caused alienation while praising the intimacy of traditional communities.

[ 188 ] Émile Durkheim expanded upon Tönnies' recognition of alienation and defined the differences between traditional and modern societies as being between societies based upon "mechanical solidarity" versus societies based on "organic solidarity".

[ 188 ] Durkheim identified mechanical solidarity as involving custom, habit, and repression that was necessary to maintain shared views. Durkheim identified organic solidarity-based societies as modern societies where there exists a division of labour based on social differentiation that causes alienation. Durkheim claimed that social integration in traditional society required authoritarian culture involving acceptance of a social order. Durkheim claimed that modern society bases integration on the mutual benefits of the division of labour, but noted that the impersonal character of modern urban life caused alienation and feelings of anomie .

[ 188 ] Max Weber claimed the change that developed modern society and nations is the result of the rise of a charismatic leader to power in a society who creates a new tradition or a rational-legal system that establishes the supreme authority of the state. Weber's conception of charismatic authority has been noted as the basis of many nationalist governments.

[ 188 ] Primordialist evolutionary interpretation [ edit ] The primordialist perspective is based upon evolutionary theory.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] This approach has been popular with the general public but is typically rejected by experts. Laland and Brown report that "the vast majority of professional academics in the social sciences not only ... ignore evolutionary methods but in many cases [are] extremely hostile to the arguments" that draw vast generalizations from rather limited evidence.

[ 191 ] The evolutionary theory of nationalism perceives nationalism to be the result of the evolution of human beings into identifying with groups, such as ethnic groups, or other groups that form the foundation of a nation.

[ 189 ] Roger Masters in The Nature of Politics describes the primordial explanation of the origin of ethnic and national groups as recognizing group attachments that are thought to be unique, emotional, intense, and durable because they are based upon kinship and promoted along lines of common ancestry.

[ 192 ] The primordialist evolutionary views of nationalism often reference the evolutionary theories of Charles Darwin as well as Social Darwinist views of the late nineteenth century. Thinkers like Herbert Spencer and Walter Bagehot reinterpreted Darwin's theory of natural selection "often in ways inconsistent with Charles Darwin's theory of evolution" by making unsupported claims of biological difference among groups, ethnicities, races, and nations.

[ 193 ] Modern evolutionary sciences have distanced themselves from such views, but notions of long-term evolutionary change remain foundational to the work of evolutionary psychologists like John Tooby and Leda Cosmides .

[ 194 ] Approached through the primordialist perspective, the example of seeing the mobilization of a foreign military force on the nation's borders may provoke members of a national group to unify and mobilize themselves in response.

[ 195 ] There are proximate environments where individuals identify nonimmediate real or imagined situations in combination with immediate situations that make individuals confront a common situation of both subjective and objective components that affect their decisions.

[ 196 ] As such proximate environments cause people to make decisions based on existing situations and anticipated situations.

[ 196 ] Nationalist and liberal pressure led to the European Revolutions of 1848 .

Critics argue that primordial models relying on evolutionary psychology are based not on historical evidence but on assumptions of unobserved changes over thousands of years and assume stable genetic composition of the population living in a specific area and are incapable of handling the contingencies that characterize every known historical process. Robert Hislope argues: [T]he articulation of cultural evolutionary theory represents theoretical progress over sociobiology, but its explanatory payoff remains limited due to the role of contingency in human affairs and the significance of non-evolutionary, proximate causal factors. While evolutionary theory undoubtedly elucidates the development of all organic life, it would seem to operate best at macro-levels of analysis, "distal" points of explanation, and from the perspective of the long-term. Hence, it is bound to display shortcomings at micro-level events that are highly contingent in nature.

[ 197 ] In 1920, English historian G. P. Gooch argued that "[while patriotism is as old as human association and has gradually widened its sphere from the clan and the tribe to the city and the state, nationalism as an operative principle and an articulate creed only made its appearance among the more complicated intellectual processes of the modern world." [ 198 ] Marxist interpretations [ edit ] In The Communist Manifesto , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels declared that "the working men have no country".

[ 199 ] Vladimir Lenin supported the concept of self-determination.

[ 200 ] Joseph Stalin 's Marxism and the National Question (1913) declares that "a nation is not a racial or tribal , but a historically constituted community of people;" "a nation is not a casual or ephemeral conglomeration , but a stable community of people"; "a nation is formed only as a result of lengthy and systematic intercourse , as a result of people living together generation after generation"; and, in its entirety: "a nation is a historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life, and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture." [ 201 ] Types [ edit ] See also: Types of nationalism Historians, sociologists and anthropologists have debated different types of nationalism since at least the 1930s.

[ 202 ] Generally, the most common way of classifying nationalism has been to describe movements as having either "civic" or "ethnic" nationalist characteristics. This distinction was popularized in the 1950s by Hans Kohn who described "civic" nationalism as "Western" and more democratic while depicting "ethnic" nationalism as "Eastern" and undemocratic.

[ 203 ] Since the 1980s, scholars of nationalism have pointed out numerous flaws in this rigid division and proposed more specific classifications and numerous varieties.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] Anti-colonial [ edit ] Crowd demonstrates against Britain in Cairo on 23 October 1951 as tension continued to mount in the dispute between Egypt and Britain over control of the Suez Canal and Anglo-Egyptian Sudan .

Anti-colonial nationalism is an intellectual framework that preceded, accompanied and followed the process of decolonization in the mid-1900s.

Benedict Anderson defined a nation as a socially constructed community that is co-created by individuals who imagine themselves as part of this group.

[ 12 ] [ 16 ] He points to the New World as the site that originally conceived of nationalism as a concept, which is defined by its imagination of an ahistorical identity that negates colonialism by definition. This concept of nationalism was exemplified by the transformation of settler colonies into nations, while anti-colonial nationalism is exemplified by movements against colonial powers in the 1900s.

Nationalist mobilization in French colonial Africa and British colonial India developed "when colonial regimes refused to cede rights to their increasingly well-educated colonial subjects",  who formed indigenous elites and strategically adopted and adapted nationalist tactics.

[ 12 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] New national identities may cross pre-existing ethnic or linguistic divisions.

[ 12 ] Anti-colonial independence movements in Africa and Asia in the 1900s were led by individuals who had a set of shared identities and imagined a homeland without external rule. Anderson argues that the racism often experienced as a result of colonial rule and attributed to nationalism is rather due to theories of class.

[ 181 ] Gellner's theory of nationalism argues that nationalism works for combining one culture or ethnicity in one state, which leads to that state's success. For Gellner, nationalism is ethnic, and state political parties should reflect the ethnic majority in the state. This definition of nationalism also contributes to anti-colonial nationalism, if one conceives of anti-colonial movements to be movements consisting of one specific ethnic group against an outside ruling party.

[ 208 ] Edward Said also saw nationalism as ethnic, at least in part, and argued that nationalist narratives often go hand in hand with racism, as communities define themselves in relation to the other.

[ 209 ] Anti-colonial nationalism is not static and is defined by different forms of nationalism depending on location. In the anti-colonial movement that took place in the Indian subcontinent, Mahatma Gandhi and his allies in the Indian independence movement argued for a composite nationalism , not believing that an independent Indian nation should be defined by its religious identity.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Despite large-scale opposition by the Indian National Congress supporters, the insistence of the Muslims under the separatist Muslim League resulted in the Indian subcontinent being partitioned into two states in 1947 along religious lines into the Muslim-majority Dominion of Pakistan and the Hindu-majority Dominion of India .

[ 212 ] Because of colonialism's creation of state and country lines across ethnic, religious, linguistic and other historical boundaries, anti-colonial nationalism is largely related to land first. After independence, especially in countries with particularly diverse populations with historic enmity, there have been a series of smaller independence movements that are also defined by anti-colonialism.

Philosopher and scholar Achille Mbembe argues that post-colonialism is a contradictory term, because colonialism is ever present.

[ 213 ] Those that participate in this intellectual practice envision a post-colonialism despite its being the defining frame for the world. This is the case with anti-colonialism as well. Anti-colonial nationalism as an intellectual framework persisted into the late 20th century with the resistance movements in Soviet satellite states and continues with independence movements in the Arab world in the 21st century.

Civic and liberal [ edit ] Main article: Civic nationalism Civic nationalism defines the nation as an association of people who identify themselves as belonging to the nation, who have equal and shared political rights, and allegiance to similar political procedures.

[ 214 ] According to the principles of civic nationalism, the nation is not based on common ethnic ancestry, but is a political entity whose core identity is not ethnicity. This civic concept of nationalism is exemplified by Ernest Renan in his lecture in 1882 " What is a Nation?

", where he defined the nation as a "daily referendum" (frequently translated "daily plebiscite ") dependent on the will of its people to continue living together.

[ 214 ] Civic nationalism is normally associated with liberal nationalism , although the two are distinct, and did not always coincide. On the one hand, until the late 19th and early 20th century adherents to anti-Enlightenment movements such as French Legitimism or Spanish Carlism often rejected the liberal, national unitary state, yet identified themselves not with an ethnic nation but with a non-national dynasty and regional feudal privileges. Xenophobic movements in long-established Western European states indeed often took a 'civic national' form, rejecting a given group's ability to assimilate with the nation due to its belonging to a cross-border community (Irish Catholics in Britain, Ashkenazic Jews in France). On the other hand, while subnational separatist movements were commonly associated with ethnic nationalism, this was not always so, and such nationalists as the Corsican Republic , United Irishmen , Breton Federalist League or Catalan Republican Party could combine a rejection of the unitary civic-national state with a belief in liberal universalism.

Liberal nationalism is commonly considered to be compatible with liberal values of freedom , tolerance , equality , and individual rights .

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] [ 217 ] Ernest Renan [ 218 ] and John Stuart Mill [ 219 ] are often thought to be early liberal nationalists. Liberal nationalists often defend the value of national identity by saying that individuals need a national identity to lead meaningful, autonomous lives, [ 220 ] [ 221 ] and that liberal democratic polities need national identity to function properly.

[ 222 ] [ 223 ] Civic nationalism lies within the traditions of rationalism and liberalism, but as a form of nationalism it is usually contrasted with ethnic nationalism . Civic nationalism is correlated with long-established states whose dynastic rulers had gradually acquired multiple distinct territories, with little change to boundaries, but which contained historical populations of multiple linguistic and/or confessional backgrounds. Since individuals living within different parts of the state territory might have little obvious common ground, civic nationalism developed as a way for rulers to both explain a contemporary reason for such heterogeneity and to provide a common purpose ( Ernest Renan 's classic description in What is a Nation?

(1882) as a voluntary partnership for a common endeavor). Renan argued that factors such as ethnicity, language, religion, economics, geography, ruling dynasty and historic military deeds were important but not sufficient. Needed was a spiritual soul that allowed as a "daily referendum" among the people.

[ 224 ] Civic-national ideals influenced the development of representative democracy in multiethnic countries such as the United States and France, as well as in constitutional monarchies such as Great Britain, Belgium and Spain.

[ 73 ] Ukrainian nationalists carry portraits of Stepan Bandera and flags of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army .

Creole [ edit ] Main article: Creole nationalism Creole nationalism is the ideology that emerged in independence movements among the creoles (descendants of the colonizers), especially in Latin America in the early 19th century.

[ 225 ] It was facilitated when French Emperor Napoleon seized control of Spain and Portugal, breaking the chain of control from the Spanish and Portuguese kings to the local governors. Allegiance to the Napoleonic states was rejected, and increasingly the creoles demanded independence. They achieved it after civil wars 1808–1826.

[ 226 ] Ethnic [ edit ] See also: Ethnic nationalism Ethnic nationalism, also known as ethno-nationalism, is a form of nationalism wherein the "nation" is defined in terms of ethnicity .

[ 227 ] The central theme of ethnic nationalists is that "nations are defined by a shared heritage, which usually includes a common language , a common faith, and a common ethnic ancestry ".

[ 228 ] It also includes ideas of a culture shared between members of the group, and with their ancestors. It is different from a purely cultural definition of "the nation," which allows people to become members of a nation by cultural assimilation ; and from a purely linguistic definition, according to which "the nation" consists of all speakers of a specific language.

Whereas nationalism in and of itself does not imply a belief in the superiority of one ethnicity or country over others, some nationalists support ethnocentric supremacy or protectionism.

The humiliation of being a second-class citizen led regional minorities in multiethnic states, such as Great Britain, Spain, France, Germany, Russia and the Ottoman Empire, to define nationalism in terms of loyalty to their minority culture, especially language and religion. Forced assimilation was anathema.

[ 229 ] For the politically dominant cultural group, assimilation was necessary to minimize disloyalty and treason and therefore became a major component of nationalism. A second factor for the politically dominant group was competition with neighboring states—nationalism involved a rivalry, especially in terms of military prowess and economic strength.

[ 230 ] Economic [ edit ] See also: Economic nationalism Economic nationalism, or economic patriotism, is an ideology that favors state interventionism in the economy, with policies that emphasize domestic control of the economy, labor, and capital formation , even if this requires the imposition of tariffs and other restrictions on the movement of labor, goods and capital.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] Gendered and muscular [ edit ] Main article: Nationalism and gender Feminist critique interprets nationalism as a mechanism through which sexual control and repression are justified and legitimized, often by a dominant masculine power. The gendering of nationalism through socially constructed notions of masculinity and femininity not only shapes what masculine and feminine participation in the building of that nation will look like, but also how the nation will be imagined by nationalists.

[ 233 ] A nation having its own identity is viewed as necessary, and often inevitable, and these identities are gendered.

[ 234 ] The physical land itself is often gendered as female (i.e. "Motherland"), with a body in constant danger of violation by foreign males, while national pride and protectiveness of "her" borders is gendered as masculine.

[ 235 ] World War II United States Patriotic Army Recruiting Poster History, political ideologies, and religions place most nations along a continuum of muscular nationalism.

[ 234 ] Muscular nationalism conceptualizes a nation's identity as being derived from muscular or masculine attributes that are unique to a particular country.

[ 234 ] If definitions of nationalism and gender are understood as socially and culturally constructed, the two may be constructed in conjunction by invoking an "us" versus "them" dichotomy for the purpose of the exclusion of the so-called "other," who is used to reinforce the unifying ties of the nation.

[ 233 ] The empowerment of one gender, nation or sexuality tends to occur at the expense and disempowerment of another; in this way, nationalism can be used as an instrument to perpetuate heteronormative structures of power.

[ 236 ] The gendered manner in which dominant nationalism has been imagined in most states in the world has had important implications on not only individual's lived experience, but on international relations.

[ 237 ] Colonialism has historically been heavily intertwined with muscular nationalism, from research linking hegemonic masculinity and empire-building, [ 233 ] to intersectional oppression being justified by colonialist images of the "other", a practice integral in the formation of Western identity.

[ 238 ] This "othering" may come in the form of orientalism , whereby the East is feminized and sexualized by the West. The imagined feminine East, or "other," exists in contrast to the masculine West.

The status of conquered nations can become a causality dilemma: the nation was "conquered because they were effeminate and seen as effeminate because they were conquered." [ 233 ] In defeat they are considered militaristically unskilled, not aggressive, and thus not muscular. In order for a nation to be considered "proper", it must possess the male-gendered characteristics of virility, as opposed to the stereotypically female characteristics of subservience and dependency.

[ 234 ] Muscular nationalism is often inseparable from the concept of a warrior , which shares ideological commonalities across many nations; they are defined by the masculine notions of aggression, willingness to engage in war, decisiveness, and muscular strength, as opposed to the feminine notions of peacefulness, weakness, non-violence, and compassion.

[ 233 ] This masculinized image of a warrior has been theorized to be "the culmination of a series of gendered historical and social processes" played out in a national and international context.

[ 233 ] Ideas of cultural dualism—of a martial man and chaste woman—which are implicit in muscular nationalism, underline the raced , classed , gendered , and heteronormative nature of dominant national identity.

[ 234 ] Nations and gender systems are mutually supportive constructions : the nation fulfils the masculine ideals of comradeship and brotherhood.

[ 239 ] Masculinity has been cited as a notable factor in producing political militancy.

[ 239 ] A common feature of national crisis is a drastic shift in the socially acceptable ways of being a man, [ 240 ] which then helps to shape the gendered perception of the nation as a whole.

Integral, pan and irredentism [ edit ] Main articles: Integral nationalism , Irredentism , and Pan-nationalism There are different types of nationalism including Risorgimento nationalism and Integral nationalism.

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] Whereas risorgimento nationalism applies to a nation seeking to establish a liberal state (for example the Risorgimento in Italy and similar movements in Greece , Germany, Poland during the 19th century or the civic American nationalism ), integral nationalism results after a nation has achieved independence and has established a state.

Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany , according to Alter and Brown, were examples of integral nationalism.

Some of the qualities that characterize integral nationalism are anti-individualism , statism , radical extremism, and aggressive-expansionist militarism. The term Integral Nationalism often overlaps with fascism, although many natural points of disagreement exist. Integral nationalism arises in countries where a strong military ethos has become entrenched through the independence struggle, when, once independence is achieved, it is believed that a strong military is required to ensure the security and viability of the new state. Also, the success of such a liberation struggle results in feelings of national superiority that may lead to extreme nationalism.

Pan-nationalism is unique in that it covers a large area span. Pan-nationalism focuses more on "clusters" of ethnic groups.

Pan-Slavism is one example of Pan-nationalism. The goal is to unite all Slavic people into one country. They did succeed by uniting several south Slavic people into Yugoslavia in 1918.

[ 243 ] Left-wing [ edit ] Main article: Left-wing nationalism A political mural in Caracas featuring an anti-American and anti-imperialist message Left-wing nationalism, occasionally known as socialist nationalism, not to be confused with the German fascist " National Socialism ", [ 244 ] is a political movement that combines left-wing politics with nationalism.

Many nationalist movements are dedicated to national liberation , in the view that their nations are being persecuted by other nations and thus need to exercise self-determination by liberating themselves from the accused persecutors.

Anti-revisionist Marxism–Leninism is closely tied with this ideology, and practical examples include Stalin's early work Marxism and the National Question and his socialism in one country edict, which declares that nationalism can be used in an internationalist context, fighting for national liberation without racial or religious divisions.

Other examples of left-wing nationalism include Fidel Castro 's 26th of July Movement that launched the Cuban Revolution in 1959, Cornwall 's Mebyon Kernow , Ireland's Sinn Féin , Wales 's Plaid Cymru , Galicia 's Galician Nationalist Bloc , the Awami League in Bangladesh, the African National Congress in South Africa and numerous movements in Eastern Europe.

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] National-anarchism [ edit ] Main article: National-anarchism Among the first advocates of national-anarchism were Hans Cany, Peter Töpfer and former National Front activist Troy Southgate , founder of the National Revolutionary Faction , a since disbanded British-based organization which cultivated links to certain far-left and far-right circles in the United Kingdom and in post-Soviet states , not to be confused with the national-anarchism of the Black Ram Group.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] In the United Kingdom, national-anarchists worked with Albion Awake , Alternative Green (published by former Green Anarchist editor Richard Hunt ) and Jonathan Boulter to develop the Anarchist Heretics Fair.

[ 248 ] Those national-anarchists cite their influences primarily from Mikhail Bakunin , William Godwin , Peter Kropotkin , Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , Max Stirner and Leo Tolstoy .

[ 247 ] A position developed in Europe during the 1990s, national-anarchist groups have seen arisen worldwide, most prominently in Australia (New Right Australia/New Zealand), Germany (International National Anarchism) and the United States (BANA).

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] National-anarchism has been described as a radical right-wing [ 250 ] [ 251 ] [ 252 ] nationalist ideology which advocates racial separatism and white racial purity .

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] National-anarchists claim to syncretize neotribal ethnic nationalism with philosophical anarchism , mainly in their support for a stateless society whilst rejecting anarchist social philosophy.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] The main ideological innovation of national-anarchism is its anti-state palingenetic ultranationalism .

[ 250 ] National-anarchists advocate homogeneous communities in place of the nation state . National-anarchists claim that those of different ethnic or racial groups would be free to develop separately in their own tribal communes while striving to be politically meritocratic , economically non- capitalist , ecologically sustainable and socially and culturally traditional .

[ 247 ] [ 249 ] Although the term national-anarchism dates back as far as the 1920s, the contemporary national-anarchist movement has been put forward since the late 1990s by British political activist Troy Southgate , who positions it as being " beyond left and right ".

[ 247 ] The few scholars who have studied national-anarchism conclude that it represents a further evolution in the thinking of the radical right rather than an entirely new dimension on the political spectrum.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] [ 252 ] National-anarchism is considered by anarchists as being a rebranding of totalitarian fascism and an oxymoron due to the inherent contradiction of anarchist philosophy of anti-fascism , abolition of unjustified hierarchy , dismantling of national borders and universal equality between different nationalities as being incompatible with the idea of a synthesis between anarchism and fascism.

[ 249 ] National-anarchism has elicited scepticism and outright hostility from both left-wing and far-right critics.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] Critics, including scholars, accuse national-anarchists of being nothing more than white nationalists who promote a communitarian and racialist form of ethnic and racial separatism while wanting the militant chic of calling themselves anarchists without the historical and philosophical baggage that accompanies such a claim, including the anti-racist egalitarian anarchist philosophy and the contributions of Jewish anarchists .

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] Some scholars are sceptical that implementing national-anarchism would result in an expansion of freedom and describe it as an authoritarian anti-statism that would result in authoritarianism and oppression, only on a smaller scale.

[ 253 ] Nativist [ edit ] See also: Nativism (politics) Nativist nationalism is a type of nationalism similar to creole or territorial types of nationalism, but which defines belonging to a nation solely by being born on its territory. In countries where strong nativist nationalism exists, people who were not born in the country are seen as lesser nationals than those who were born there and are called immigrants even if they became naturalized. It is cultural as people will never see a foreign-born person as one of them and is legal as such people are banned for life from holding certain jobs, especially government jobs. In scholarly studies, nativism is a standard technical term, although those who hold this political view do not typically accept the label.

"[N]ativists . . . do not consider themselves nativists. For them it is a negative term and they rather consider themselves as ' Patriots '." [ 254 ] Racial [ edit ] Main article: Racial nationalism Racial nationalism is an ideology that advocates a racial definition of national identity. Racial nationalism seeks to preserve a given race through policies such as banning race mixing and the immigration of other races. Its ideas tend to be in direct conflict with those of anti-racism and multiculturalism .

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] Specific examples are black nationalism and white nationalism .

Religious [ edit ] Main article: Religious nationalism Religious nationalism is the relationship of nationalism to a particular religious belief, dogma, or affiliation where a shared religion can be seen to contribute to a sense of national unity, a common bond among the citizens of the nation.

Saudi Arabian , Iranian , Egyptian , Iraqi , American and the Pakistani-Islamic nationalism ( Two-Nation Theory ) are some examples.

Territorial [ edit ] Main article: Territorial nationalism Nationalist slogan " Brazil, love it or leave it ", used during the Brazilian military dictatorship Some nationalists exclude certain groups. Some nationalists, defining the national community in ethnic, linguistic, cultural, historic, or religious terms (or a combination of these), may then seek to deem certain minorities as not truly being a part of the 'national community' as they define it. Sometimes a mythic homeland is more important for the national identity than the actual territory occupied by the nation.

[ 257 ] Territorial nationalists assume that all inhabitants of a particular nation owe allegiance to their country of birth or adoption.

[ 258 ] A sacred quality is sought in the nation and in the popular memories it evokes. Citizenship is idealized by territorial nationalists. A criterion of a territorial nationalism is the establishment of a mass, public culture based on common values, codes and traditions of the population.

[ 259 ] Sport [ edit ] Main article: Nationalism and sport Sport spectacles like football's World Cup command worldwide audiences as nations battle for supremacy and the fans invest intense support for their national team. Increasingly people have tied their loyalties and even their cultural identity to national teams.

[ 260 ] The globalization of audiences through television and other media has generated revenues from advertisers and subscribers in the billions of dollars, as the FIFA Scandals of 2015 revealed.

[ 261 ] Jeff Kingston looks at football, the Commonwealth Games, baseball, cricket, and the Olympics and finds that, "The capacity of sports to ignite and amplify nationalist passions and prejudices is as extraordinary as is their power to console, unify, uplift and generate goodwill." [ 262 ] The phenomenon is evident across most of the world.

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] [ 265 ] The British Empire strongly emphasized sports among its soldiers and agents across the world, and often the locals joined in enthusiastically.

[ 266 ] It established a high prestige competition in 1930, named the British Empire Games from 1930 to 1950, the British Empire and Commonwealth Games from 1954 to 1966, British Commonwealth Games from 1970 to 1974 and since then the Commonwealth Games .

[ 267 ] The French Empire was not far behind the British in the use of sports to strengthen colonial solidarity with France. Colonial officials promoted and subsidized gymnastics, table games, and dance and helped football spread to French colonies.

[ 268 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Internationalism (politics) Critics of nationalism have argued that it is often unclear what constitutes a nation, or whether a nation is a legitimate unit of political rule. Nationalists hold that the boundaries of a nation and a state should coincide with one another, thus nationalism tends to oppose multiculturalism .

[ 269 ] It can also lead to conflict when more than one national group finds itself claiming rights to a particular territory or seeking to take control of the state.

[ 7 ] Philosopher A. C. Grayling describes nations as artificial constructs, "their boundaries drawn in the blood of past wars". He argues that "there is no country on earth which is not home to more than one different but usually coexisting culture. Cultural heritage is not the same thing as national identity".

[ 270 ] Nationalism is considered by its critics to be inherently divisive, as adherents may draw upon and highlight perceived differences between people, emphasizing an individual's identification with their own nation. They also consider the idea to be potentially oppressive, because it can submerge individual identity within a national whole and give elites or political leaders potential opportunities to manipulate or control the masses .

[ 271 ] Much of the early opposition to nationalism was related to its geopolitical ideal of a separate state for every nation. The classic nationalist movements of the 19th century rejected the very existence of the multi-ethnic empires in Europe, contrary to an ideological critique of nationalism which developed into several forms of internationalism and anti-nationalism. The Islamic revival of the 20th century also produced an Islamist critique of the nation-state. (see Pan-Islamism ) [ 272 ] At the end of the 19th century, Marxists and other socialists and communists (such as Rosa Luxemburg ) produced political analyses that were critical of the nationalist movements then active in Central and Eastern Europe, although a variety of other contemporary socialists and communists, from Vladimir Lenin (a communist) to Józef Piłsudski (a socialist), were more sympathetic to national self-determination .

[ 273 ] In his classic essay on the topic, George Orwell distinguishes nationalism from patriotism (which he defines as devotion to a particular place). More abstractly, nationalism is "power-hunger tempered by self-deception".

[ 274 ] For Orwell, the nationalist is more likely than not dominated by irrational negative impulses: A nationalist is one who thinks solely, or mainly, in terms of competitive prestige. He may be a positive or a negative nationalist—that is, he may use his mental energy either in boosting or in denigrating—but at any rate his thoughts always turn on victories, defeats, triumphs and humiliations. He sees history, especially contemporary history, as the endless rise and decline of great power units and every event that happens seems to him a demonstration that his own side is on the upgrade and some hated rival is on the downgrade. But finally, it is important not to confuse nationalism with mere worship of success. The nationalist does not go on the principle of simply ganging up with the strongest side. On the contrary, having picked his side, he persuades himself that it is the strongest and is able to stick to his belief even when the facts are overwhelmingly against him.

[ 274 ] In the liberal political tradition, there was mostly a negative attitude toward nationalism as a dangerous force and a cause of conflict and war between nation-states. The historian Lord Acton put the case for "nationalism as insanity" in 1862. He argued that nationalism suppresses minorities, places country above moral principles and creates a dangerous individual attachment to the state. He opposed democracy and tried to defend the pope from Italian nationalism.

[ 275 ] Since the late 20th century, liberals have been increasingly divided, with some philosophers such as Michael Walzer , Isaiah Berlin , Charles Taylor and David Miller emphasizing that a liberal society needs to be based in a stable nation state.

[ 276 ] The pacifist critique of nationalism also concentrates on the violence of some nationalist movements, the associated militarism , and on conflicts between nations inspired by jingoism or chauvinism . National symbols and patriotic assertiveness are in some countries discredited by their historical link with past wars, especially in Germany. British pacifist Bertrand Russell criticized nationalism for diminishing the individual's capacity to judge his or her fatherland's foreign policy.

[ 277 ] [ 278 ] Albert Einstein stated that "Nationalism is an infantile disease. It is the measles of mankind".

[ 279 ] Jiddu Krishnamurti stated that "Nationalism is merely the glorification of tribalism ".

[ 280 ] Transhumanists have also expressed their opposition to nationalism, to the extent that some transhumanists believe national identities should be dissolved entirely. The influential transhumanist FM-2030 refused to identify with any nationality, referring to himself as 'universal'.

[ 281 ] Furthermore, in The Transhumanist Handbook , Kate Levchuk stated that a transhumanist "doesn't believe in nationality".

[ 282 ] See also [ edit ] Lists of historical separatist movements List of active nationalist parties in Europe Lists of active separatist movements National memory Nationalism and archaeology Nationalism in the Middle Ages Nationalism studies , an interdisciplinary academic field devoted to the study of nationalism Nationalization of history Notes on Nationalism , an essay by George Orwell on types of nationalism in the late World War Two world Xenophobia Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Hechter, Michael (2000).

Containing Nationalism . Oxford University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0198297420 .

^ a b Gellner, Ernest (1983).

Nations and Nationalism . Cornell University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0801475009 .

^ Brubaker, Rogers (1996).

Nationalism reframed: Nationhood and the national question in the New Europe . Cambridge University Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-521-57649-9 .

^ a b c Smith, Anthony .

Nationalism: Theory, Ideology, History .

Polity , 2010. pp. 9, 25–30; James, Paul (1996).

Nation Formation: Towards a Theory of Abstract Community . London: Sage Publications.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2019 .

^ Finlayson, Alan (2014).

"5. Nationalism" . In Geoghegan, Vincent; Wilford, Rick (eds.).

Political Ideologies: An Introduction . Routledge. pp.

100–102 .

ISBN 978-1317804338 .

^ Yack, Bernard.

Nationalism and the Moral Psychology of Community . University of Chicago Press, 2012. p. 142 ^ a b Triandafyllidou, Anna (1998). "National Identity and the Other".

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

21 (4): 593– 612.

doi : 10.1080/014198798329784 .

^ Smith, A.D. (1981).

The Ethnic Revival in the Modern World . Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Mylonas, Harris; Tudor, Maya (2023).

Varieties of Nationalism: Communities, Narratives, Identities . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108973298 .

ISBN 9781108973298 .

S2CID 259646325 .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

a broad scholarly consensus that the nation is a recent and imagined identity dominates political science ^ a b Adeney, Katharine (2009). "Nationalism". In Iain, McLean; McMillan, Alistair (eds.).

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191727191 .

^ Coakley, John (April 2018).

" 'Primordialism' in nationalism studies: theory or ideology?: 'Primordialism' in nationalism studies" .

Nations and Nationalism .

24 (2): 327– 347.

doi : 10.1111/nana.12349 .

ISSN 1354-5078 .

S2CID 149288553 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h Mylonas, Harris; Tudor, Maya (2021).

"Nationalism: What We Know and What We Still Need to Know" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

24 (1): 109– 132.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-041719-101841 .

^ Garner, Renaud-Philippe (18 May 2022), "Nationalism" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.2039 , ISBN 978-0-19-022863-7 ^ Woods, Eric Taylor; Schertzer, Robert; Kaufmann, Eric (April 2011). "Ethno-national conflict and its management".

Commonwealth & Comparative Politics .

49 (2): 154.

doi : 10.1080/14662043.2011.564469 .

S2CID 154796642 .

^ Smith, Deanna (2007).

Nationalism (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Polity.

ISBN 978-0745651286 .

^ a b Anderson, Benedict (1983).

Imagined Communities: Reflections on the origins and spread of nationalism . London: Verso Books.

^ Hobsbawm, E.; Ranger, T. (1983).

The Invention of Tradition . Cambridge University Press.

^ Bunce, Valerie (2000). "Comparative Democratization: Big and Bounded Generalizations".

Comparative Political Studies .

33 ( 6– 7): 703– 734.

doi : 10.1177/001041400003300602 .

ISSN 0010-4140 .

S2CID 153875363 .

^ Kocher, Matthew Adam; Lawrence, Adria K.; Monteiro, Nuno P. (2018).

"Nationalism, Collaboration, and Resistance: France under Nazi Occupation" .

International Security .

43 (2): 117– 150.

doi : 10.1162/isec_a_00329 .

ISSN 1531-4804 .

S2CID 57561272 .

^ Bonikowski, Bart; Feinstein, Yuval; Bock, Sean (2021).

"The Partisan Sorting of "America": How Nationalist Cleavages Shaped the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election" .

American Journal of Sociology .

127 (2): 492– 561.

doi : 10.1086/717103 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

S2CID 246017190 .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2022 . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ Bonikowski, Bart and DiMaggio, Paul (2016) "Varieties of American Popular Nationalism" Archived 7 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

American Sociological Review , 81(5): 949–980.

^ Wimmer, Andreas (2019).

"Why Nationalism Works" .

Foreign Affairs . No. March/April 2019.

ISSN 0015-7120 .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ Smith, Anthony .

Nationalism: Theory, Ideology, History .

Polity , 2010. pp. 6–7, 30–31, 37 ^ Nairn, Tom ; James, Paul (2005).

Global Matrix: Nationalism, Globalism and State-Terrorism . London and New York: Pluto Press.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2017 .

^ James Bingham (19 June 2012).

"How Significant is Nationalism as a Cause of War?" .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 19 January 2024 .

Direct causality can be drawn between nationalism and war.

^ Gat, Azar (2012).

Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism . Cambridge University Press. p. 214.

ISBN 978-1107007857 .

^ de Bertier de Sauvigny, Guillaume (April 1970). "Liberalism, Nationalism and Socialism: The Birth of Three Words".

The Review of Politics .

30 (2): 147– 166.

JSTOR 1406513 .

^ "Nationalism" .

merriam-webster.com .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2016 . Retrieved 9 November 2016 .

^ See Norman Rich, The age of nationalism and reform, 1850–1890 (1970).

^ Glenda Sluga, Internationalism in the Age of Nationalism (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013) ch 1 ^ Gorski, Philip S. (2000). "The Mosaic Moment: An Early Modernist Critique of Modernist Theories of Nationalism".

American Journal of Sociology .

105 (5): 1432– 1433.

doi : 10.1086/210435 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

JSTOR 3003771 .

S2CID 144002511 .

^ Wedeen, Lisa (2008).

Peripheral Visions: Publics, Power, and Performance in Yemen . University of Chicago Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0226877921 .

^ Smith, A.D. (1991). National Identity. Penguin. p.94.

^ Smith, A.D. (1991). National Identity. Penguin. p.96.

^ Smith, A.D. (1991). National Identity. Penguin. p.87.

^ Christopher Dandeker, ed. (1998).

Nationalism and Violence . Transaction Publishers. p. 52.

ISBN 978-1412829359 .

^ Votruba, Martin.

"Herder on Language" (PDF) .

Slovak Studies Program . University of Pittsburgh.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2010 .

^ T.C.W. Blanning (2003).

The Culture of Power and the Power of Culture: Old Regime Europe 1660–1789 . Oxford University Press. pp.

259– 260.

ISBN 978-0199265619 .

^ Benner, Erica (2013). "Nationalism: Intellectual Origins". In Breuilly, John (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Nationalism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 978-0-19-876820-3 .

^ Benner 2013 , p. 43.

^ a b Roeder, Philip G. (2007).

Where Nation-States Come From: Institutional Change in the Age of Nationalism . Princeton University Press. pp.

5– 6.

ISBN 978-0691134673 .

JSTOR j.ctt7t07k .

^ Kramer, Lloyd (2011).

Nationalism in Europe and America: Politics, Cultures, and Identities since 1775 . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0807872000 .

JSTOR 10.5149/9780807869055_kramer .

^ Kohn, Hans (1939).

"The Nature of Nationalism" .

American Political Science Review .

33 (6): 1001– 1021.

doi : 10.2307/1948728 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

JSTOR 1948728 .

S2CID 144176353 .

Nationalism as we understand it is not older than the second half of the eighteenth century. Its first great manifestation was the French Revolution ^ Goodblatt, David, ed. (2006), "Theoretical Considerations: Nationalism and Ethnicity in Antiquity" , Elements of Ancient Jewish Nationalism , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3, 11– 13, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511499067.002 , ISBN 978-0-521-86202-8 , retrieved 14 June 2024 ^ Gregorio F. Zaide (1965).

World History . . p. 274.

ISBN 978-9712314728 .

^ Calhoun, Craig (1993). "Nationalism and Ethnicity".

Annual Review of Sociology .

19 : 211– 239.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.soc.19.1.211 .

^ Zimmer, O. (2003).

Nationalism in Europe, 1890–1940 . Studies in European History. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1403943880 . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Raymond Pearson, ed., The Long-man companion to European nationalism 1789–1920 (2014) p. xi, with details on each country large and small.

^ "Nationalism in Europe and America | Lloyd S. Kramer | University of North Carolina Press" .

University of North Carolina Press .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 12 October 2017 .

^ Michael Mann (2012).

The Sources of Social Power, Volume 2 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781107031180 .

^ Gerald Newman (1997).

The Rise of English Nationalism: A Cultural History, 1740–1830 . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0312176990 .

^ Nick Groom, The Union Jack: The Story of the British Flag (2007).

^ Scholes, Percy A (1970).

The Oxford Companion to Music (tenth ed.).

Oxford University Press . p. 897.

^ Newman, Gerald G. (1987).

The Rise of English Nationalism: A Cultural History, 1740–1830 . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0312682477 .

^ Smith, Anthony D.

(1998).

Nationalism and Modernism: A Critical Survey of Recent Theories of Nations and Nationalism . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415063418 .

^ Iain McLean, Alistair McMillan, Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics , " French Revolution ... It produced the modern doctrine of nationalism, and spread it directly throughout Western Europe ...", Oxford, 2009, ISBN 978-0199205165 .

^ Motyl 2001 , pp. 171.

^ Kohn, Hans (1967) [1944].

The Idea Of Nationalism: A Study In Its Origins And Background . Transaction Publishers. p.

1i .

ISBN 978-1412837293 .

^ "Wells, H.G., The Outline of History , Vol.2, Ch.36, §6 (New York 1920)" .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 29 May 2022 .

^ "Etusivu" .

kansallisbiografia.fi .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ "Snellman, the man who inspired Finns to be Finns" .

Foreigner.fi . 2 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 June 2021 .

^ "Prime Minister Vanhanen at the Celebration of J.V. Snellman" .

Valtioneuvosto . 12 May 2006.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ Öhberg, Tony.

"Five Facts That You Didn't Know About J.V. Snellman" .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ Andrew Nestingen: Crime and Fantasy in Scandinavia: Fiction, Film and Social Change. University of Washington Press, 2008.

ISBN 978-8763507936 .

^ Roshwald, Aviel (2013).

"Part II. The Emergence of Nationalism: Politics and Power – Nationalism in the Middle East, 1876–1945" . In Breuilly, John (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Nationalism .

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

220– 241.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199209194.013.0011 .

ISBN 9780191750304 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

^ John Horne (2012).

A Companion to World War I . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

21– 22.

ISBN 978-1119968702 .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 November 2016 .

^ Gillette, Aaron (2006). "Why Did They Fight the Great War? A Multi-Level Class Analysis of the Causes of the First World War".

The History Teacher .

40 (1): 45– 58.

doi : 10.2307/30036938 .

JSTOR 30036938 .

^ Kohn, Hans (1950). "Napoleon and the Age of Nationalism".

The Journal of Modern History .

22 (1): 21– 37.

doi : 10.1086/237315 .

JSTOR 1875877 .

S2CID 3270766 .

^ J. P. T. Bury, "Nationalities and Nationalism," in J. P. T. Bury, ed. "The New Cambridge Modern History Vol. 10 (1830–70)" (1960) pp. 213–245 [245] online .

^ Moran, Daniel; Waldron, Arthur, eds. (2003).

The People in Arms: Military Myth and National Mobilization since the French Revolution . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 14.

^ K. Varley (2008).

Under the Shadow of Defeat: The War of 1870–71 in French Memory . Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 54.

ISBN 978-0230582347 .

^ Karine Varley, "The Taboos of Defeat: Unmentionable Memories of the Franco-Prussian War in France, 1870–1914." in Jenny Macleod, ed., Defeat and Memory: Cultural Histories of Military Defeat in the Modern Era (Palgrave Macmillan, 2008) pp. 62–80.

^ a b Jeremy D. Popkin (2016).

A History of Modern France . Routledge. p. 173.

ISBN 978-1315508207 .

^ Nicholas V. Riasanovsky, Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia 1825–1855 (1969) ^ Hutchings, Stephen C. (2004).

Russian Literary Culture in the Camera Age: The Word as Image . Routledge. p. 86.

^ Astrid S. Tuminez, Russian Nationalism since 1856: Ideology and the Making of Foreign Policy (2000) ^ Miller, Nicola (2006). "The historiography of nationalism and national identity in Latin America".

Nations and Nationalism .

12 (2): 201– 221.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-8129.2006.00237.x .

^ "1810 Juntas Form in Caracas, Buenos Aires, Bogota and Santiago" .

War and Nation: identity and the process of state-building in South America (1800–1840) .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2020 .

^ "Monroe Doctrine (1823)" .

National Archives . 25 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ John Lynch, The Spanish American Revolutions 1808–1826 (2nd ed. 1986) ^ Alan Forrest and Peter H. Wilson, eds.

The Bee and the Eagle: Napoleonic France and the End of the Holy Roman Empire (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).

^ Karen Hagemann, "Of  'manly valor' and 'German Honor': nation, war, and masculinity in the age of the Prussian uprising against Napoleon." Central European History 30#2 (1997): 187–220.

^ Hagen Schulze, The Course of German Nationalism: From Frederick the Great to Bismarck 1763–1867 (Cambridge UP, 1991).

^ Louis L. Snyder, Encyclopedia of Nationalism (1990) pp. 77–78, 381–382.

^ Adolf Hausrath, ed.

Treitschke, his doctrine of German destiny and of international relations: together with a study of his life and work (1914) online edition ^ Snyder, Encyclopedia of Nationalism (1990) pp. 399–401 ^ Hruška, Emil (2013), Boj o pohraničí: Sudetoněmecký Freikorps v roce 1938 (1st ed.), Prague: Nakladatelství epocha, Pražská vydavatelská společnost, p. 11 ^ Hochman, Adam (2015).

"Of Vikings and Nazis: Norwegian contributions to the rise and the fall of the idea of a superior Aryan race" .

Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences .

54 : 84– 88.

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsc.2015.09.003 .

^ "Aryan people" .

Encyclopedia Britannica On-line . n.d.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2015 . Retrieved 9 November 2018 .

^ McKay, Alex (Spring 2001).

"Hitler and the Himalayas: The SS Mission to Tibet 1938–39" .

Tricycle Magazine .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Boissoneault, Lorraine (31 March 2017).

"When the Nazis Tried to Bring Animals Back From Extinction: Their ideology of genetic purity extended to aspirations about reviving a pristine landscape with ancient animals and forests" .

Smithsonian.com .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 9 November 2018 .

^ Silvana Patriarca and Lucy Riall, eds., The Risorgimento Revisited: Nationalism and Culture in Nineteenth-century Italy (Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).

^ Bosworth, R. J. B. (2013).

Italy and the Wider World: 1860–1960 . London: Routledge. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1134780884 .

^ Stephen Barbour; Cathie Carmichael, eds. (2000).

Language and Nationalism in Europe . Oxford UP chapter 8.

ISBN 978-0191584077 .

^ Sales Vives, Pere (22 September 2020).

L'Espanyolització de Mallorca: 1808-1932 [ The Spanishization of Mallorca: 1808-1932 ] (in Catalan). El Gall editor. p. 422.

ISBN 9788416416707 .

^ Antoni Simon, Els orígens històrics de l'anticatalanisme Archived 5 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine , páginas 45–46, L'Espill, nº 24, Universitat de València ^ Mayans Balcells, Pere (2019).

Cròniques Negres del Català A L'Escola [ Black Chronicles of Catalan at School ] (in Catalan) (del 1979 ed.). Edicions del 1979. p. 230.

ISBN 978-84-947201-4-7 .

^ Lluís, García Sevilla (2021).

Recopilació d'accions genocides contra la nació catalana [ Compilation of genocidal actions against the Catalan nation ] (in Catalan). Base. p. 300.

ISBN 9788418434983 .

^ Bea Seguí, Ignaci (2013).

En cristiano! Policia i Guàrdia Civil contra la llengua catalana [ In Christian! Police and Civil Guard against the Catalan language ] (in Catalan). Cossetània. p. 216.

ISBN 9788490341339 .

^ "Enllaç al Manifest Galeusca on en l'article 3 es denuncia l'asimetria entre el castellà i les altres llengües de l'Estat Espanyol, inclosa el català" [The link to the Galeusca Manifest in article 3 denounces the asymmetry between Spanish and the other languages of the Estat Espanyol, including Catalan.] (in Catalan). Archived from the original on 19 July 2008 . Retrieved 2 August 2008 .

^ Radatz, Hans-Ingo (8 October 2020).

"Spain in the 19th century: Spanish Nation Building and Catalonia's attempt at becoming an Iberian Prussia" .

^ Fontana, Josep (1998).

La fi de l'antic règim i la industrialització. Vol. V Història de Catalunya [ The end of the old regime and industrialization. Flight. V History of Catalonia ] (in Catalan). Barcelona: Edicions 62. p. 453.

ISBN 9788429744408 .

^ Llaudó Avila, Eduard (2021).

Racisme i supremacisme polítics a l'Espanya contemporània [ Political racism and supremacism in contemporary Spain ] (7th ed.). Manresa: Parcir.

ISBN 9788418849107 .

^ Joe, Brew (26 February 2019).

"Video of the Conference of Josep Borrell at the Geneva Press Club, 27th February, 2019" .

Archived from the original on 17 June 2023 . Retrieved 10 May 2023 – via Twitter .

^ Riquer i Permanyer 1994 , pp. 14–15.

^ Riquer i Permanyer, Borja de (1994).

"Aproximación al nacionalismo español contemporáneo" .

Stvdia Historica. Historia Contemporánea .

12 .

University of Salamanca : 14– 15.

ISSN 0213-2087 .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

^ García-Sanjuán, Alejandro (2020). "Weaponizing Historical Knowledge: the Notion of Reconquista in Spanish Nationalism".

Imago Temporis. Medium Aevum . Lleida: Universitat de Lleida : 133.

doi : 10.21001/itma.2020.14.04 .

hdl : 10272/19498 .

ISSN 1888-3931 .

^ Schmidt-Nowara, Christopher (2004). " 'La España Ultramarina': Colonialism and Nation-Building in Nineteenth-Century Spain".

European History Quarterly .

34 (2): 199.

doi : 10.1177/0265691404042507 .

S2CID 145675694 .

^ a b Muro & Quiroga 2005 , pp. 17–18.

^ Núñez 2001 , p. 720.

^ Muro & Quiroga 2005 , p. 9.

^ Núñez 2001 , p. 719.

^ Muro, Diego; Quiroga, Alejandro (2005).

"Spanish nationalism. Ethnic or civic?" (PDF) .

Ethnicities .

5 (1).

SAGE Publications : 9– 10.

doi : 10.1177/1468796805049922 .

hdl : 2262/52563 .

ISSN 1468-7968 .

S2CID 144193279 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 .

^ Núñez, Xosé-Manoel (2001). "What is Spanish nationalism today? From legitimacy crisis to unfulfilled renovation (1975–2000)".

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

24 (5): 719– 752.

doi : 10.1080/01419870120063954 .

S2CID 143787176 .

^ Vasiliev, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich, Vasiliev (1952).

History of the Byzantine Empire, 324–1453 . Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

582 .

ISBN 978-0299809263 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Alister E. McGrath (2012).

Christian History: An Introduction . John Wiley & Sons. p. 270.

ISBN 978-1118337837 .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ Birgit Bock-Luna (2007).

The Past in Exile: Serbian Long-distance Nationalism and Identity in the Wake of the Third Balkan War . LIT Verlag Münster.

ISBN 978-3-8258-9752-9 .

^ Hajdarpasic, Edin (2015).

Whose Bosnia? Nationalism and Political Imagination in the Balkans, 1840–1914 . Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. pp.

1– 17, 90– 126.

ISBN 978-0801453717 .

^ Christopher Clark, The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914 (2012) ^ Sabrina P. Ramet, Nationalism and federalism in Yugoslavia, 1962–1991 (Indiana Univ Press, 1992).

^ Richard Blanke, Prussian Poland in the German Empire (1871–1900) (1981) ^ Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, Vol. 2: 1795 to the Present (2005).

^ Geoffrey A. Hosking and George Schöpflin (1997).

Myths and Nationhood . Routledge. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0415919746 .

^ Sharp, Tony (1977). "The Origins of the 'Teheran Formula' on Polish Frontiers".

Journal of Contemporary History .

12 (2): 381– 393.

doi : 10.1177/002200947701200209 .

JSTOR 260222 .

S2CID 153577101 .

^ Davies (2001).

Heart of Europe . OUP Oxford. pp.

286– 287.

ISBN 978-0191587719 .

^ David, Engel (2009).

Zionism . Pearson Longman Publishing Group.

^ Alroey, Gur (2011).

" "Zionism without Zion"?: Territorialist Ideology and the Zionist Movement, 1882–1956" .

Jewish Social Studies .

18 (1): 18– 24.

doi : 10.2979/jewisocistud.18.1.1 .

ISSN 1527-2028 .

S2CID 154121434 .

^ Rotem Kowner, ed., The impact of the Russo-Japanese war (Routledge, 2006).

^ Hans Kohn, Nationalism: Its Meaning and History (1955) p. 87.

^ Shakhar Rahav, The Rise of Political Intellectuals in Modern China: May Fourth Societies and the Roots of Mass-Party Politics (Oxford UP, 2015).

^ Patricia Buckley Ebrey , Cambridge Illustrated History of China (1996) p. 271.

^ Duara, Prasenjit (1995).

Rescuing History from the Nation . University of Chicago Press. p. 142.

doi : 10.7208/chicago/9780226167237.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-226-16722-0 .

^ Šebok, Filip (2023). "Historical Legacy". In Kironska, Kristina; Turscanyi, Richard Q. (eds.).

Contemporary China: a New Superpower?

.

Routledge . pp.

15– 28.

doi : 10.4324/9781003350064-3 .

ISBN 978-1-03-239508-1 .

^ a b Esherick, Joseph; Kayalı, Hasan; Van Young, Eric (2011).

Empire to nation : historical perspectives on the making of the modern world . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-7815-9 .

OCLC 1030355615 .

^ Alistair Horne, A savage war of peace: Algeria 1954–1962 (1977).

^ David Anderson, Histories of the hanged: The dirty war in Kenya and the end of empire (2005).

^ Gabriel Almond and James S. Coleman, The Politics of the Developing Areas (1971) ^ Festus Ugboaja Ohaegbulam, Nationalism in colonial and post-colonial Africa (University Press of America, 1977).

^ Thomas Hodgkin, Nationalism in Colonial Africa (1956) ^ Nancy L. Clark and William H. Worger, South Africa: The rise and fall of apartheid (Routledge, 2013).

^ a b c d e f Berg, Steven (1993). "Nationalism Redux: Through the Glass of the Post-Communist States Darkly".

Ethnic Conflicts WorldWide, Current History : 162– 166.

^ Barber, Benjamin (1992). "Jihad vs. McWorld: the two axial principles of our age—tribalism and globalism—clash at every point except one: they may both be threatening to democracy".

The Atlantic .

^ a b c Huntington, Samuel (1993). "The Clash of Civilizations".

Foreign Affairs .

72 (3): 22– 49.

doi : 10.2307/20045621 .

JSTOR 20045621 .

^ a b c d e f g Berg, Steven (2004). "Why Yugoslavia Fell Apart".

Current History .

92 (577): 357– 363.

doi : 10.1525/curh.1993.92.577.357 .

S2CID 151283265 .

^ Ramet, Sabrina (1996). "Eastern Europe's Painful Transition".

Current History .

95 (599): 97– 102.

doi : 10.1525/curh.1996.95.599.97 .

S2CID 249691639 .

^ McCartney, Paul T. (Fall 2004). "American Nationalism and U.S. Foreign Policy from September 11 to the Iraq War".

Political Science Quarterly .

119 (3): 399– 423.

doi : 10.2307/20202389 .

JSTOR 20202389 .

^ Postelnicescu, Claudia (12 May 2016).

"Europe's New Identity: The Refugee Crisis and the Rise of Nationalism" .

Europe's Journal of Psychology .

12 (2): 203– 209.

doi : 10.5964/ejop.v12i2.1191 .

PMC 4894286 .

PMID 27298631 .

^ Clark, Philip (12 November 2015).

"The New European Nationalism and the Migrant Crisis" .

Stanford Politics .

^ a b Arnold, Richard (30 May 2016).

"Surveys show Russian nationalism is on the rise. This explains a lot about the country's foreign and domestic politics" .

Washington Post .

^ "Why Spanish Nationalism Is on the Rise" .

Foreign Affairs . 5 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ " Madrid Unity Rally Mired by Fascist Salutes From Far-right Falange Party Members Archived 17 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine ".

Haaretz . 8 October 2017.

^ Koronaiou, Alexandra; Lagos, Evangelos; Sakellariou, Alexandros; Kymionis, Stelios; Chiotaki-Poulou, Irini (1 December 2015). "Golden Dawn, Austerity and Young People: The Rise of Fascist Extremism Among Young People in Contemporary Greek Society".

The Sociological Review .

63 (2_suppl): 231– 249.

doi : 10.1111/1467-954X.12270 .

S2CID 145077294 .

^ Arshakuni, Nini, ed. (June 2016).

"The Rise of the Russian Nationalism, the Secret of Putin's Survival, and the Return of Stalin" . Institute of Modern Russia.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 30 July 2017 .

^ Zamoyski, Adam (27 January 2016).

"The Problem With Poland's New Nationalism" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on 4 September 2017 . Retrieved 5 September 2017 .

^ "Why is Hungary turning to nationalism?" .

The Economist . 5 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2018 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ "Bulgaria's government will include far-right nationalist parties for the first time" .

Washington Post . 25 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2019 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ "Threat to collapse Fico coalition after journalist killing" .

EUobserver . 13 March 2018.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2018 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ "Latvia's nationalist party demands right for employees to use Latvian language" .

Xinhua News Agency . 14 November 2017. Archived from the original on 25 October 2018 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ "In Ukraine, nationalists gain influence – and scrutiny" .

Reuters . 18 March 2014.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2016 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ Burke, Jason (16 May 2014).

"Narendra Modi's landslide victory shatters Congress's grip on India" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ Iwanek, Krzysztof.

"Narendra Modi Wins Again – What Does That Mean for India?" .

thediplomat.com .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ "The Regional Reach of Buddhist Nationalism" .

U.S. News . 7 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ "Review: Myanmar's Enemy Within and the Making of Anti-Muslim Rage" .

Time . 12 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ Yoshio Sugimoto, ed. (2020).

An Introduction to Japanese Society .

Cambridge University Press . p. 242.

ISBN 9781108724746 .

... Nippon Kaigi Parts of the Japanese establishment have ties with a large far-right voluntary organization, Nippon Kaigi (Japan Conference), whose ranks include grassroots members across the nation as well as national and local ...

^ Michael W. Apple, ed. (2009).

Global Crises, Social Justice, and Education .

Routledge . p. 69.

ISBN 9781135172787 .

In 1997 nationalist intellectuals, politicians, and religious leaders formed the largest far-right advocacy group, Japan Conference (Nippon kaigi), formed as a result of the merger between the two ...

^ The Passenger, ed. (2020).

The Passenger: Japan . Europa Editions.

ISBN 9781609456429 .

Every year far-right nationalist groups – including Nippon Kaigi – private citizens and government officials visit the Yasukuni Shrine. Many wear uniforms or clothing linked to the Imperial Army and display the Japanese imperial flag.

^ "Japan emperor greets at celebration hosted by conservatives" .

ABC News . 8 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 9 November 2019 .

Abe's key ultra-conservative supporter, Nippon Kaigi, or Japan Conference, was among the organizers Saturday.

^ "Ultra-nationalist school linked to Japanese PM accused of hate speech" .

The Guardian . 8 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

Abe and Kagoike, who has indicated he will resign as principal, both belong to an ultra-conservative lobby group whose members include more than a dozen cabinet ministers.

^ "Tokyo's new governor defies more than glass ceiling" .

Deutsche Welle . 8 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 August 2016 .

In 2008, she made an unsuccessful run at the LDP's chairmanship. Following her defeat, she worked to build an internal party network and became involved in a revisionist group of lawmakers that serves as the mouthpiece of the ultraconservative Nippon Kaigi ("Japan Conference") movement.

^ a b Nippon Kaigi: Empire, Contradiction, and Japan’s Future Archived 12 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

Asia-Pacific Journal . Author – Sachie Mizohata. Published 1 November 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2020.

^ Brooks, Libby (9 May 2021).

"Sturgeon says second independence vote 'a matter of when, not if' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 June 2021 .

^ Barnett, Anthony (2017).

The Lure of Greatness: England's Brexit and America's Trump . Random House.

ISBN 978-1783524549 .

^ "Trump: 'I'm a nationalist' " .

Politico . 22 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2018 .

^ Gearan, Anne (13 November 2018).

"Trump refuses to acknowledge the fraught history of nationalism" .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ Teehankee, Julio C. (2016).

"Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs" .

Journal of Current Southeast Asian Affairs . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 30 July 2017 .

^ Kingsley, Patrick (17 April 2017).

"In Supporting Erdogan, Turks Cite Economic and Religious Gains" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2017 . Retrieved 30 July 2017 .

^ "European Leaders Say Vote Shows 'Deeply Divided' Turkey" .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 June 2022 .

^ "Trump Called Erdoğan to Congratulate Him on Referendum Results" .

Haaretz . 18 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2017 . Retrieved 18 April 2017 .

^ Miller, Max (31 March 2016).

"The Nature of the State" .

Oxford Bibliographies .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 .

^ Weber, Max (1994).

Weber: Political Writings . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

309– 331.

^ a b Anderson, Benedict (2006).

Imagined Communities: Reflections on the origins and spread of nationalism . Verso Books. pp.

48– 56.

^ Etherington, John (2007).

"Nationalism, Exclusion and Violence: A Territorial Approach" .

Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism .

7 (3): 24– 44.

doi : 10.1111/j.1754-9469.2007.tb00160.x . Retrieved 20 February 2024 .

p.25 ^ a b Herbst, Jeffrey (Spring 1990). "War and the State in Africa".

International Security .

14 (4): 117– 139.

doi : 10.2307/2538753 .

JSTOR 2538753 .

S2CID 153804691 .

^ Posen, Barry (Fall 1993). "Nationalism, the Mass Army, and Military Power".

International Security .

18 (2): 80– 124.

doi : 10.2307/2539098 .

JSTOR 2539098 .

S2CID 154935234 .

^ Lawrence, Adria K. (2013).

Imperial Rule and the Politics of Nationalism: Anti-Colonial Protest in the French Empire . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107037090 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 February 2022 .

^ Hechter, Michael (2000).

Containing Nationalism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198297420 .

^ a b c Motyl 2001 , pp. 508–509.

^ a b c d e Motyl 2001 , p. 510.

^ a b Motyl 2001 , pp. 272–273.

^ Goetze, David (1998). "Evolution, Mobility, and Ethnic Group Formation".

Politics and the Life Sciences .

17 (1): 59– 71.

doi : 10.1017/S0730938400025363 .

JSTOR 4236409 .

S2CID 151531605 .

^ Kevin N. Laland; Gillian R. Brown (2011).

Sense and Nonsense: Evolutionary Perspectives on Human Behaviour . Oxford UP. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0199586967 .

^ Motyl 2001 , p. 273.

^ Motyl 2001 , pp. 495–496.

^ Motyl 2001 , p. 268.

^ Motyl 2001 , p. 271.

^ a b Motyl 2001 , p. 272.

^ Robert Hislope "From Ontology to Analogy: Evolutionary Theories and the Explanation of Ethnic Politics: in Patrick James and David Goetze ed.

Evolutionary Theory and Ethnic Conflict (2000) p. 174.

^ G.P. Gooch (1920).

Nationalism . Swarthmore Press Limited. p.

5 .

^ K. Marx, F. Engels.

Manifesto of the Communist Party .

^ Smith, Anthony D. (March 1983). "Nationalism and Classical Social Theory".

The British Journal of Sociology .

34 (1): 19– 38.

doi : 10.2307/590606 .

JSTOR 590606 .

^ Stalin, Joseph.

"Marxism and the National Question" .

marxists.org . Marxists Internet Archive.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 10 May 2016 .

^ Wirth, Louis (1 May 1936). "Types of Nationalism".

American Journal of Sociology .

41 (6): 723– 737.

doi : 10.1086/217296 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

S2CID 144187204 .

^ Kohn, Hans (2005) [1944].

The Idea of Nationalism: A Study of Its Origins and Background (reprint). New York: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1412804769 .

^ Spencer, Philip; Wollman, Howard (1 October 1998). "Good and bad nationalisms: A critique of dualism".

Journal of Political Ideologies .

3 (3): 255– 274.

doi : 10.1080/13569319808420780 .

ISSN 1356-9317 .

S2CID 145053698 .

^ Yack, Bernard (1 March 1996). "The myth of the civic nation".

Critical Review .

10 (2): 193– 211.

doi : 10.1080/08913819608443417 .

ISSN 0891-3811 .

^ Lawrence, Adria (2013).

Imperial rule and the politics of nationalism : anti-colonial protest in the French empire . New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781107640757 .

^ Tudor, Maya Jessica (2013).

The promise of power : the origins of democracy in India and autocracy in Pakistan . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781139519076 .

^ Gellner, Ernest (1997).

Nationalism . Washington Square, N.Y.: New York University Press.

ISBN 0814731139 .

OCLC 37353976 .

^ Said, Edward W. (1978).

Orientalism (First ed.). New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 0394428145 .

OCLC 4004102 .

^ Grant, Moyra.

"Politics Review" (PDF) . Politics Review . Retrieved 16 April 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Bennema, Cornelis; Bhakiaraj, Paul Joshua (2011).

Indian and Christian: Changing Identities in Modern India . SAIACS Press & Oxford House Research. p. 157.

ISBN 978-8187712268 .

Both these approaches are shown to be within the framework of 'composite nationalism', where Indian Christians maintained their communal distinctiveness while aspiring for national integration.

^ Chitkara, M. G. (1998).

Converts Do Not Make a Nation . APH Publishing. p. 240.

ISBN 9788170249825 .

^ Mbembe, Achille (2001).

On the postcolony . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0520917538 .

OCLC 49570017 .

^ a b Nash, Kate (2001).

The Blackwell companion to political sociology . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 391.

ISBN 978-0631210504 .

^ Tamir, Yael. 1993.

Liberal Nationalism.

Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691078939 ^ Kymlicka 1995 , p. 200.

^ Miller 1995 , pp. 188–189 ^ Renan, Ernest. 1882.

"Qu'est-ce qu'une nation?" Archived 28 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Mill, John Stuart. 1861.

Considerations on Representative Government.

^ Kymlicka 1995 , p. 34.

^ For criticism, see: Patten, Alan (1999). "The Autonomy Argument for Liberal Nationalism".

Nations and Nationalism .

5 (1): 1– 17.

doi : 10.1111/j.1354-5078.1999.00001.x .

^ Miller 1995 , p. 136 ^ For criticism, see: Abizadeh, Arash (2002).

"Does Liberal Democracy Presuppose a Cultural Nation? Four Arguments" .

American Political Science Review .

96 (3): 495– 509.

doi : 10.1017/s000305540200028x .

S2CID 145715867 .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2016 . Retrieved 8 July 2015 .

; Abizadeh, Arash (2004).

"Liberal Nationalist versus Postnational Social Integration" .

Nations and Nationalism .

10 (3): 231– 250.

doi : 10.1111/j.1354-5078.2004.00165.x .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2016 . Retrieved 8 July 2015 .

^ Singley, Carol J. (2003). "Race, Culture, Nation: Edith Wharton and Ernest Renan".

Twentieth Century Literature .

49 (1): 32– 45.

doi : 10.2307/3176007 .

JSTOR 3176007 .

^ Joshua Simon, The Ideology of Creole Revolution: Imperialism and Independence in American and Latin American Political Thought (2017) pp 1-2.

^ D. A. Brading, The First America: The Spanish Monarchy, Creole Patriots and the Liberal State 1492–1866 (1991) ^ "The Website of Political Research Associates" . PublicEye.org.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 May 2015 .

^ Muller, Jerry Z. "Us and Them." Current Issue 501 Mar/Apr 2008 9–14 ^ Timothy Baycroft, Nationalism in Europe 1789–1945 (1998) p. 56.

^ Baycroft, Nationalism in Europe 1789–1945 (1998) p. 58.

^ Gilpin, Robert (1987).

The Political Economy of International Relations . Princeton University Press. pp.

31– 34.

ISBN 978-0691022628 .

Archived from the original on 13 June 2021 . Retrieved 5 June 2021 .

^ Helleiner, Eric (2021).

"The Diversity of Economic Nationalism" .

New Political Economy .

26 (2): 229– 238.

doi : 10.1080/13563467.2020.1841137 .

ISSN 1356-3467 .

^ a b c d e f Banerjee, Sikata (2003). "Gender and nationalism: the masculinization of hinduism and female political participation in india".

Women's Studies International Forum .

26 (2): 167– 179.

doi : 10.1016/s0277-5395(03)00019-0 .

^ a b c d e Mackay, Eva (2000).

"Death by Landscape: Race, Nature and Gender in the Canadian Nationalist Mythology" .

Canadian Woman Studies .

20 : 125– 130.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2018 . Retrieved 17 November 2017 – via Journals.Yorku.

^ Peterson, Spike V. (1998).

"Gendered nationalism: Reproducing "Us" versus "Them" " . In Turpin, Jennifer; Lorentzen, Lois Ann (eds.).

The Woman and War Reader . New York: New York University Press. pp.

41–49 .

ISBN 978-0814751459 .

^ Mayer, Tamar (2000).

Gender Ironies of Nationalism . Psychology Press.

^ Robidoux, Michael A. (2002). "Imagining a Canadian Identity through Sport: A Historical Interpretation of Lacrosse and Hockey".

The Journal of American Folklore .

115 (456): 209– 225.

doi : 10.2307/4129220 .

JSTOR 4129220 .

^ Said, Edward (1979).

Orientalism . New York: Vintage Books. pp.

1– 368.

ISBN 978-0394740676 .

^ a b Waetjen, Thembisa (2001). "The Limits of Gender Rhetoric for Nationalism: A Case Study from Southern Africa".

Theory and Society .

30 (1): 121– 152.

doi : 10.1023/a:1011099627847 .

JSTOR 658064 .

S2CID 142868365 .

^ Alison, Miranda (2007). "Wartime Sexual Violence: Women's Human Rights and Questions of Masculinity".

Review of International Studies .

33 (1): 75– 90.

doi : 10.1017/s0260210507007310 .

JSTOR 20097951 .

S2CID 2332633 .

^ Brown, David (2003).

Contemporary Nationalism . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1134695416 .

^ Integral nationalism is one of five types of nationalism defined by Carlton Hayes in his 1928 book The Historical Evolution of Modern Nationalism.

^ Ivo Banac, The National Question in Yugoslavia (Cornell University Press, 1984).

^ Schwarzmantel, J. J (2006).

"Class and Nation: Problems of Socialist Nationalism" .

Political Studies .

35 (2): 239– 255.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9248.1987.tb01886.x .

S2CID 144474775 . Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 October 2009 .

^ Robert Zuzowski, "The Left and Nationalism in Eastern Europe" East European Quarterly , 41#4 (2008) online Archived 23 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Alexander J. Motyl, ed., Encyclopedia of Nationalism (2 vol. 2000).

^ a b c d e f Macklin, Graham D. (September 2005).

"Co-opting the counter culture: Troy Southgate and the National Revolutionary Faction" .

Patterns of Prejudice .

39 (3): 301– 326.

doi : 10.1080/00313220500198292 .

S2CID 144248307 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g Sunshine, Spencer (Winter 2008).

"Rebranding Fascism: National-Anarchists" .

The Public Eye .

23 (4): 1– 12.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2009 . Retrieved 12 November 2009 .

^ a b c d e f g h Sanchez, Casey (Summer 2009).

" 'National Anarchism': California racists claim they're Anarchists" .

Intelligence Report .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2016 . Retrieved 2 December 2009 .

^ a b c Griffin, Roger (March 2003). "From slime mould to rhizome: an introduction to the groupuscular right".

Patterns of Prejudice .

37 (1): 27– 63.

doi : 10.1080/0031322022000054321 .

S2CID 143709925 .

^ a b Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas (2003).

Black Sun: Aryan Cults, Esoteric Nazism and the Politics of Identity . New York: New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0814731550 .

^ a b Sykes, Alan (2005).

The Radical Right in Britain: Social Imperialism to the BNP (British History in Perspective) . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0333599235 .

^ Lyons, Matthew N. (Summer 2011).

"Rising Above the Herd: Keith Preston's Authoritarian Anti-Statism" .

New Politics .

7 (3).

Archived from the original on 27 July 2019 . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

^ Dindar, Oezguer (2009).

American Nativism and Its Representation in the Film "L. A. Crash" . Munich, Germany: GRIN Verlag. p. 4.

ISBN 978-3640704453 .

^ Taub, Amanda (21 November 2016).

"White Nationalism, Explained" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2023 . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Silverstein, Jason (11 January 2015).

"Billboard from 'white genocide' segregation group goes up along highway near Birmingham, Ala" .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Smith, Anthony D. 1986. The Ethnic Origins of Nations London: Basil Blackwell. pp. 6–18.

ISBN 0631152059 .

^ Middle East and North Africa: Challenge to Western Security by Peter Duignan and L.H. Gann, Hoover Institution Press , 1981, ISBN 978-0817973926 p. 22 ^ Leoussi 2001 , p. 62.

^ Grant Jarvie and Wray Vamplew, Sport, nationalism and cultural identity (1993).

^ Andrew Jennings, The Dirty Game: Uncovering the Scandal at FIFA (2015).

^ Jeff Kingston, Nationalism in Asia: A History Since 1945 (2016).

^ H. Fernández L’Hoeste et al.

Sports and Nationalism in Latin/o America (2015).

^ Alan Bairner, Sport, nationalism, and globalization: European and North American perspectives (2001).

^ Gwang Ok, Transformation of Modern Korean Sport: Imperialism, Nationalism, Globalization (2007).

^ P. McDevitt, May the Best Man Win: Sport, Masculinity, and Nationalism in Great Britain and the Empire, 1880–1935 (2008).

^ Harold Perkin , "Teaching the nations how to play: sport and society in the British empire and Commonwealth." International Journal of the History of Sport 6#2 (1989): 145–155.

^ Driss Abbassi, "Le sport dans l'empire français: un instrument de domination?." Outre-mers 96.364 (2009): 5–15.

online Archived 7 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Heywood, Andrew (1999).

Political Theory: An Introduction (2nd ed.). London: Macmillan Press. pp.

97– 98.

ISBN 978-0333760918 .

^ Grayling, A.C. (2001).

The Meaning of Things: Applying Philosophy to Life . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. pp.

78– 79.

ISBN 978-0297607588 .

^ Heywood, Andrew (2000).

Key Concepts in Politics . London: Macmillan Press. p. 256.

ISBN 978-0333770955 .

^ World Book Encyclopedia , 2018 ed., s.v. "Muslims" ^ Cliff, Tony (1959).

"Rosa Luxemburg and the national question" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2008 .

^ a b George Orwell, Notes on Nationalism Archived 1 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine , orwell.ru Archived 1 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Lang, Timothy (2002). "Lord Acton and 'the Insanity of Nationality' ".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

63 (1): 129– 149.

doi : 10.2307/3654261 .

JSTOR 3654261 .

^ Motyl 1:298 ^ Russell Speaks His Mind , 1960. Fletcher and son Ltd., Norwich, United Kingdom ^ Russell, Bertrand (1915).

"The ethics of war" .

Fair Use Repository .

International Journal of Ethics .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2018 .

^ Viereck, George Sylvester (26 October 1929).

"What Life Means to Einstein" (PDF) .

The Saturday Evening Post . p. 117.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2019 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ Nationalism is Glorified Tribalism Krishnamurti .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2022 . Retrieved 14 October 2022 .

^ Esfandiary, F. M. (1973).

Up-wingers . New York: John Day Co.

ISBN 0-381-98243-2 .

OCLC 600299 .

^ Newton Lee, ed. (2019).

The transhumanism handbook . Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature.

ISBN 978-3-030-16920-6 .

OCLC 1107699751 .

References [ edit ] Library resources about Nationalism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Anderson, Benedict (1983).

Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism . London: Verso.

ISBN 978-0860910596 .

Billig, Michael (1995).

Banal Nationalism . London: Sage.

ISBN 978-0803975255 .

Delanty, Gerard; Kumar, Krishan , eds. (2006).

The Sage Handbook of Nations and Nationalism . London: Sage Publications.

ISBN 978-1412901017 .

Hayes, Carlton J.

The Historical Evolution of Modern Nationalism (1928) the first major scholarly survey.

Hobsbawm, Eric J.

(1992).

Nations and Nationalism Since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521439619 .

Hobsbawm, E.; Ranger, T. (1983).

The Invention of Tradition . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

James, Paul (1996).

Nation Formation: Towards a Theory of Abstract Community . London: Sage Publications.

ISBN 978-0761950721 .

James, Paul (2006).

Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In . London: Sage Publications.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2020 . Retrieved 2 December 2017 .

Kohn, Hans.

The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in Its Origins and Background (1944; 2nd ed. 2005 with introduction by Craig Calhoun). 735 pp; an often-cited classic Kymlicka, Will (1995).

Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal Theory of Minority Rights . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198279495 .

Leoussi, Athena S., ed. (2001).

Encyclopedia of Nationalism . New Brunswick, N.J: Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-0765800022 .

Miller, David (1995).

On Nationality . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198280477 .

Motyl, Alexander , ed. (2001).

Encyclopedia of Nationalism . San Diego: Academic Press 2 vol.

ISBN 978-0122272301 .

Mylonas, Harris ; Tudor, Maya (2023).

Varieties of Nationalism: Communities, Narratives, Identities . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108973298 .

ISBN 9781108973298 .

S2CID 259646325 .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

Mylonas, Harris ; Tudor, Maya (2021). " Nationalism: What We Know and What We Still Need to Know Archived 3 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine ".

Annual Review of Political Science .

24 (1): 109–132.

Snyder, Louis L.

(1990).

Encyclopedia of Nationalism . New York: Paragon House.

ISBN 978-1557781673 .

Further reading [ edit ] Baycroft, Timothy.

Nationalism in Europe 1789–1945 (1998), textbook; 104 pp.

Breuilly, John (1994).

Nationalism and the State (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226074146 .

Breuilly, John, ed.

The Oxford handbook of the history of nationalism (Oxford UP, 2013).

Brubaker, Rogers (1996).

Nationalism Reframed: Nationhood and the National Question in the New Europe . Cambridge UP.

ISBN 978-0521572248 .

Day, Graham (2004).

Theorizing Nationalism . Palgrave.

ISBN 978-0333962657 .

Gellner, Ernest.

Nations and Nationalism (2nd ed. 2009).

Gerrits, Nationalism in Europe since 1945 (2015).

Greenfeld, Liah (1992).

Nationalism: Five Roads to Modernity . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674603189 .

Greenfeld, Liah (2012). "Nationalism".

The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Globalization .

doi : 10.1002/9780470670590.wbeog415 .

ISBN 9780470670590 .

Guibernau, Montserrat 2007 ( The Identity of Nations ) Polity Press, Cambridge UK Guibernau, Montserrat 2013 ( Belonging: solidarity and division in modern societies ) Polity Press, Cambridge Jusdanis, Gregory (2001).

The Necessary Nation . Princeton UP.

ISBN 978-0691070292 .

Kingston, Jeff.

Nationalism in Asia: A History Since 1945 (2016).

Kohn, Hans.

Nationalism: Its Meaning and History (1955) 192 pp, with primary sources online Archived 23 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine Kramer, Lloyd.

Nationalism in Europe and America: Politics, Cultures, and Identities since 1775 (2011).

excerpt Archived 26 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine Kuznicki, Jason (2008).

"Nationalism" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

347– 349.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n213 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

Malesevic, Sinisa (2006).

Identity As Ideology: Understanding Ethnicity and Nationalism . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1403987860 .

Malesevic, Sinisa (2013).

Nation-States and Nationalisms:Organization, Ideology and Solidarity . Polity.

ISBN 978-0745653396 .

Malesevic, Sinisa (2019).

Grounded Nationalisms . Cambridge University Press.

Miscevic, Nenad (1 June 2010).

"Nationalism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2018 . Retrieved 31 May 2005 .

"Nations and Nationalism" .

Harvard Asia Pacific Review .

11 (1). Spring 2010.

ISSN 1522-1113 .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2014 . Retrieved 14 January 2011 .

Özkirimli, Umut (2010).

Theories of Nationalism: A Critical Introduction (2nd ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0230577329 .

Smith, Anthony D.

(1981).

The Ethnic Revival in the Modern World . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521232678 .

Smith, Anthony D.

(1995).

Nations and Nationalism in a Global Era . Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0745610191 .

Smith, Anthony D.

(2000).

The Nation in History: Historiographical Debates about Ethnicity and Nationalism . Hanover: University Press of New England.

ISBN 978-158465-0409 .

Smith, Anthony D.

(2010) [2001].

Nationalism: Theory, Ideology, History (2. ed.). Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0745651279 .

Smith, Anthony D.

(2009).

Ethno-symbolism and Nationalism: A Cultural Approach . London and New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1135999483 .

Smith, Anthony D.

(2013).

The Nation Made Real: Art and National Identity in Western Europe, 1600–1850 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199662975 .

Spira, Thomas , ed. (1999).

Nationalism and Ethnicity Terminologies: An Encyclopedic Dictionary and Research Guide . Gulf Breeze, FL: Academic International Press.

ISBN 978-0875692050 . Archived from the original on 16 March 2009 . Retrieved 28 July 2008 .

White, Philip L.

; White, Michael Lee (2008).

"Nationality: The History of a Social Phenomenon" .

Nationality in World History .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2013 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Nationalism at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity "Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions" Archived 21 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine , comprehensive collection of new articles by modern scholars Nationalism Archived 15 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine – entry at Encyclopædia Britannica "Nationalism" .

Internet Modern History Sourcebook .

Fordham University . Archived from the original on 28 October 2014 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

"The Nationalism Project" .

Association for Research on Ethnicity and Nationalism in the Americas .

University of South Carolina . Archived from the original on 2 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 April 2012 .

v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fxnqf
Cached time: 20250817071840
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.649 seconds
Real time usage: 2.971 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19748/1000000
Revision size: 201117/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 600353/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18173/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 60/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 920819/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.665/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26802717/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2404.095      1 -total
 51.22% 1231.458      1 Template:Reflist
 26.02%  625.429    113 Template:Cite_book
 13.11%  315.096     57 Template:Cite_journal
  7.26%  174.519     32 Template:Cite_web
  6.98%  167.783     27 Template:Sfn
  3.89%   93.469      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.77%   90.720     20 Template:Cite_news
  3.73%   89.758      4 Template:Lang
  3.16%   76.054      1 Template:Nationalism_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21748:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817071840 and revision id 1306345314. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nationalism&oldid=1306345314 " Categories : Nationalism Political ideologies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Use Oxford spelling from April 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2024 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from October 2022 Articles that may contain original research from March 2023 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 07:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nationalism 146 languages Add topic

