Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origin and development 2 Research and studies 3 Alternative explanations Toggle Alternative explanations subsection 3.1 Slips of the tongue 3.2 Human-computer interaction 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Freudian slip 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in classical psychoanalysis Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e In psychoanalysis , a Freudian slip , also called parapraxis , is an error in speech , memory , or physical action that occurs due to the interference of an unconscious subdued wish or internal train of thought. Classical examples involve slips of the tongue , but psychoanalytic theory also embraces misreadings, mishearings, mistypings, temporary forgettings, and the mislaying and losing of objects.

History [ edit ] Origin and development [ edit ] The Freudian slip is named after Sigmund Freud , who, in his 1901 book The Psychopathology of Everyday Life , [ 1 ] described and analyzed a large number of seemingly trivial, even bizarre, or nonsensical errors and slips, most notably the Signorelli parapraxis .

Freud himself referred to these slips as Fehlleistungen [ 1 ] (meaning "faulty functions", [ 1 ] "faulty actions", or "misperformances" in German ). His English translator used the Greek term parapraxes (plural of parapraxis ; from Greek παρά (para) ' another ' and πρᾶξις (praxis) ' action ' ) and coined the term "symptomatic action".

[ citation needed ] Freud's process of psychoanalysis [ 2 ] is often described as being lengthy and complex, as was the case with many of the dreams in his 1899 book The Interpretation of Dreams . An obstacle facing the non-German-speaking reader is that Freud's emphasis on "slips of the tongue" in The Interpretation of Dreams led to the inclusion of a much colloquial and informal material that is extremely resistant to translations.

[ 3 ] As in the study of dreams, Freud discussed so-called "symptomatic actions" with the intention of demonstrating the existence of unconscious mental processes in healthy people: In the same way that psycho-analysis makes use of dream interpretation, it also profits by the study of the numerous little slips and mistakes which people make—symptomatic actions, as they are called ... I have pointed out that these phenomena are not accidental, that they require more than physiological explanations, that they have a meaning and can be interpreted, and that one is justified in inferring from them the presence of restrained or repressed impulses and intentions.

— Freud, An Autobiographical Study (1925) Research and studies [ edit ] A 1979 study investigated Freudian slips by having male test participants who had been primed with a stimulus, either related to sex or an electric shock, to read a list of words that had meaningful spoonerisms related to both stimuli. Primed participants had a far higher rate of spoonerism related to the specific stimulus.

[ 4 ] This aligns with the psychoanalytic theory that unconscious desires or fears influence speech, as demonstrated in Michael Fontaine's analysis of Plautus's Menaechmi . Fontaine explores how linguistic missteps, such as spoonerisms, can reveal latent desires and thoughts. Fontaine argues that in Plautus's plays, seemingly accidental slips of the tongue often carry significant psychological and thematic weight, revealing characters' unconscious motivations (Fontaine, 2007).

[ 5 ] Just as the test subjects in the 1979 study were more likely to produce slips related to their primed stimuli, characters in Plautus's comedies reveal hidden truths through their verbal missteps, offering a comedic yet insightful view of the human psyche.

Alternative explanations [ edit ] Main article: Speech error In contrast to psychoanalytic theorists, cognitive psychologists say that linguistic slips can represent a sequencing conflict in grammar production. From this perspective, slips may be due to cognitive underspecification that can take a variety of forms, such as inattention, incomplete sense data, or insufficient knowledge.

[ 6 ] Slips may also be due to the existence of some locally appropriate response pattern that is strongly primed by its prior usage, recent activation, or emotional change, or by the situation calling conditions.

[ 7 ] Some sentences are susceptible to the process of banalisation , the replacement of archaic or unusual expressions with more commonly used forms. In other words, some slips may simply be due to strong habit substitution.

[ 7 ] Slips of the tongue [ edit ] In general use, the term 'Freudian slip' has been debased to refer to any accidental slips of the tongue .

[ 8 ] Thus, many examples are found in explanations and dictionaries that do not strictly fit the psychoanalytic definition.

For example: She: 'What would you like—bread and butter, or cake?' He: 'Bed and butter.' [ 8 ] In the above, the man may be presumed to have a sexual feeling or intention that he wished to leave unexpressed, not a sexual feeling or intention that was dynamically repressed. His sexual intention was therefore secret , rather than subconscious , and any 'parapraxis' would inhere in the idea that he unconsciously wished to express that intention , rather than in the sexual connotation of the substitution. Freudians might point out, however, that this is simply a description of what Freud and Breuer termed the preconscious , which Freud defined as thoughts that are not presently conscious but can become conscious without meeting any resistance.

[ 9 ] In Freud's theory, he allows parapraxes to be generated in the preconscious, [ 10 ] so he would allow for thoughts that one tries to put outside of consciousness to have effects on conscious actions.

Human-computer interaction [ edit ] Beyond slips of the tongue, these accidental human errors also commonly occur in the realm of human-computer interaction . In the context of interaction design , slips refer to an incorrect action that is taken with the correct intention.

[ 11 ] As opposed to mistakes, which refer to an incorrect action due to an incorrect intention, slips result from automatic behaviors that are triggered by external factors, distracting the user from carrying out their intended goal. There are many different types of slips in interaction design, including capture errors, description similarity slips, data-driven errors, associative activation, loss of activation, and mode errors.

Capture errors occur when a familiar behavior takes over a less frequently occurring behavior.

[ 12 ] An example of a capture error would be driving to the office on a Saturday when the intention was to go to the grocery store.

Description similarity slips occur when an action is taken upon an item that is similar to the one you intended.

[ 13 ] For example, flipping the switch for the bathroom vent fan instead of the light switch to turn on the bathroom light would be a description similarity slip.

Data-driven errors occur in the arrival of new sensory information that triggers an automatic response, such as dialing the hotel concierge to reserve a particular room and dialing the room number instead.

[ 14 ] Associative activation errors are caused by an internal correlation of two actions.

[ 14 ] For example, associating the phone ringing with someone knocking on the door and saying "come in" as a response would represent a type of associative activation error. Associative activation errors are also considered accidental slips of the tongue.

Loss of activation is the error of executing an action but forgetting the goal behind the intended action.

[ 14 ] A common example of a loss of activation error is walking into a room and forgetting the purpose of walking into the room.

Lastly, mode errors occur when the input for an action is the same for different modes of operation, but the output of that action varies according to the selected mode.

[ 14 ] These errors could easily occur with the gear shift control in cars, since the action of stepping on the gas pedal to execute the action is the same for all gears, but the direction in which the car moves depends on the selected gear. This could lead to detrimental consequences if a user were accidentally in reverse mode but intended to be in drive mode.

See also [ edit ] Bushism Cognition Eggcorn Lapsus Malapropism Metathesis Non sequitur Pun Tip of the tongue References [ edit ] ^ a b c Laplanche, Jean ; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (1988) [1973].

"Parapraxis (pp. 300–1)" .

The Language of Psycho-analysis (reprint, revised ed.). London: Karnac Books.

ISBN 978-1-781-81026-2 .

^ Berg, Henk de.

"The Birth of Psychoanalysis" Freud's Theory and Its Use in Literary and Cultural Studies: An Introduction . NED-New edition, Boydell & Brewer, 2003, pp. 1–16.

^ "Translation".

Concise Oxford Companion to the English Language – Oxford Reference . Oxford University Press. January 2003.

ISBN 978-0-19-280061-9 .

Archived from the original on 2017-08-12.

^ Motley, Michael T.; Baars, Bernard J. (1979). "Effects of Cognitive Set Upon Laboratory Induced Verbal (Freudian) Slips".

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research .

22 (3). American Speech Language Hearing Association: 421– 432.

doi : 10.1044/jshr.2203.421 .

ISSN 1092-4388 .

PMID 502504 .

^ Fontaine, Michael.

"Freudian Slips in Plautus: Two Case Studies" The American Journal of Philology , vol. 128, no. 2, 2007, pp. 209–37.

^ Motley, Michael T.

"Slips of the Tongue" Scientific American , vol. 253, no. 3, 1985, pp. 116–27.

^ a b "Language and Communication", B. MacMahon 1995, p. 15, 4, 289–328 ^ a b "Concise Oxford Companion to the English Language".

Concise Oxford Companion to the English Language – Oxford Reference . Oxford University Press. January 2003.

ISBN 978-0-19-280061-9 .

^ Sigmund Freud, On Metapsychology in Volume XIV of The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud p. 173 ^ Sigmund Freud, The Psychopathology of Everyday Life in Volume VI of The Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud p. 209-210 ^ Human error (slips and mistakes) . 25 June 2023.

^ "What are Capture Errors?" .

The Interaction Design Foundation . Retrieved 2021-12-13 .

^ "Preventing User Errors" .

Insight Chaos . 2015-05-08 . Retrieved 2021-12-13 .

^ a b c d "Economic Analysis" .

www.mistakeproofing.com . Retrieved 2021-12-13 .

Sources [ edit ] Baars, B. J.

et al.

(1992). "Some caveats on testing the Freudian Slip Hypothesis: Problems in Systematic Replication".

Experimental Slips and Human Error: Exploring the Architecture of Volition , pp. 289-313.

Freud, Sigmund. (1991 [1915]).

Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis . Penguin Books Ltd; New Ed edition, pp. 50–108.

Jacoby L. L., & Kelley, C. M. (1992). "A process-dissociation framework for investigating unconscious influences: Freudian slips, projective tests, subliminal perception and signal detection theory".

Current Directions in Psychological Science , 1, 174–179.

Motley, M. T. (1985). "Slips of the tongue".

Scientific American , 253, 116–127.

Smith, D. J.

Speech Errors, Speech Production Models, and Speech Pathology (2003) External links [ edit ] Der Mensch determiniert durch unbewusste Motivierung. Erläutert in der Psychopathologie des Alltags von S. Freud. Erläuterte kritische Zusammenfassung der Psychopathologie mit Erläuterung Freud'scher Versprecher (German) Freudian Slips – Explains what they are and offers examples of slips approached through psychoanalytic means.

v t e Sigmund Freud Books On Aphasia (1891) Studies on Hysteria (1895) The Interpretation of Dreams (including On Dreams ) (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) Totem and Taboo (1913) Introduction to Psychoanalysis (1916–17) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1917) Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921) The Ego and the Id (1923) The Question of Lay Analysis (1926) The Future of an Illusion (1927) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) Moses and Monotheism (1939) Essays " The Aetiology of Hysteria " (1896) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Delusion and Dream in Jensen's Gradiva (1907) Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming (1908) Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood (1910) On Narcissism (1914) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1914) Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work (1915) Thoughts for the Times on War and Death (1916) Mourning and Melancholia (1918) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) Medusa's Head (1922) Dostoevsky and Parricide (1928) Case studies "Dora" (Ida Bauer) Emma Eckstein Herbert Graf ("Little Hans") Irma's injection "Anna O." ( Bertha Pappenheim ) "Rat Man" Sergei Pankejeff ("Wolfman") Daniel Paul Schreber Original concepts Psychoanalysis Id, ego and superego Libido Preconscious Ego ideal censorship Free association Transference Psychosexual development Oral stage Anal stage Phallic stage Latency stage Genital stage Oedipus complex Father complex Deferred obedience Reality principle Seduction theory Related Bibliography complete works Archives Vienna home and museum London home and museum 1971 statue Interment Freudian slip Humor Inner circle Neo-Freudianism Views on homosexuality Religious views Cultural depictions Freud: The Secret Passion (1962 film) The Visitor (1993 play) Mahler on the Couch (2010 film) A Dangerous Method (2011 film) Freud (2020 TV series) Freud's Last Session (2023 film) Family Martha Bernays (wife) Anna Freud (daughter) Ernst L. Freud (son) Clement Freud (grandson) Lucian Freud (grandson) Walter Freud (grandson) Amalia Freud (mother) Jacob Freud (father) Edward Bernay (nephew) Jofi (dog) Prizes Sigmund Freud Prize v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freudian_slip&oldid=1304927921 " Categories : English-language idioms Speech error Freudian psychology Popular psychology Psychoanalytic terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 01:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freudian slip 24 languages Add topic

