Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Creation 1.2 List of incorporated agencies 1.3 Changes under Secretary Chertoff 1.4 First Trump administration 1.5 Biden administration 2 Function 3 Organizational structure Toggle Organizational structure subsection 3.1 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 3.1.1 Executives 3.1.2 Subordinate components 3.2 U.S. Coast Guard 3.2.1 Executives 3.2.2 Subordinate components 3.3 U.S. Customs and Border Protection 3.3.1 Executives 3.3.2 Subordinate components 3.4 U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency 3.4.1 Executives 3.4.2 Subordinate components 3.5 U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency 3.5.1 Executives 3.5.2 Subordinate components 3.6 U.S. Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers 3.6.1 Executives 3.6.2 Subordinate components 3.7 U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 3.7.1 Executives 3.7.2 Subordinate components 3.8 U.S. Secret Service 3.8.1 Executives 3.8.2 Subordinate components 3.9 U.S. Transportation Security Administration 3.9.1 Executives 3.9.2 Subordinate components 3.10 DHS Management Directorate 3.10.1 Subordinate components 3.11 DHS Science and Technology Directorate 3.11.1 Subordinate components 3.12 DHS Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office 3.12.1 Executives 3.12.2 Subordinate components 3.13 DHS Office of Intelligence and Analysis 3.13.1 Executives 3.13.2 Subordinate components 3.14 DHS Office of Homeland Security Situational Awareness 3.14.1 Executives 3.14.2 Subordinate components 3.15 DHS Office of Health Security 3.15.1 Executives 3.15.2 Subordinate components 3.16 DHS Office of Inspector General 3.16.1 Executives 3.16.2 Subordinate components 3.17 DHS Office of the Secretary 3.17.1 Executives 3.17.2 Subordinate components 3.18 DHS Advisory Panels 4 National Terrorism Advisory System 5 Seal 6 Headquarters 7 Disaster preparedness and response Toggle Disaster preparedness and response subsection 7.1 Congressional budgeting effects 7.2 Ready.gov 7.3 National Incident Management System 7.4 National Response Framework 7.5 Surge Capacity Force 8 Cyber-security 9 Secretaries 10 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 10.1 Excess, waste, and ineffectiveness 10.2 Data mining 10.3 Fusion centers 10.4 Mail interception 10.5 Employee morale 10.6 MIAC report 10.7 Freedom of Information Act processing performance 10.8 Fourteen Words slogan and "88" reference 10.9 Calls for abolition 10.10 ACLU lawsuit 10.11 Nejwa Ali controversy 10.12 Surveillance 10.12.1 ICE 10.12.2 Office of Intelligence and Analysis 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 13.1 Primary sources 14 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Department of Homeland Security 44 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°51′17″N 77°00′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8547°N 77.0000°W ﻿ / 38.8547; -77.0000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from U.S. Department of Homeland Security ) United States federal executive department "DHS" redirects here. For other uses, see DHS (disambiguation) .

United States Department of Homeland Security Seal of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Flag of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Headquarters of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in Washington D.C.

Agency overview Formed November 25, 2002 ( 2002-11-25 ) Jurisdiction U.S. federal government Headquarters St. Elizabeths West Campus , Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

38°51′17″N 77°00′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8547°N 77.0000°W ﻿ / 38.8547; -77.0000 Employees 240,000 (2018) [ 1 ] Annual budget $ 103.2 billion (FY 2024) [ 2 ] Agency executives Kristi Noem , Secretary Troy Edgar , Deputy Secretary Child agency Full list United States Citizenship and Immigration Services U.S. Customs and Border Protection Federal Emergency Management Agency U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Transportation Security Administration United States Coast Guard (during times of peace) Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency United States Secret Service Federal Law Enforcement Training Center Federal Protective Service Citizenship & Immigration Services Ombudsmen Office of Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Management Directorate Office for Civil Rights & Civil Liberties Office of General Counsel Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman Office of Intelligence & Analysis Office of Legislative Affairs Office of Situational Awareness Office of Partnership & Engagement Office of Strategy, Policy and Plans Office of Public Affairs Office of the Inspector General Privacy Office Science & Technology Directorate Key document Homeland Security Act of 2002 Website dhs.gov Agency ID 7000 "The DHS March" The United States Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) is the U.S.

federal executive department responsible for public security , roughly comparable to the interior , home , or public security ministries in other countries. Its missions involve anti-terrorism , civil defense , immigration and customs , border control , cybersecurity , transportation security , maritime security and sea rescue , and the mitigation of weapons of mass destruction .

[ 3 ] It began operations on March 1, 2003, after being formed as a result of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 , enacted in response to the September 11 attacks . With more than 240,000 employees, [ 1 ] DHS is the third-largest Cabinet department, after the departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs .

[ 4 ] Homeland security policy is coordinated at the White House by the Homeland Security Council . Other agencies with significant homeland security responsibilities include the departments of Health and Human Services , Justice , and Energy .

History [ edit ] Creation [ edit ] A video released in 2016 by the DHS, detailing its duties and responsibilities In response to the September 11 attacks , President George W. Bush announced the establishment of the Office of Homeland Security (OHS) to coordinate " homeland security " efforts. The office was headed by former Pennsylvania governor Tom Ridge , who assumed the title of Assistant to the President for Homeland Security. The official announcement states: The mission of the Office will be to develop and coordinate the implementation of a comprehensive national strategy to secure the United States from terrorist threats or attacks. The Office will coordinate the executive branch's efforts to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks within the United States.

[ 5 ] Ridge began his duties as OHS director on October 8, 2001.

[ 6 ] On November 25, 2002, the Homeland Security Act established the Department of Homeland Security to consolidate U.S. executive branch organizations related to "homeland security" into a single Cabinet agency. In January 2003, the office was superseded, but not replaced by the Department of Homeland Security and the White House Homeland Security Council, both of which were created by the Homeland Security Act of 2002. The Homeland Security Council, similar in nature to the National Security Council , retains a policy coordination and advisory role and is led by the assistant to the president for homeland security.

[ 5 ] The Gilmore Commission , supported by much of Congress and John Bolton , helped to solidify further the need for the department. The DHS incorporated the following 22 agencies.

[ 7 ] List of incorporated agencies [ edit ] Original agency Original department New agency or office after transfer U.S. Customs Service Treasury U.S. Customs and Border Protection U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Immigration and Naturalization Service Justice U.S. Customs and Border Protection U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Federal Protective Service General Services Administration Management Directorate Transportation Security Administration Transportation Transportation Security Administration Federal Law Enforcement Training Center Treasury Federal Law Enforcement Training Center Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (part) Agriculture U.S. Customs and Border Protection Federal Emergency Management Agency none Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Strategic National Stockpile Health and Human Services Originally assigned to FEMA, but returned to HHS in July 2004 National Disaster Medical System Health and Human Services Originally assigned to FEMA, but returned to HHS in August 2006 Nuclear Incident Response Team Energy Responsibilities distributed within FEMA Domestic Emergency Support Team Justice Responsibilities distributed within FEMA Center for Domestic Preparedness Justice (FBI) Responsibilities distributed within FEMA CBRN Countermeasures Programs Energy Science & Technology Directorate Environmental Measurements Laboratory Energy Science & Technology Directorate National Biological Warfare Defense Analysis Center Defense Science & Technology Directorate Plum Island Animal Disease Center Agriculture Science & Technology Directorate Federal Computer Incident Response Center General Services Administration US-CERT, Office of Cybersecurity and Communications National Programs and Preparedness Directorate (now CISA ) National Communications System Defense Office of Cybersecurity and Communications National Programs and Predaredness Directorate National Infrastructure Protection Center Justice (FBI) Office of Operations Coordination Office of Infrastructure Protection Energy Security and Assurance Program Energy Office of Infrastructure Protection U.S. Coast Guard Transportation U.S. Coast Guard U.S. Secret Service Treasury U.S. Secret Service According to political scientist Peter Andreas , the creation of DHS constituted the most significant government reorganization since the Cold War [ 8 ] and the most substantial reorganization of federal agencies since the National Security Act of 1947 (which had placed the different military departments under a secretary of defense and created the National Security Council and Central Intelligence Agency ). Creation of DHS constitutes the most diverse merger ever of federal functions and responsibilities, incorporating 22 government agencies into a single organization.

[ 9 ] The founding of the DHS marked a change in American thought towards threats.
Introducing the term "homeland" centers attention on a population that needs to be protected not only against emergencies such as natural disasters but also against diffuse threats from individuals who are non-native to the United States.

[ 10 ] Prior to the signing of the bill, controversy about its adoption was focused on whether the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency should be incorporated in part or in whole (neither was included). The bill was also controversial for the presence of unrelated " riders ", as well as for eliminating certain union-friendly civil service and labor protections for department employees. Without these protections, employees could be expeditiously reassigned or dismissed on grounds of security, incompetence or insubordination, and DHS would not be required to notify their union representatives. The plan stripped 180,000 government employees of their union rights.

[ 11 ] In 2002, Bush officials argued that the September 11 attacks made the proposed elimination of employee protections imperative.

[ 12 ] In an August 5, 2002, speech, President Bush said: "We are fighting ... to secure freedom in the homeland." [ 13 ] Prior to the creation of DHS, U.S. Presidents had referred to the U.S. as "the nation" or "the republic" and to its internal policies as "domestic".

[ 14 ] Also unprecedented was the use, from 2002, of the phrase "the homeland" by White House spokespeople.

[ 14 ] A U.S. Customs and Border Protection officer addresses Vice President Dick Cheney (center); Saxby Chambliss (center right), a U.S. Senator from Georgia ; and Michael Chertoff (far right), the second head of the DHS; in 2005 Congress ultimately passed the Homeland Security Act of 2002, and President Bush signed the bill into law on November 25, 2002. It was the largest U.S. government reorganization in the 50 years since the United States Department of Defense was created.

Tom Ridge was named secretary on January 24, 2003, and began naming his chief deputies. DHS officially began operations on January 24, 2003, but most of the department's component agencies were not transferred into the new department until March 1.

[ 5 ] President George W. Bush signs the Homeland Security Appropriations Act of 2004 on October 1, 2003.

After establishing the basic structure of DHS and working to integrate its components, Ridge announced his resignation on November 30, 2004, following the re-election of President Bush. Bush initially nominated former New York City Police Department commissioner Bernard Kerik as his successor, but on December 10, Kerik withdrew his nomination, citing personal reasons and saying it "would not be in the best interests" of the country for him to pursue the post.

Changes under Secretary Chertoff [ edit ] On January 11, 2005, President Bush nominated federal judge Michael Chertoff to succeed Ridge. Chertoff was confirmed on February 15, 2005, by a vote of 98–0 in the U.S. Senate and was sworn in the same day.

[ 5 ] In February 2005, DHS and the Office of Personnel Management issued rules relating to employee pay and discipline for a new personnel system named MaxHR.

The Washington Post said that the rules would allow DHS "to override any provision in a union contract by issuing a department-wide directive" and would make it "difficult, if not impossible, for unions to negotiate over arrangements for staffing, deployments, technology and other workplace matters".

[ 12 ] In August 2005, U.S. District judge Rosemary M. Collyer blocked the plan on the grounds that it did not ensure collective-bargaining rights for DHS employees.

[ 12 ] A federal appeals court ruled against DHS in 2006; pending a final resolution to the litigation, Congress's fiscal year 2008 appropriations bill for DHS provided no funding for the proposed new personnel system.

[ 12 ] DHS announced in early 2007 that it was retooling its pay and performance system and retiring the name "MaxHR".

[ 5 ] In a February 2008 court filing, DHS said that it would no longer pursue the new rules, and that it would abide by the existing civil service labor-management procedures. A federal court issued an order closing the case.

[ 12 ] Chertoff’s successor, Secretary Janet Napolitano deployed full body scanners to assist the United States Secret Service in 2012.

[ 15 ] First Trump administration [ edit ] A 2017 memo by Secretary of Homeland Security John F. Kelly directed DHS to disregard "age as a basis for determining when to collect biometrics." [ 16 ] On November 16, 2018, President Donald Trump signed the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency Act of 2018 into law, which elevated the mission of the former DHS National Protection and Programs Directorate and established the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency .

[ 17 ] In fiscal year 2018, DHS was allocated a net discretionary budget of $47.716 billion.

[ 2 ] Biden administration [ edit ] In 2021, the Department of Justice began carrying out an investigation into white supremacy and extremism in the DHS ranks.

[ 18 ] DHS also halted large-scale immigration raids at job sites, saying in October 2021 that the administration was planning "a new enforcement strategy to more effectively target employers who pay substandard wages and engage in exploitative labor practices." [ 19 ] In 2023, the U.S. Customs and Border Patrol began using an app which requires asylum seekers to submit biometric information before they enter the country.

In June 2024 John Boyd, the head of the DHS Office of Biometric Identity Management, announced at a conference that the agency "is looking into ways it might use facial recognition technology to track the identities of migrant children." According to Boyd, the initiative is intended to advance the development of facial recognition algorithms. A former DHS official said that every migrant processing center he visited engaged in biometric identity collection, and that children were not separated out during processing. DHS denied collecting the biometric data of children under 14.

[ 16 ] Function [ edit ] Whereas the Department of Defense is charged with military actions abroad, the Department of Homeland Security works in the civilian sphere to protect the United States within, at, and outside its borders. Its stated goal is to prepare for, prevent, and respond to domestic emergencies, particularly terrorism.

[ 20 ] On March 1, 2003, DHS absorbed the U.S. Customs Service and Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and assumed its duties. In doing so, it divided the enforcement and services functions into two separate and new agencies: Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Citizenship and Immigration Services . The investigative divisions and intelligence gathering units of the INS and Customs Service were merged forming Homeland Security Investigations , the primary investigative arm of DHS. Additionally, the border enforcement functions of the INS, including the U.S. Border Patrol , the U.S. Customs Service , and the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service were consolidated into a new agency under DHS: U.S. Customs and Border Protection . The Federal Protective Service falls under the Management Directorate.

[ 21 ] U.S. CBP Office of Field Operations officer checking the authenticity of a travel document at an international airport using a stereo microscope Organizational structure [ edit ] DHS Organizational Chart | November 9, 2023 The Department of Homeland Security is headed by the secretary of homeland security with the assistance of the deputy secretary . DHS contains operational components, executing specific missions under the purview of the DHS; support components, supporting the mission of the DHS and operational components; and components in the Office of the Secretary, supporting department leadership, DHS components, and the secretary by overseeing and establishing policy.

[ 22 ] U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services [ edit ] United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) oversees lawful immigration into the United States.

[ 23 ] Note that Passports for U.S. citizens are issued by the U.S. Department of State , not the Department of Homeland Security.

USCIS Wordmark Executives [ edit ] Director, Kika Scott (acting) Deputy Director, Andrew J. Davidson (acting) Subordinate components [ edit ] Office of Performance and Quality Office of Investigations Office of Privacy Office of Administrative Appeals Immigration Records and Identity Services Directorate Field Operations Directorate External Affairs Directorate Fraud Detection and National Security Directorate Management Directorate Service Center Operations Directorate Asylum and International Operations Directorate U.S. Coast Guard [ edit ] The United States Coast Guard (USCG) is the maritime security, search and rescue, and law enforcement service branch of the U.S. Armed Forces.

[ 24 ] It is under the Department of Homeland Security during times of peace, and under the U.S. Department of the Navy during wartime.

[ 25 ] USCG Seal Executives [ edit ] Commandant, Admiral Kevin E. Lunday (Acting) Vice Commandant, Vice Admiral Peter W. Gautier (Acting) Subordinate components [ edit ] Atlantic Area Coast Guard District 1 Coast Guard District 5 Coast Guard District 7 Coast Guard District 8 Coast Guard District 9 Pacific Area Coast Guard District 11 Coast Guard District 13 Coast Guard District 14 Coast Guard District 17 U.S. Customs and Border Protection [ edit ] United States Customs and Border Protection (CBP) is a law enforcement agency responsible for protecting the U.S. border against illegal entry, illicit activity, and other threats; combatting transnational crime and terrorism that's a threat to the economic and national security of the United States; and facilitating lawful trade and lawful entry into the United States.

[ 26 ] CBP Seal Executives [ edit ] Commissioner, Pete R. Flores (acting) Deputy Commissioner, John Modlin (acting) Subordinate components [ edit ] U.S. Border Patrol Office of Field Operations Air and Marine Operations Office of Trade Enterprise Services Office Operations Support Office U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency [ edit ] CISA Seal The United States Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) is the leading entity of the U.S. federal government in understanding, managing, and reducing risk to cyber and physical infrastructure across the United States.

[ 27 ] Executives [ edit ] Director, Bridget Bean (acting) Deputy Director, vacant Subordinate components [ edit ] Cybersecurity Division Infrastructure Security Division Emergency Communications Division Integrated Operations Division Stakeholder Engagement Division National Risk Management Center U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency [ edit ] FEMA Wordmark The United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) invests in, improves, and supports capabilities to respond to, mitigate, protect against, recover from, and to prepare for all hazards that may threaten the security of the United States and its citizens, such as natural disasters.

[ 28 ] Executives [ edit ] Administrator, David Richardson (acting) Deputy Administrator, MaryAnn Tierney (acting) Subordinate components [ edit ] Mission Support Regional Offices (Regions 1-10) Resilience Response and Recovery U.S. Fire Administration U.S. Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers [ edit ] FLETC Seal The United States Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC) provides training services to U.S. law enforcement.

[ 29 ] Executives [ edit ] Director, Benjamine C. Huffman Deputy Director, Paul E. Baker Associate Director for Training Operations, Ariana M. Roddini Subordinate components [ edit ] Training Management Operations Directorate National Capital Region Training Operations Directorate Core Training Operations Directorate Technical Training Operations Directorate Mission and Readiness Support Directorate U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement [ edit ] ICE Wordmark United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) enforces federal laws governing border control, customs, immigration and trade.

[ 30 ] Executives [ edit ] Director, Todd Lyons (acting) Deputy Director, Madison Sheahan Subordinate components [ edit ] Enforcement and Removal Operations Homeland Security Investigations U.S. Secret Service [ edit ] USSS Logo The United States Secret Service (USSS) is charged with the protection of the President of the United States and other government officials and persons designated by law. It also safeguards U.S. financial infrastructure and fights against counterfeiting.

[ 31 ] Executives [ edit ] Director, Sean M. Curran Deputy Director, vacant Subordinate components [ edit ] Uniformed Division Office of Protective Operations Office of Investigations U.S. Transportation Security Administration [ edit ] TSA Seal The United States Transportation Security Administration (TSA) protects U.S. transportation systems (e.g. airport security) and ensures freedom of movement for people and commerce.

[ 32 ] It was created as a result of the September 11 attacks in the United States by the Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 .

[ 33 ] Executives [ edit ] Administrator, Ha Nguyen McNeil (acting) Deputy Administrator, Vacant Subordinate components [ edit ] Federal Air Marshal Service Security Operations TSA Investigations Operations Support Enterprise Support DHS Management Directorate [ edit ] MGMT Wordmark The Department of Homeland Security Management Directorate (MGMT) manages department finance, appropriations, accounting, budgeting, expenditures, procurement, human resources and personnel, information technology systems, biometric identification services, facilities, property, equipment, other material resources, protection of department personnel, information and resources, performance metrics, and the security of federal infrastructure.

[ 34 ] Executives Under Secretary, Benjamine C. Huffman (acting) Deputy Under Secretary, vacant Subordinate components [ edit ] Office of the Chief Financial Officer Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer Office of the Chief Information Officer Office of the Chief Procurement Officer Office of the Chief Readiness Support Officer Office of the Chief Security Officer Office of Program Accountability and Risk Management Office of Biometric Identity Management U.S. Federal Protective Service DHS Science and Technology Directorate [ edit ] S&T Wordmark The Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) is the department's research and development arm.

[ 35 ] Executives Under Secretary, Julie S. Brewer (acting) Deputy Under Secretary, Joseph "Jay" F. Martin (acting) Subordinate components [ edit ] Office of Innovation and Collaboration Office of Mission and Capability Support Office of Enterprise Services Office of Science and Engineering DHS Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office [ edit ] CWMD Logo The Department of Homeland Security Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD) works to prevent chemical, biological, nuclear, and radiological attacks against the United States.

[ 36 ] Executives [ edit ] Assistant Secretary, David Richardson Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Deborah Kramer Subordinate components [ edit ] BioWatch Program Securing the Cities Program Mobile Detection Deployment Program Training and Exercise Program CBRN Intelligence National Biosurveillance Integration Center DHS Office of Intelligence and Analysis [ edit ] I&A Logo The Department of Homeland Security Office of Intelligence & Analysis (I&A) is the department's intelligence arm, and disseminates timely information  across the DHS enterprise and to local, state, tribal, territorial, and private sector partners.

[ 37 ] Executives [ edit ] Under Secretary, Daniel Tamburello (acting) Principal Deputy Under Secretary, Adam Luke (acting) Subordinate components [ edit ] Counterterrorism Center Cyber Intelligence Center Nation-State Intelligence Center Transborder Security Center Current and Emerging Threats Center Office of Regional Intelligence Homeland Identities, Targeting & Exploitation Center DHS Office of Homeland Security Situational Awareness [ edit ] OSA Logo The Office of Homeland Security Situational Awareness (OSA) provides operations coordination, information sharing, situational awareness, common operating picture, and executes the Secretary's responsibilities across the homeland security enterprise.

[ 38 ] Executives [ edit ] Director, Rear Admiral Christopher J. Tomney Deputy Director, Frank DiFalco Subordinate components [ edit ] National Operations Center Integration Division Mission Support Division DHS Office of Health Security [ edit ] OHS Wordmark The Department of Homeland Security Office of Health Security (OHS) is the principal medical, workforce health and safety, and public health authority for DHS.

[ 39 ] Executives [ edit ] Director & Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Herbert Wolfe (acting) Deputy Director & Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Herbert Wolfe Subordinate components [ edit ] Total Workforce Protection Directorate Health, Food & Agriculture Resilience Directorate Healthcare Systems & Oversight Directorate Health Information Systems & Decision Support Regional Operations DHS Office of Inspector General [ edit ] OIG Seal The Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector General (OIG) provides independent oversight and promotes excellence, integrity, and accountability within DHS.

[ 40 ] Executives [ edit ] Inspector General, Joseph V. Cuffari Principal Deputy Inspector General, Glenn Sklar Subordinate components [ edit ] Office of Audits Office of Investigations Office of Integrity Office of Management Office of Innovation Office of Inspections and Evaluations DHS Office of the Secretary [ edit ] See also: United States Secretary of Homeland Security § Office of the Secretary of Homeland Security OSEC Wordmark CIS Ombudsman Wordmark OIDO Wordmark The Office of the Secretary of Homeland Security oversees the Department of Homeland Security's execution of its mission to safeguard the nation.

[ 41 ] Executives [ edit ] Chief of Staff, vacant/none.

Subordinate components [ edit ] Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Climate Change Action Group Office of the Executive Secretary Family Reunification Task Force Office of the General Counsel Joint Requirements Council Office of Legislative Affairs Office of the Military Advisor Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman Office of the Citizenship and Immigration Ombudsman Office of Partnership and Engagement DHS Privacy Office Office of Public Affairs Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans Office for State and Local Law Enforcement Center for Countering Human Trafficking Committee Management Office Council on Combating Gender-Based Violence Forced Labor Enforcement Task Force DHS Advisory Panels [ edit ] DHS advisory panels and committees  provide advice and recommendations on mission-related topics from academic engagement to privacy.

[ 42 ] Homeland Security Academic Partnership Council (HSAPC) Artificial Intelligence Safety and Security Board (AISSB) Counternarcotics Coordinating Council (CNCC) Faith-Based Security Advisory Council (FBSAC) Homeland Security Advisory Council (HSAC) Data Privacy and Integrity Advisory Committee (DPIAC) Tribal Homeland Security Advisory Council (THSAC) National Terrorism Advisory System [ edit ] In 2011, the Department of Homeland Security phased out the old Homeland Security Advisory System, replacing it with a two-level National Terrorism Advisory System. The system has two types of advisories: alerts and bulletins. NTAS bulletins permit the secretary to communicate critical terrorism information that, while not necessarily indicative of a specific threat against the United States, can reach homeland security partners or the public quickly, thereby allowing recipients to implement necessary protective measures. Alerts are issued when there is specific and credible information of a terrorist threat against the United States. Alerts have two levels: elevated and imminent. An elevated alert is issued when there is credible information about an attack but only general information about timing or a target. An Imminent Alert is issued when the threat is very specific and impending in the very near term.

[ citation needed ] The Homeland Security Advisory System scale On March 12, 2002, the Homeland Security Advisory System , a color-coded terrorism risk advisory scale, was created as the result of a Presidential Directive to provide a "comprehensive and effective means to disseminate information regarding the risk of terrorist acts to Federal, State, and local authorities and to the American people". Many procedures at government facilities are tied into the alert level; for example a facility may search all entering vehicles when the alert is above a certain level. Since January 2003, it has been administered in coordination with DHS; it has also been the target of frequent jokes and ridicule on the part of the administration's detractors about its ineffectiveness. After resigning, Tom Ridge said he did not always agree with the threat level adjustments pushed by other government agencies.

[ 43 ] Seal [ edit ] Main article: Seal of the United States Department of Homeland Security The seal was developed with input from senior DHS leadership, employees, and the U.S. Commission on Fine Arts. The Ad Council – which partners with DHS on its Ready.gov campaign – and the consulting company Landor Associates were responsible for graphic design and maintaining heraldic integrity.

The seal is symbolic of the Department's mission – to prevent attacks and protect Americans – on the land, in the sea and in the air. In the center of the seal, a graphically styled white American eagle appears in a circular blue field. The eagle's outstretched wings break through an inner red ring into an outer white ring that contains the words "U.S. DEPARTMENT OF" in the top half and "HOMELAND SECURITY" in the bottom half in a circular placement. The eagle's wings break through the inner circle into the outer ring to suggest that the Department of Homeland Security will break through traditional bureaucracy and perform government functions differently. In the tradition of the Great Seal of the United States, the eagle's talon on the left holds an olive branch with 13 leaves and 13 seeds while the eagle's talon on the right grasps 13 arrows.
Centered on the eagle's breast is a shield divided into three sections containing elements that represent the American homeland – air, land, and sea. The top element, a dark blue sky, contains 22 stars representing the original 22 entities that have come together to form the department. The left shield element contains white mountains behind a green plain underneath a light blue sky. The right shield element contains four wave shapes representing the oceans alternating light and dark blue separated by white lines.

- DHS June 6, 2003 [ 44 ] Headquarters [ edit ] The current headquarters at St. Elizabeths West Campus Nebraska Avenue Complex , DHS headquarters from its inception until April 2019 Since its inception, the department's temporary headquarters had been in Washington, D.C.'s Nebraska Avenue Complex , a former naval facility. The 38-acre (15 ha) site, across from American University , has 32 buildings comprising 566,000 square feet (52,600 m 2 ) of administrative space.

[ 45 ] In early 2007, the department submitted a $4.1 billion plan to Congress to consolidate its 60-plus Washington-area offices into a single headquarters complex at the St. Elizabeths Hospital campus in Anacostia , Southeast Washington, D.C.

[ 46 ] The move was championed by District of Columbia officials because of the positive economic impact it would have on historically depressed Anacostia. The move was criticized by historic preservationists , who claimed the revitalization plans would destroy dozens of historic buildings on the campus.

[ 47 ] Community activists criticized the plans because the facility would remain walled off and have little interaction with the surrounding area.

[ 48 ] In February 2015 the General Services Administration said that the site would open in 2021.

[ 49 ] DHS headquarters staff began moving to St. Elizabeths in April 2019 after the completion of the Center Building renovation.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Disaster preparedness and response [ edit ] Congressional budgeting effects [ edit ] During a Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee hearing on the reauthorization of DHS, Deputy Secretary Elaine Duke said there is a weariness and anxiety within DHS about the repeated congressional efforts to agree to a long-term spending plan, which had resulted in several threats to shut down the federal government. "Shutdowns are disruptive", Duke said. She said the "repeated failure on a longtime spending plan resulting in short-term continuing resolutions (CRs) has caused "angst" among the department's 240,000 employees in the weeks leading up to the CRs." [ 52 ] The uncertainty about funding hampers DHS's ability to pursue major projects and takes away attention and manpower from important priorities. Seventy percent of DHS employees are considered essential and are not furloughed during government shutdowns.

[ 52 ] Ready.gov [ edit ] Ready.gov program logo Soon after formation, the department worked with the Ad Council to launch the Ready Campaign, a national public service advertising (PSA) campaign to educate and empower Americans to prepare for and respond to emergencies including natural and man-made disasters. With pro bono creative support from the Martin Agency of Richmond, Virginia , the campaign website "Ready.gov" and materials were conceived in March 2002 and launched in February 2003, just before the launch of the Iraq War .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] One of the first announcements that garnered widespread public attention to this campaign was one by Tom Ridge in which he stated that in the case of a chemical attack, citizens should use duct tape and plastic sheeting to build a homemade bunker, or "sheltering in place" to protect themselves.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] As a result, the sales of duct tape skyrocketed, and DHS was criticized for being too alarmist .

[ 58 ] On March 1, 2003, the Federal Emergency Management Agency was absorbed into the DHS and in the fall of 2008 took over coordination of the campaign. The Ready Campaign and its Spanish-language version Listo.gov asks individuals to build an emergency supply kit, [ 59 ] make a family emergency plan [ 60 ] and be informed about the different types of emergencies that can occur and how to respond.

[ 61 ] The campaign messages have been promoted through television, radio, print, outdoor and web PSAs, [ 62 ] as well as brochures, toll-free phone lines and the English and Spanish language websites Ready.gov and Listo.gov.

The general campaign aims to reach all Americans, but targeted resources are also available via "Ready Business" for small- to medium-sized business  and "Ready Kids" for parents and teachers of children ages 8–12. In 2015, the campaign also launched a series of PSAs to help the whole community, [ 63 ] people with disabilities and others with access and functional needs prepare for emergencies, which included open captioning, a certified deaf interpreter and audio descriptions for viewers who are blind or have low vision.

[ 64 ] National Incident Management System [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) On March 1, 2004, the National Incident Management System (NIMS) was created. The stated purpose was to provide a consistent incident management approach for federal, state, local, and tribal governments. Under Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5, all federal departments were required to adopt the NIMS and to use it in their individual domestic incident management and emergency prevention, preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation program and activities.

National Response Framework [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In December 2005, the National Response Plan (NRP) was created, in an attempt to align federal coordination structures, capabilities, and resources into a unified, all-discipline, and all-hazards approach to domestic incident management. The NRP was built on the template of the NIMS.

On January 22, 2008, the National Response Framework was published in the Federal Register as an updated replacement of the NRP, effective March 22, 2008.

Surge Capacity Force [ edit ] The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act directs the DHS Secretary to designate employees from throughout the department to staff a Surge Capacity Force (SCF). During a declared disaster, the DHS Secretary will determine if SCF support is necessary. The secretary will then authorize FEMA to task and deploy designated personnel from DHS components and other Federal Executive Agencies to respond to extraordinary disasters.

[ 65 ] Cyber-security [ edit ] See also: Cyber-security regulation The DHS National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) is responsible for the response system, risk management program, and requirements for cyber-security in the U.S. The division is home to US-CERT operations and the National Cyber Alert System .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The DHS Science and Technology Directorate helps government and private end-users transition to new cyber-security capabilities. This directorate also funds the Cyber Security Research and Development Center, which identifies and prioritizes research and development for NCSD.

[ 67 ] The center works on the Internet's routing infrastructure (the SPRI program) and Domain Name System ( DNSSEC ), identity theft and other online criminal activity (ITTC), Internet traffic and networks research (PREDICT datasets and the DETER testbed), Department of Defense and HSARPA exercises (Livewire and Determined Promise), and wireless security in cooperation with Canada.

[ 68 ] On October 30, 2009, DHS opened the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center . The center brings together government organizations responsible for protecting computer networks and networked infrastructure.

[ 69 ] In January 2017, DHS officially designated state-run election systems as critical infrastructure. The designation made it easier for state and local election officials to get cybersecurity help from the federal government. In October 2017, DHS convened a Government Coordinating Council (GCC) for the Election Infrastructure Subsection with representatives from various state and federal agencies such as the Election Assistance Commission and National Association of Secretaries of State .

[ 70 ] Secretaries [ edit ] Main article: United States Secretary of Homeland Security § List of secretaries of homeland security To date there have been eight confirmed secretaries of the Department of Homeland Security: [ 71 ] Tom Ridge (January 24, 2003–February 1, 2005) Michael Chertoff (February 15, 2005–January 21, 2009) Janet Napolitano (January 20, 2009–September 6, 2013) Jeh Charles Johnson (December 23, 2013–January 20, 2017) John F. Kelly (January 20, 2017–July 28, 2017) Kirstjen M. Nielsen (December 6, 2017–April 10, 2019) Alejandro Mayorkas (February 1, 2021–January 20, 2025) Kristi Noem (January 25, 2025–Present) Criticism [ edit ] See also: Criticism of the United States government § Criticism of agencies , and Criticism of the government response to Hurricane Katrina Excess, waste, and ineffectiveness [ edit ] The department has been dogged by persistent criticism over excessive bureaucracy , waste, ineffectiveness and lack of transparency. Congress estimates that the department has wasted roughly $15 billion in failed contracts (as of September 2008 [update] ).

[ 72 ] In 2003, the department came under fire after the media revealed that Laura Callahan , Deputy Chief Information Officer at DHS with responsibilities for sensitive national security databases, had obtained her bachelor, masters, and doctorate computer science degrees through Hamilton University , a diploma mill in a small town in Wyoming .

[ 73 ] The department was blamed for up to $2 billion of waste and fraud after audits by the Government Accountability Office revealed widespread misuse of government credit cards by DHS employees, with purchases including beer brewing kits, $70,000 of plastic dog booties that were later deemed unusable, boats purchased at double the retail price (many of which later could not be found), and iPods ostensibly for use in "data storage".

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] A 2015 inspection of IT infrastructure found that the department was running over a hundred computer systems whose owners were unknown, including Secret and Top Secret databases, many with out-of-date security or weak passwords. Basic security reviews were absent, and the department had apparently made deliberate attempts to delay publication of information about the flaws.

[ 78 ] Data mining [ edit ] On September 5, 2007, the Associated Press reported that the DHS had scrapped an anti-terrorism data mining tool called ADVISE (Analysis, Dissemination, Visualization, Insight and Semantic Enhancement) after the agency's internal inspector general found that pilot testing of the system had been performed using data on real people without required privacy safeguards in place.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] The system, in development at Lawrence Livermore and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory since 2003, has cost the agency $42 million to date. Controversy over the program is not new; in March 2007, the Government Accountability Office stated that "the ADVISE tool could misidentify or erroneously associate an individual with undesirable activity such as fraud , crime or terrorism." Homeland Security's Inspector General later said that ADVISE was poorly planned, time-consuming for analysts to use, and lacked adequate justifications.

[ 81 ] Fusion centers [ edit ] Main article: Fusion center Fusion centers are terrorism prevention and response centers, many of which were created under a joint project between the Department of Homeland Security and the U.S. Department of Justice 's Office of Justice Programs between 2003 and 2007. The fusion centers gather information from government sources as well as their partners in the private sector.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] They are designed to promote information sharing at the federal level between agencies such as the CIA, FBI, Department of Justice, U.S. military and  state and local level government. As of July 2009 [update] , DHS recognized at least seventy-two fusion centers.

[ 84 ] Fusion centers may also be affiliated with an Emergency Operations Center that responds in the event of a disaster.

There are a number of documented criticisms of fusion centers, including relative ineffectiveness at counterterrorism activities, the potential to be used for secondary purposes unrelated to counterterrorism, and their links to violations of civil liberties of American citizens and others.

[ 85 ] David Rittgers of the Cato Institute notes: A long line of fusion center and DHS reports labeling broad swaths of the public as a threat to national security. The North Texas Fusion System labeled Muslim lobbyists as a potential threat; a DHS analyst in Wisconsin thought both pro- and anti-abortion activists were worrisome; a Pennsylvania homeland security contractor watched environmental activists, Tea Party groups, and a Second Amendment rally; the Maryland State Police put anti-death penalty and anti-war activists in a federal terrorism database; a fusion center in Missouri thought that all third-party voters and Ron Paul supporters were a threat ...

[ 86 ] Mail interception [ edit ] In 2006, MSNBC reported that Grant Goodman, "an 81-year-old retired University of Kansas history professor, received a letter from his friend in the Philippines that had been opened and resealed with a strip of dark green tape bearing the words "by Border Protection" and carrying the official Homeland Security seal." [ 87 ] The letter was sent by a devout Catholic Filipino woman with no history of supporting Islamic terrorism .

[ 87 ] A spokesman for U.S. Customs and Border Protection "acknowledged that the agency can, will and does open mail coming to U.S. citizens that originates from a foreign country whenever it's deemed necessary": All mail originating outside the United States Customs territory that is to be delivered inside the U.S. Customs territory is subject to Customs examination," says the CBP Web site. That includes personal correspondence. "All mail means 'all mail,'" said John Mohan, a CBP spokesman, emphasizing the point.

[ 87 ] The department declined to outline what criteria are used to determine when a piece of personal correspondence should be opened or to say how often or in what volume Customs might be opening mail.

[ 87 ] Goodman's story provoked outrage in the blogosphere , [ 88 ] as well as in the more established media. Reacting to the incident, Mother Jones remarked "unlike other prying government agencies, Homeland Security wants you to know it is watching you." [ 89 ] CNN observed "on the heels of the NSA wiretapping controversy , Goodman's letter raises more concern over the balance between privacy and security." [ 90 ] Employee morale [ edit ] In July 2006, the Office of Personnel Management conducted a survey of federal employees in all 36 federal agencies on job satisfaction and how they felt their respective agency was headed. DHS was last or near to last in every category including; 33rd on the talent management index 35th on the leadership and knowledge management index 36th on the job satisfaction index 36th on the results-oriented performance culture index The low scores were attributed to concerns about basic supervision, management and leadership within the agency. Examples from the survey reveal most concerns are about promotion and pay increase based on merit, dealing with poor performance, rewarding creativity and innovation, leadership generating high levels of motivation in the workforce, recognition for doing a good job, lack of satisfaction with various component policies and procedures and lack of information about what is going on with the organization.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] DHS is the only large federal agency to score below 50% in overall survey rankings. It was last of large federal agencies in 2014 with 44.0% and fell even lower in 2015 at 43.1%, again last place.

[ 93 ] DHS continued to rank at the bottom in 2019, prompting congressional inquiries into the problem.

[ 94 ] High work load resulting from chronic staff shortage, particularly in Customs and Border Protection, has contributed to low morale, [ 95 ] as have scandals and intense negative public opinion heightened by immigration policies of the Obama administration.

[ 96 ] DHS has struggled to retain women, who complain of overt and subtle misogyny.

[ 97 ] MIAC report [ edit ] In 2009, the Missouri Information Analysis Center (MIAC) made news for targeting supporters of third party candidates (such as Ron Paul ), anti-abortion activists, and conspiracy theorists as potential militia members.

[ 98 ] Anti-war activists and Islamic lobby groups were targeted in Texas, drawing criticism from the American Civil Liberties Union .

[ 99 ] According to DHS: [ 100 ] The Privacy Office has identified a number of risks to privacy presented by the fusion center program: Justification for fusion centers Ambiguous Lines of Authority, Rules, and Oversight Participation of the Military and the Private Sector Data Mining Excessive Secrecy Inaccurate or Incomplete Information Mission Creep Freedom of Information Act processing performance [ edit ] In the Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, published in 2015 (using 2012 and 2013 data), the Department of Homeland Security earned a D+ by scoring 69 out of a possible 100 points, i.e. did not earn a satisfactory overall grade. It also had not updated its policies since the 2007 FOIA amendments.

[ 101 ] Fourteen Words slogan and "88" reference [ edit ] In 2018, the DHS was accused of referencing the white nationalist Fourteen Words slogan in an official document, by using a similar fourteen-worded title, in relation to unlawful immigration and border control: [ 102 ] We Must Secure The Border And Build The Wall To Make America Safe Again.

[ 103 ] Although dismissed by the DHS as a coincidence, both the use of "88" in a document and the similarity to the slogan's phrasing ("We must secure the existence of our people and a future for white children"), drew criticism and controversy from several media outlets.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Calls for abolition [ edit ] While abolishing the DHS has been proposed since 2011, [ 106 ] the idea was popularized when Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez suggested abolishing the DHS in light of the abuses against detained migrants by the Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Customs and Border Protection agencies.

[ 107 ] In 2020, the DHS was criticized for detaining protesters in Portland, Oregon .  It even drew rebuke from the department's first secretary Tom Ridge who said, "It would be a cold day in hell before I would consent to an uninvited, unilateral intervention into one of my cities".

[ 108 ] On August 10, 2020, in an opinion article for USA Today by Anthony D. Romero , the ACLU called for the dismantling of DHS over the deployment of federal forces in July 2020 during the Portland protests.

[ 109 ] ACLU lawsuit [ edit ] In December 2020, ACLU filed a lawsuit against the DHS, U.S. CBP and U.S. ICE, seeking the release of their records of purchasing cellphone location data. ACLU alleges that this data was used to track U.S. citizens and immigrants and is seeking to discover the full extent of the alleged surveillance.

[ 110 ] Nejwa Ali controversy [ edit ] The DHS came under fire from pro-Israel politicians in October 2023 for employing Nejwa Ali, who supported Hamas following its deadly terror attack against Israel. Her social media posts were first reported on by the Daily Wire and the Washington Examiner reported on Ali being placed on administrative leave.

[ 111 ] Surveillance [ edit ] ICE [ edit ] American Dragnet, a report, from the Center on Privacy and Technology documents the scope of ICE's surveillance capabilities. The report found that ICE has access to the driver’s license data of 3 in 4 adults, could locate 3 in 4 adults through their utility records and tracks the movements of drivers in cities home to 3 in 4 adults.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] The report also claimed "the agency spent approximately $2.8 billion between 2008 and 2021 on new surveillance, data collection and data-sharing initiatives".

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] ICE has also used data brokers to circumvent laws restricting government bodies sharing information with ICE.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] Office of Intelligence and Analysis [ edit ] The office of intelligence and analysis (I&A) has a history of problematic surveillance.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] In 2020, the I&A authorized "collecting and reporting on various activities in the context of elevated threats targeting monuments, memorials, and statues".

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] The office surveilled protestors at the George Floyd protests in Portland, Oregon [ 124 ] [ 125 ] In September 2023, Congress considered revoking some of the agency’s collection authorities over concerns about overreach.

[ 126 ] According to Politico, "a key theme that emerges from internal documents is that in recent years, many people working at I&A have said they fear they are breaking the law".

[ 127 ] In 2025, sexual orientation and gender identity were removed from I&A's list of characteristics that "personnel are prohibited from engaging in intelligence activities based solely on".

[ 128 ] See also [ edit ] United States portal Container Security Initiative E-Verify Electronic System for Travel Authorization Emergency Management Institute History of homeland security in the United States Homeland Security USA Homeland security grant Home Office , equivalent department in the United Kingdom List of state departments of homeland security National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center (NBACC), Ft Detrick, MD National Interoperability Field Operations Guide National Strategy for Homeland Security Project Hostile Intent Public Safety Canada , equivalent department in Canada Shadow Wolves Terrorism in the United States United States visas References [ edit ] ^ a b "About DHS" . Homeland Security. June 29, 2016.

^ a b "DHS FY 2024 Budget in Brief (BIB)" (PDF) . Homeland Security. p. 4 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 .

^ "Our Mission" . Homeland Security. June 27, 2012.

^ "Department of Homeland Security Executive Staffing Project" .

National Academy of Public Administration . Archived from the original on March 10, 2010 . Retrieved May 31, 2011 .

^ a b c d e "National Strategy For Homeland Security" (PDF) . DHS. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 14, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "EPIC Fact Sheet on OHS" .

www.epic.org . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ "Who Joined DHS" .

Department of Homeland Security . July 27, 2012 . Retrieved May 27, 2021 .

^ [Peter Andreas: Redrawing the line 2003:92], additional text.

^ Perl, Raphael (2004). "The Department of Homeland Security: Background and Challenges", Terrorism—reducing Vulnerabilities and Improving Responses , Committee on Counterterrorism Challenges for Russia and the United States, Office for Central Europe and Eurasia Development, Security, and Cooperation Policy and Global Affairs, in Cooperation with the Russian Academy of Sciences, page 176. National Academies Press.

ISBN 0-309-08971-9 .

^ Gessen, Masha (July 25, 2020).

"Homeland Security Was Destined to Become a Secret Police Force" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved July 26, 2020 .

^ Chomsky, Noam (2005).

Imperial Ambitions , page 199. Metropolitan Books.

ISBN 0-8050-7967-X .

^ a b c d e Stephen Barr. "DHS Withdraws Bid to Curb Union Rights", The Washington Post page D01, February 20, 2008 . Retrieved on August 20, 2008.

^ Bovard, James. "Moral high ground not won on battlefield", USA Today , October 8, 2008 . Retrieved on August 19, 2008.

^ a b Wolf, Naomi (2007).

The End of America , page 27. Chelsea Green Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-933392-79-0 .

^ "Freedom of Information Act Request and Request for Expedited Processing" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 3, 2021.

^ a b Guo, Eileen (August 14, 2024).

"The US wants to use facial recognition to identify migrant children as they age" .

MIT Technology Review . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ "Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency" .

DHS.gov . November 20, 2018 . Retrieved November 24, 2018 .

^ Kanno-Youngs, Zolan (April 26, 2021).

"D.H.S. will review how it identifies and addresses extremism and white supremacy in its ranks" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 27, 2021 .

^ Miroff, Nick (October 12, 2021).

"Biden administration orders halt to ICE raids at worksites" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved March 19, 2022 .

^ "One Team, One Mission, Securing Our Homeland - U.S. Department of Homeland Security Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2008–2013" (PDF) . DHS. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 21, 2012 . Retrieved July 29, 2016 .

^ "Who We Are" .

DHS.gov . Retrieved February 20, 2025 .

^ "Organization | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "What We Do | USCIS" .

www.uscis.gov . February 27, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About U.S. Coast Guard Missions" .

www.uscg.mil . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Our Forces" .

U.S. Department of Defense . Retrieved December 5, 2024 .

^ "About CBP | U.S. Customs and Border Protection" .

www.cbp.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About CISA | CISA" .

www.cisa.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About Us | FEMA.gov" .

www.fema.gov . November 14, 2024 . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Our Mission and Core Values | Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers" .

www.fletc.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "ICE's Mission | ICE" .

www.ice.gov . May 8, 2024 . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About Us" .

www.secretservice.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Mission | Transportation Security Administration" .

www.tsa.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "TSA History | Transportation Security Administration" .

www.tsa.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Management Directorate | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About S&T | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About CWMD | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Office of Intelligence and Analysis | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Office of Homeland Security Situational Awareness | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "Office of Health Security | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 4, 2024 .

^ "About Us | Office of Inspector General" .

www.oig.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 5, 2024 .

^ "Office of the Secretary | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 5, 2024 .

^ "Advisory Panels & Committees | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved December 5, 2024 .

^ "Remarks by Governor Ridge Announcing Homeland Security Advisory System" . Retrieved May 5, 2017 .

^ "Fact Sheet: Department of Homeland Security Seal", DHS press release, June 19, 2003. DHS website Archived October 24, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on August 26, 2008.

^ "Statement of Secretary Tom Ridge" . DHS . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Losey, Stephen (March 19, 2007).

"Homeland Security plans move to hospital compound" . Federal Times. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Most Endangered Places" .

2/2009 . National Trust . Retrieved February 4, 2009 .

^ Holley, Joel (June 17, 2007).

"Tussle Over St. Elizabeths" .

The Washington Post . p. C01 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "DHS headquarters consolidation has a new tentative plan at St. Elizabeths" . July 10, 2020.

^ Heckman, Jory (June 21, 2019).

"DHS St. Elizabeths campus gains 'center of gravity' with new headquarters" .

Federal News Network . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ Sernovitz, Daniel J. (July 9, 2019).

"DHS reveals more detail on what's to come for St. Elizabeths West" .

Washington Business Journal . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ a b Roberts, Ed (February 7, 2018).

"Spending stalemate has costs at Department of Homeland Security – Homeland Preparedness News" .

Homeland Preparedness News . Retrieved February 27, 2018 .

^ Forbes, Daniel (May 28, 2004).

"$226 Million in Govt Ads Helped Pave the Way for War" . Antiwar.com . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Homeland Security: Ready.Gov" . Outdoor Advertising Association of America. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "CNN Live at daybreak" .

Aired February 20, 2003 . CNN . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Homeland Security Frequently Asked Questions" . ready.gov. Archived from the original on November 6, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Clean Air" . ready.gov. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Are You Ready.gov?" .

February 21, 2003 . lies.com . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Build A Kit | Ready.gov" . www.ready.gov. Archived from the original on November 1, 2016 . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ "Make A Plan | Ready.gov" . www.ready.gov . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ "About the Ready Campaign | Ready.gov" . www.ready.gov . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ "Emergency Preparedness" .

AdCouncil . Archived from the original on October 25, 2016 . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ Newswire, MultiVu - PR.

"FEMA, Ad Council Launch New PSA Focused on People with Disabilities Preparing for Emergencies" . Multivu . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ "Individuals with Disabilities and Others with Access and Functional Needs | Ready.gov" . ready.gov . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ "Surge Capacity Force – Homeland Security" . January 30, 2013 . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

^ "National Cyber Security Division" . U.S. Department of Homeland Security . Retrieved June 14, 2008 .

^ a b "FAQ: Cyber Security R&D Center" . U.S. Department of Homeland Security S&T Directorate . Retrieved June 14, 2008 .

^ "Ongoing Research and Development" . U.S. Department of Homeland Security S&T Directorate . Retrieved June 14, 2008 .

^ AFP-JiJi, "U.S. boots up cybersecurity center", October 31, 2009.

^ Murtha, Alex (October 17, 2017).

"DHS, partners convene for government council on protecting election infrastructure" .

Homeland Preparedness News . Retrieved December 20, 2017 .

^ Secretaries of Homeland Security, dhs.gov ^ Hedgpeth, Dana (September 17, 2008).

"Congress Says DHS Oversaw $15 Billion in Failed Contracts" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 17, 2008 .

^ Diplomas For Sale – Retrieved August 5, 2015 ^ Lipton, Eric (July 19, 2006).

"Homeland Security Department Is Accused of Credit Card Misuse" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Jakes Jordan, Lara (July 19, 2006).

"Credit Card Fraud at DHS" . Homeland Security Weekly. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Government's Katrina credit cards criticized" . Associated Press. September 15, 2005 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Hedgpeth, Dana (September 17, 2008).

"Congress says DHS oversaw $15 billion in failed contracts" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 17, 2008 .

^ McCarthy, Kieren (November 20, 2015).

"Who's running dozens of top-secret unpatched databases? The Dept of Homeland Security" .

The Register . Retrieved January 3, 2016 .

^ "ADVISE Could Support Intelligence Analysis More Effectively" (PDF) .

pdf file . DHS . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Singel, Ryan (March 20, 2007).

"Homeland Data Tool Needs Privacy Help, Report Says" .

Wired . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Sniffen, Michael J. (September 5, 2007).

"DHS Ends Criticized Data-Mining Program" .

The Washington Post . Associated Press . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Monahan, T. 2009. The Murky World of 'Fusion Centres'. Criminal Justice Matters 75 (1): 20-21.

^ "Smashing Intelligence Stovepipes | Security Management" . Archived from the original on April 29, 2011 . Retrieved February 2, 2011 .

^ Report on Fusion Centers July 29, 2009, Democracy Now ^ Monahan, T. and Palmer, N.A. 2009. The Emerging Politics of DHS Fusion Centers. Security Dialogue 40 (6): 617–636.

^ Rittgers, David (February 2, 2011) We're All Terrorists Now Archived April 15, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Cato Institute ^ a b c d Meeks, Brock (January 6, 2006) Homeland Security opening private mail , NBC News ^ Cole, John (January 9, 2006) Your Mail- Free for Government Inspection , Balloon Juice ^ Dees, Diane (January 9, 2006) Department of Homeland Security opens Kansas professor's mail , Mother Jones ^ Transcript Archived July 8, 2011, at the Wayback Machine from The Situation Room (January 12, 2006) ^ "Homeland Security employees rank last in job satisfaction survey" . ABC Inc., WLS-TV Chicago. February 8, 2007. Archived from the original on March 18, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ Conroy, Bill (January 31, 2007).

"DHS memo reveals agency personnel are treated like "human capital" " . Narco News. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007 . Retrieved October 31, 2007 .

^ "Best Places to Work Agency Rankings" . Partnership for Public Service. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016 . Retrieved February 22, 2016 .

^ Neal, Jeff (January 16, 2020).

"Layers of problems drive morale issues at DHS" .

Federal News Network . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ Miroff, Nick (January 19, 2018).

"U.S. customs agency is so short-staffed, it's sending officers from airports to the Mexican border" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ Fernandez, Manny; Jordan, Miriam; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan; Dickerson, Caitlin; Brinson, Kendrick (September 15, 2019).

" 'People Actively Hate Us': Inside the Border Patrol's Morale Crisis" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ "Federal law enforcement has a woman problem" .

Politico . November 14, 2017.

^ " 'Fusion Centers' Expand Criteria to Identify Militia Members" .

Fox News . March 23, 2009. Archived from the original on August 3, 2009 . Retrieved December 19, 2018 .

^ "Fusion Centers Under Fire in Texas and New Mexico | Security Management" . Archived from the original on April 8, 2012 . Retrieved July 13, 2012 .

^ Privacy Impact Assessment for the Department of Homeland Security State, Local, and Regional Fusion Center Initiative December 11, 2008 ^ Making the Grade: Access to Information Scorecard 2015 Archived March 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine March 2015, 80 pages, Center for Effective Government , retrieved March 21, 2016 ^ "Did Trump administration send a coded signal to neo-Nazis? Maybe not — but is that reassuring?" .

Salon . July 6, 2018.

^ "We Must Secure The Border And Build The Wall To Make America Safe Again" .

DHS . February 15, 2018.

^ "Homeland Security Officials Say Claims That Statement Mimics A White Supremacist Slogan Are Merely Conspiracy Theories" .

BuzzFeed . June 29, 2018.

^ "Are '14' And '88' Nazi Dog Whistles In Border Security Document – Or Just Numbers?" .

The Forward . June 28, 2018.

^ Rittgers, David (September 8, 2011).

"Abolish the Department of Homeland Security" .

Cato Institute . Retrieved July 15, 2019 .

^ Iati, Marisa (July 11, 2019).

"Ocasio-Cortez wants to ax Homeland Security. Some conservatives didn't want it to begin with" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 11, 2019 .

^ "Ex-DHS Secretary Tom Ridge: 'It would be a cold day in hell' before 'personal militia' would be welcomed uninvited in Pa" .

triblive.com . July 21, 2020.

^ Romero, Anthony D. (August 10, 2020).

"Dismantle the Department of Homeland Security. Its tactics are fearsome: ACLU director" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved August 10, 2020 .

^ Zakrzewski, Cat (December 2, 2020).

"The Technology 202: ACLU sues DHS over purchase of cellphone location data used to track immigrants" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Kaminsky, Gabe (October 18, 2023).

"Biden DHS official placed on leave after pro-Palestinian ties revealed" .

The Washington Examiner . pp.

2– 3 . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ "American Dragnet: Data-Driven Deportation in the 21st Century" .

law.georgetown.edu .

^ Harwell, Drew (July 7, 2019).

"FBI, ICE find state driver's license photos are a gold mine for facial-recognition searches" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on April 22, 2021.

^ "American Dragnet | Data-Driven Deportation in the 21st Century" .

American Dragnet .

Center on Privacy and Technology . Archived from the original on February 23, 2025.

^ Carcamo, Cindy (May 10, 2022).

"Immigration officials created network that can spy on majority of Americans, report says" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Faife, Corin (May 10, 2022).

"ICE uses data brokers to bypass surveillance restrictions, report finds" .

The Verge .

^ Hodge, Rae (April 22, 2022).

"ICE Uses Private Data Brokers to Circumvent Immigrant Sanctuary Laws, Report Says" .

CNET .

^ Walter-Johnson, Shreya Tewari, Fikayo (July 18, 2022).

"New Records Detail DHS Purchase and Use of Vast Quantities of Cell Phone Location Data | ACLU" .

American Civil Liberties Union .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Reynolds, Spencer (January 17, 2024).

"Recent Reforms Won't Fix DHS Intelligence Abuses" .

Brennan Center .

^ Levinson-Waldman, Rachel; Panduranga, Harsha; Patel, Faiza (July 30, 2024).

"Social Media Surveillance by the U.S. Government | Brennan Center for Justice" .

Brennan Center .

^ Reynolds, Spencer (March 5, 2025).

"How DHS Laid the Groundwork for More Intelligence Abuse" .

Brennan Center .

^ Vladeck, Steve; Wittes, Benjamin (January 18, 2023).

"DHS Authorizes Domestic Surveillance to Protect Statues and Monuments" .

Lawfare .

^ Harris, Shane (July 20, 2020).

"DHS authorizes personnel to collect information on protesters it says threaten monuments" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

^ Selsky, Andrew (October 28, 2022).

"New report shows Department of Homeland Security gathered intel on Portland Black Lives Matter protestors" .

PBS News .

^ "Wyden Releases New Details About Surveillance and Interrogation of Portland Demonstrators by Department of Homeland Security Agents" .

wyden.senate.gov . October 27, 2022. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022.

^ Sullivan, Eileen (January 18, 2025).

"Little-Known Intelligence Agency Outlines Limits on Spying" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

^ Woodruff Swan, Betsy (March 6, 2023).

"DHS has a program gathering domestic intelligence — and virtually no one knows about it" .

Politico .

^ Adamczeski, Ryan (February 26, 2025).

"DHS quietly eliminates ban on surveillance based on sexual orientation and gender identity" .

advocate.com .

Further reading [ edit ] Bullock, Jane, George Haddow, and Damon P. Coppola.

Introduction to homeland security: Principles of all-hazards risk management (Butterworth-Heinemann, 2011) Ramsay, James D.  et al.

Theoretical Foundations of Homeland Security: Strategies, Operations, and Structures (Routledge, 2021) Sylves, Richard T.

Disaster policy and politics: Emergency management and homeland security (CQ press, 2019).

MacMartin, Steven M. Et al. "The History and Evolution of Homeland Security in the United States" ISBN 978-1032756622 (CRC Press 2025) Primary sources [ edit ] United States. Office of Homeland Security.

National strategy for homeland security (DIANE Publishing, 2002) online .

External links [ edit ] Media related to United States Department of Homeland Security at Wikimedia Commons Works on the topic United States Department of Homeland Security at Wikisource Official website Department of Homeland Security on USAspending.gov DHS in the Federal Register v t e United States Department of Homeland Security Headquarters: St. Elizabeths West Campus Kristi Noem , Secretary of Homeland Security Troy Edgar , Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary United States Coast Guard ( Commandant ) Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( Director ) U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Customs and Border Protection Federal Emergency Management Agency Center for Domestic Preparedness National Flood Insurance Program United States Fire Administration Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers United States Secret Service Office of Situational Awareness Transportation Security Administration Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency ( Director ) Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans Office of Immigration Statistics Homeland Security Advisory Council Science and Technology Science and Technology Directorate Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency Explosives Division Chemical and Biological Defense Division Border and Maritime Security Division Human Factors and Behavioral Sciences Division Infrastructure Protection and Disaster Management Division Cyber Security Division ( National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center ) Command, Control and Interoperability Division Intelligence and Analysis Office of Intelligence and Analysis Management Management Directorate Federal Protective Service Office of Biometric Identity Management Law enforcement in the United States Terrorism in the United States Links to related articles v t e Federal executive departments of the United States of America Current Agriculture Commerce Defense Education Energy Health and Human Services Homeland Security Housing and Urban Development Interior Justice Labor State Transportation Treasury Veterans Affairs Former Air Force Army Commerce and Labor Health, Education, and Welfare Navy Post Office War v t e United States Armed Forces Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard Leadership President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Vice Chairman Committees on Armed Services Senate House Active duty four-star officers Active duty three-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Components Military departments Department of Defense Secretary Department of the Army Secretary Department of the Navy Secretary Department of the Air Force Secretary Department of Homeland Security Secretary Service branches and heads Chief of Staff of the United States Army Commandant of the Marine Corps Chief of Naval Operations Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Chief of Space Operations Commandant of the Coast Guard Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard : A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified combatant command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Budget Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II Demographics African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Sikh Americans Hispanic Americans Civil War Air Force Coast Guard Marine Corps Navy Academy History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies : A ( prep ) MC/N ( prep ) AF/SF ( prep ) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer : A MEPS ASVAB The Basic School (MC) Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms : A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations : Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges : Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Officer Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers : A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty / Rating / Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System / Tricare Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains : A MC N AF CG Equipment A ( Designations ) MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles ( active ) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N active future AF CG MSC Weapons: N Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active future Aircraft designation Helicopter arms Other WWII equipment Nuclear football Electronics ( designations ) Flags : A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs : Nuclear Biological Chemical Category A MC N AF SF CG Navboxes A MC N AF SF CG v t e Immigration to the United States and related topics Relevant colonial era, United States and international laws 18th century Nationality law in the American Colonies Plantation Act of 1740 Naturalization Act of 1790 / 1795 / 1798 19th century Naturalization Act of 1802 Act to Encourage Immigration (1864) Civil Rights Act of 1866 14th Amendment (1868) Naturalization Act of 1870 Page Act of 1875 Immigration Act of 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 Scott Act of 1888 Immigration Act of 1891 Geary Act of 1892 20th century Immigration Act of 1903 Naturalization Act of 1906 Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 Immigration Act of 1907 Immigration Act of 1917 Immigration Act of 1918 Emergency Quota Act of 1921 Cable Act of 1922 Immigration Act of 1924 Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 Philippine Independence Act of 1934 Filipino Repatriation Act of 1935 Nationality Act of 1940 Bracero Program (1942–1964) Chinese Exclusion Repeal Act of 1943 War Brides Act of 1945 Alien Fiancées and Fiancés Act of 1946 Luce–Celler Act of 1946 UN Refugee Convention (1951) Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 / 1965 Refugee Act of 1980 Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 Family Fairness (1987) Amerasian Homecoming Act of 1987 Immigration Act of 1990 Immigration and Nationality Technical Corrections Act of 1994 Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act of 1997 American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act of 1998 21st century American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act of 2000 Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 Child Citizenship Act of 2000 Legal Immigration Family Equity Act of 2000 Homeland Security Act of 2002 H-1B Visa Reform Act of 2004 Real ID Act of 2005 International Marriage Broker Regulation Act of 2005 Secure Fence Act of 2006 Emergency Afghan Allies Extension Act of 2014 Laken Riley Act of 2025 Visas and policies Visa policy Permanent residence (Green card) Visa Waiver Program Temporary protected status (TPS) Asylum Green Card Lottery Central American Minors Employment authorization document (EAD card) Deferred action Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) Deferred Action for Parents of Americans (DAPA) Parole Keeping Families Together (KFT) Adjustment of status US-VISIT Security Advisory Opinion E-Verify National Origins Formula Expedited removal Detention Family Unaccompanied children Trump administration family separation policy Trump travel ban Government organizations Department of Homeland Security Immigration and Customs Enforcement U.S. Border Patrol ( BORTAC ) U.S. Customs and Border Protection U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) Executive Office for Immigration Review Board of Immigration Appeals Office of Refugee Resettlement Supreme Court cases Chae Chan Ping v. U.S.

(1889) Nishimura Ekiu v. U.S.

(1892) Fong Yue Ting v. U.S.

(1893) U.S. v. Wong Kim Ark (1898) Ozawa v. U.S.

(1922) U.S. v. Bhagat Singh Thind (1923) Knauff v. Shaughnessy (1950) Harisiades v. Shaughnessy (1952) Shaughnessy v. Mezei (1953) Kleindienst v. Mandel (1972) U.S. v. Brignoni-Ponce (1975) I.N.S. v. St. Cyr (2001) Zadvydas v. Davis (2001) Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting (2011) Trump v. Hawaii (2018) D.H.S. v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal.

(2020) D.H.S. v. Thuraissigiam (2020) Department of State v. Muñoz (2024) Related issues and events 2006 protests Brooks County, Texas Central American migrant caravans Economic impact Effects Eugenics in the United States Guest worker program Human trafficking Human smuggling Coyotaje Immigration reduction Immigration reform List of people deported from the United States Mexico–United States border crisis Mexico–United States border wall Labor shortage March for America Undocumented immigrant population Reverse immigration Unaccompanied minors from Central America Illegal immigration to the United States Detention and deportation of American citizens in the second Trump administration Geography Mexico–United States border Canada–United States border United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints Proposed legislation DREAM Act (2001–2010) H.R. 4437 (2005) McCain–Kennedy (2005) Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2006 STRIVE Act (2007) Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2007 Uniting American Families Act (2000–2013) Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013 SAFE Act (2015) RAISE Act (2017) U.S. Citizenship Act of 2021 Immigration stations and points of entry Angel Island Castle Garden East Boston Ellis Island Otay Mesa San Ysidro Sullivan's Island Washington Avenue Operations "Wetback" (1954) "Peter Pan" (1960–1962) "Babylift" (1975) "Gatekeeper" (1994) "Endgame" (2003–2012) "Front Line" (2004–2005) "Streamline" (2005–present) "Return to Sender" (2006–2007) "Jump Start" (2006–2008) "Phalanx" (2010–2016) "Faithful Patriot" (2018–present) State legislation California DREAM Act (2006–2010) Arizona SB 1070 (2010) Alabama HB 56 (2011) Non-governmental organizations Arizona Border Recon California Coalition for Immigration Reform CASA of Maryland Center for Immigration Studies Center for Migration Studies of New York Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform Community Change Federation for American Immigration Reform Improve The Dream Mexica Movement Mexicans Without Borders Migration Policy Institute Minuteman Civil Defense Corps Minuteman Project National Immigration Forum National Korean American Service & Education Consortium (NAKASEC) Negative Population Growth No More Deaths NumbersUSA Save Our State Utah Compact Documentaries Borderland (TV series) Missing in Brooks County v t e Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States Commerce Office of Export Enforcement National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office of Law Enforcement Office of Security Defense Defense Criminal Investigative Service Department of Defense police Defense Logistics Agency Police Pentagon Force Protection Agency ( Pentagon Police ) National Security Agency Police Department of the Army Intelligence and Security Command Criminal Investigation Division Military Police Corps Army Department Police Corrections Command Navy Criminal Investigative Service Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division Master-at-Arms Navy Police Marine Corps Police Naval Academy Police Air Force Office of Special Investigations Security Forces Department of the Air Force Police Health and Human Services United States Food and Drug Administration ( Office of Criminal Investigations ) National Institutes of Health Police Homeland Security Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers Citizenship and Immigration Services United States Coast Guard Investigative Service Coast Guard Police Customs and Border Protection Border Patrol Federal Protective Service Immigration and Customs Enforcement United States Secret Service Uniformed Division Transportation Security Administration Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Police Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement Hoover Dam Police National Park Service Rangers United States Park Police Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement Justice Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives Drug Enforcement Administration Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI Police Federal Bureau of Prisons United States Marshals Service State Bureau of Diplomatic Security Diplomatic Security Service Office of Foreign Missions Treasury Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau Bureau of Engraving and Printing Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigation United States Mint Police Others (executive) Agriculture : US Forest Service: Law Enforcement & Investigations Energy : Office of Secure Transportation Transportation : United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety Veterans Affairs : Department of Veterans Affairs Police Congress Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms of the Senate United States Capitol Police Government Publishing Office Police Judicial U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System Marshal of the United States Supreme Court ( Supreme Court Police ) Others (federal law) Amtrak Police Department Central Intelligence Agency: Security Protective Service Environmental Protection Agency: Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance Federal Reserve Police Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia Postal Inspection Service ( U.S. Postal Police ) Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services ( National Zoological Park Police ) v t e George W. Bush 43rd President of the United States (2001–2009) 46th Governor of Texas (1995–2000) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inaugurations 2001 2005 Timeline 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 January 2009 Domestic policy Legislation and programs Economic policy Foreign policy International trips Bush Doctrine Russia summits Slovenia Slovakia War in Afghanistan Patriot Act No Child Left Behind Act 2003 invasion of Iraq Status of Forces Agreement Relations with Iran Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act USA Freedom Corps Department of Homeland Security Space policy Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty "War on Terror" President's Council on Service and Civic Participation award Dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy Email controversy Judicial appointments Supreme Court candidates John Roberts Harriet Miers Samuel Alito controversies Cabinet Cheney vice presidency Pardons Impeachment efforts Executive orders Presidential proclamations State funeral of Ronald Reagan State funeral of Gerald Ford Obama transition Life and legacy Childhood home Early life and career Presidential library Official White House portrait Military service controversy Killian documents controversy authenticity issues Professional life Governorship of Texas Prairie Chapel Ranch Walker's Point Estate Clinton Bush Haiti Fund Speeches Joint session of Congress (Feb 2001) Remarks at the Islamic Center of Washington (2001) Joint session of Congress (September 11 attacks) (2001) Mission Accomplished (2003) State of the Union addresses 2002 ( "Axis of evil" ) 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Elections U.S. House 1978 Gubernatorial 1994 1998 Presidential 2000 campaign primaries running mate selection convention debates election Bush v. Gore 2004 campaign primaries convention debates election Public image Bushisms Nicknames As the subject of books and films Fictionalized portrayals Miss Me Yet?

" Yo, Blair " Books A Charge to Keep (1999) Decision Points (2010) 41: A Portrait of My Father (2014) Portraits of Courage (2017) Out of Many, One (2021) Popular culture Fahrenheit 9/11 (2004 documentary) W.

(2008 film) Family Laura Bush (wife) Barbara Pierce Bush (daughter) Jenna Bush Hager (daughter) George H. W. Bush (father presidency ) Barbara Bush (mother) Robin Bush (sister) Jeb Bush (brother) Neil Bush (brother) Marvin Bush (brother) Dorothy Bush Koch (sister) Barney (dog) Miss Beazley (dog) India (cat) Spot Fetcher (dog) ← Bill Clinton Barack Obama → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic Israel Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐v8kfc
Cached time: 20250817043712
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.285 seconds
Real time usage: 1.549 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9489/1000000
Revision size: 97036/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 633780/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 155086/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 458654/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.712/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10964763/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1154.166      1 -total
 52.49%  605.840      1 Template:Reflist
 32.89%  379.551     77 Template:Cite_web
 11.09%  128.022     28 Template:Cite_news
  8.41%   97.087      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
  8.27%   95.506      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.89%   91.028      1 Template:Infobox
  7.03%   81.098      6 Template:Navbox
  5.34%   61.683      1 Template:Short_description
  5.34%   61.658      1 Template:DHS_agencies Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58236:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043712 and revision id 1305720299. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Department_of_Homeland_Security&oldid=1305720299 " Categories : United States Department of Homeland Security 2002 establishments in the United States Disaster preparedness in the United States Internal affairs ministries Ministries established in 2002 Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States Organizations based in Washington, D.C.

Public safety ministries Organizations associated with Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections United States federal executive departments Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2022 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2008 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2009 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 18:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Department of Homeland Security 44 languages Add topic

