Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early military space defense 2.2 Strategic Defense Initiative and the first U.S. Space Command 2.3 Space in U.S. Strategic Command 2.4 U.S. Space Command reestablished 2.4.1 Headquarters 3 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 3.1 Relationship with the United States Space Force 4 Emblem and symbols Toggle Emblem and symbols subsection 4.1 U.S. Space Command seal (2019) 4.2 Army element shoulder sleeve and distinctive unit insignia 4.2.1 Shoulder sleeve insignia 4.2.2 Distinctive unit insignia 5 Locations 6 List of commanders 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents United States Space Command 20 languages Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unified command of the U.S. Department of Defense Not to be confused with the United States Space Force .

United States Space Command Seal of the United States Space Command Active 23 September 1985 – 1 October 2002 (16 years, 10 months) [ 1 ] (first incarnation) 29 August 2019 – present (5 years, 11 months) (second incarnation) Country United States Type Unified combatant command Role Space command Part of Department of Defense Headquarters Peterson Space Force Base , Colorado, U.S.

[ 2 ] March "Space Command March" [ 3 ] Decorations Joint Meritorious Unit Award [ 4 ] Website www .spacecom .mil Commanders Commander Gen Stephen Whiting , USSF Deputy Commander LTG Thomas L. James , USA Command Senior Enlisted Leader CMSgt Jacob C. Simmons, USSF [ 5 ] Insignia Flag Military unit United States Space Command ( USSPACECOM or SPACECOM ) is a unified combatant command of the United States Department of Defense , responsible for military operations in outer space , specifically all operations 100 kilometers (62 miles) and greater above mean sea level . U.S. Space Command is responsible for the operational employment of space forces that are provided by the uniformed services of the Department of Defense .

[ 6 ] Space Command was originally created in September 1985 to provide joint command and control for all military forces in outer space and coordinate with the other combatant commands. SPACECOM was disestablished in 2002, and its responsibilities and forces were merged into United States Strategic Command .

[ 7 ] It was reestablished on 29 August 2019, with a reemphasized focus on space as a warfighting domain.

The U.S. Space Force is the military service responsible for organizing, training, and equipping the majority of forces for U.S. Space Command, which also includes a smaller number of forces from each of the other branches of the U.S. Armed Forces .

Mission [ edit ] U.S. Space Command, working with allies and partners, plans, executes, and integrates military spacepower into multi-domain global operations in order to deter aggression, defend national interests, and when necessary, defeat threats.

[ 8 ] U.S. Space Command has four "space truths" that provide the foundation for its vision and operations: [ 9 ] Space is a vital interest that is integral to the American way of life and national security.

Space superiority enables the Joint Force to rapidly transition from competition to conflict and prevail in a global, all-domain fight.

Space warfighters generate the combat power to win in space.

Space provides the warfighter a combat advantage from the ultimate high ground to the last tactical mile.

History [ edit ] Early military space defense [ edit ] Program 437 PGM-17 Thor anti-satellite missiles Early military space activities were predominantly focused on research and development, rather than operations, and split across the Air Force, Army, and Navy. In 1959, Admiral Arleigh Burke proposed the creation of the Defense Astronautical Agency to control all military space programs. This proposal was supported by the Army and Navy, but opposed by the Air Force.

[ 10 ] Arguing that space defense was an extension of air defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff ultimately agreed with the Air Force, putting operational control of space defense forces under the unified Continental Air Defense Command and multinational North American Air Defense Command in 1960. In 1975, Continental Air Defense Command was inactivated and replaced with Aerospace Defense Command (ADCOM), a specified command led by the Air Force. In 1981, North American Air Defense Command changed its name to North American Aerospace Defense Command to better reflect its role in both air and space defense.

[ 10 ] Strategic Defense Initiative and the first U.S. Space Command [ edit ] First U.S. Space Command service components Name Headquarters Dates Army service components Army Space Planning Group [ 11 ] 1985–1986 Army Space Agency Colorado Springs, Colorado 1986–1988 Army Space Command 1988–August 1992 Army Space and Strategic Defense Command Redstone Arsenal , Alabama August 1992–1 October 1998 Army Space and Missile Defense Command Redstone Arsenal , Alabama 1 October 1997 – 1 October 2002 Naval service components Naval Space Command Dahlgren, Virginia 1 October 1985 – July 2002 Naval Network Warfare Command Norfolk, Virginia July 2002 – 1 October 2002 Air Force service components Air Force Space Command Peterson Space Force Base , Colorado 23 September 1985 – 23 March 1992 Fourteenth Air Force Vandenberg Air Force Base , California 23 March 1992 – 1 October 2002 Strategic Defense Initiative Brilliant Pebbles were intended to intercept a ballistic missile in space The Reagan Administration's Strategic Defense Initiative brought a new focus on space. In 1983, General James V. Hartinger , the commander of Aerospace Defense Command and Air Force Space Command , proposed movement towards a unified space command. The Air Force supported a unified command, which would be dominated by the aerospace service, however, the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps were satisfied with the current arrangement. However, the White House supported the Air Force's position that a unified command should be created, and on 20 November 1984, President Ronald Reagan approved its establishment. U.S. Space Command's missions would include integrating tactical warning and space operations, including control of space, direction of space support activities, and planning for ballistic missile defense. U.S. Space Command would also replace Aerospace Defense Command as the supporting U.S. command to North American Aerospace Defense Command, sharing the same commander.

[ 12 ] On 23 September 1985, U.S. Space Command was activated as a functional combatant command at Peterson Air Force Base , Colorado Springs and Aerospace Defense Command was inactivated on 19 December 1986. In February 1988, U.S. Space Command was assigned the ballistic missile defense mission in preparation for assuming operational command of the Strategic Defense Initiative. However, the end of the Cold War significantly reduced the investment in SDI.

[ 12 ] In 1991, the Joint Chiefs of Staff debated establishing U.S. Strategic Command assume responsibility for nuclear deterrence, missile defense, and space. U.S. Space Command would have been made a sub-unified command under the U.S. Strategic Command. However, the decisive role played by U.S. Space Command in the Persian Gulf War prevented its absorption into U.S. Strategic Command, providing tactical missile warning, GPS, and other space data to forces in theater.

[ 12 ] Concept for a space-based directed energy weapon from United States Space Command: A Vision for 2020 In 1997, General Howell M. Estes III proposed designating space as a geographic area of responsibility, transitioning U.S. Space Command from a functional to a geographic command. This effort was opposed by the Joint Staff , the State Department , and the National Security Council and did not occur. However, there was growing discussion about giving U.S. Space Command the mission for information support and renaming it to United States Space and Information Command. While U.S. Space Command was not renamed, it did assume responsibility for information, or cyberspace, operations.

[ 12 ] Following the September 11 attacks , there was a growing focus on homeland defense and counter-terrorism at the expense of space. The Defense Department was intent on establishing United States Northern Command , merging U.S. Space Command and U.S. Strategic Command in 2002. On 1 October 2002, the first U.S. Space Command was shut down.

[ 13 ] Space in U.S. Strategic Command [ edit ] A SM-3 launches from the USS Lake Erie as part of Operation Burnt Frost On 1 October 2002, as U.S. Space Command inactivated, a new U.S. Strategic Command at Offutt Air Force Base , Nebraska, stood up. Within STRATCOM, the responsibilities for space operations were initially managed by the Joint Functional Component Command for Space and Global Strike , led by the commander of the Air Force's Eighth Air Force .

[ 14 ] However, in 2006, space regained its own functional component under U.S. Strategic Command, under the command of the Fourteenth Air Force commanded.

[ 13 ] Following the inactivation of U.S. Space Command in 2002, Russia and China began developing sophisticated on-orbit capabilities and an array of counter-space weapons. In particular, China conducted the 2007 Chinese anti-satellite missile test , destroying its Fengyun spacecraft, which, according to NASA ,  created 2,841 high-velocity debris items, a larger amount of dangerous space junk than any other space event in history.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 2008, U.S. Strategic Command conducted Operation Burnt Frost to destroy a non-functioning National Reconnaissance Office satellite, before its toxic hydrazine tank could reenter and cause potential harm to human safety, with a RIM-161 Standard Missile 3 launched from the USS Lake Erie .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] This construct lasted until 2017, when the commander of Air Force Space Command became the Joint Force Space Component Commander, replacing it.

[ 13 ] U.S. Space Command reestablished [ edit ] Left to right: USSPACECOM Commander General John Raymond , Secretary of Defense Mark Esper , President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence in the White House Rose Garden for the 2019 reestablishment signing ceremony The 2019 National Defense Authorization Act , which was signed into law in 2018, directed the re-establishment [ 19 ] of U.S. Space Command as a sub-unified combatant command under U.S. Strategic Command ; however, in December 2018, the Trump administration directed that U.S. Space Command instead be a newly established, full unified combatant command, with full responsibilities for space.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] On 26 March 2019, U.S. Air Force General John Raymond [ 22 ] was nominated to be the commander of the second establishment of USSPACECOM, pending Senate approval.

[ 19 ] [ 23 ] In 2019 the Department of the Air Force released the list of finalists for the location of Headquarters Space Command: Cheyenne Mountain Air Force Station , Schriever Air Force Base , Peterson Air Force Base , Buckley Air Force Base , Vandenberg Air Force Base , and Redstone Arsenal .

[ 24 ] U.S. Space Command was officially reestablished as a geographic combatant command on 29 August 2019, during a ceremony at the White House .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The former Joint Force Space Component Commander was dissolved and folded into Space Command. Following the creation of the United States Space Force in December 2019, the Department of the Air Force widened its search for a location of Space Command's permanent headquarters.

[ 27 ] The U.S. Space Command Joint Operations Center USSPACECOM has two subordinate commands: Combined Force Space Component Command (CFSCC), and Joint Task Force Space Defense (JTF-SD).

[ 28 ] CFSCC plans, integrates, conducts, and assesses global space operations in order to deliver combat relevant space capabilities to Combatant Commanders, Coalition partners, the Joint Force, and the Nation. JTF-SD conducts, in unified action with mission partners, space superiority operations to deter aggression, defend U.S. and allied interests, and defeat adversaries throughout the continuum of conflict .

[ 2 ] [ 28 ] In August 2020, In the meeting of the National Space Council, acting Director of National Intelligence announced ''in case of an attack on the U.S. satellites the operational control of intelligence community assets will be in the ambit of the military'', resulting in the National Reconnaissance Office being operationally subordinated to the commander of U.S. Space Command in matters of space defense.

[ 29 ] Air Force pararescue teams practice recovery of a space capsule Launch of a U.S. Army Ground-Based Interceptor On 24 August 2021, two years after its establishment, U.S. Space Command announced that it had reached initial operating capability .

[ 30 ] Achieving full operating capability , according to Lieutenant General John E. Shaw , deputy commander of U.S. Space Command, is dependent on the selection of the combatant command's permanent headquarters.

[ 31 ] U.S. Space Command is planning to reorganize its subordinate commands, possibly reactivating the Joint Force Space Component Command (JFSCC), the precursor organization of the combatant command. JFSSC is planned to be the combatant command's "primary warfighting command," formed by combining CFSCC and JTF–SD. Space Force Lieutenant General Stephen Whiting , commander of SpOC, is planned to lead the new organization.

[ 32 ] In 2023, U.S. Space Command regained its responsibility for missile defense from U.S. Strategic Command and will be taking over the Joint Functional Component Command for Integrated Missile Defense .

[ 33 ] Headquarters [ edit ] In January 2021, it was announced that Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama was the preferred final location for U.S. Space Command. The other locations in contention were Kirtland Air Force Base , Offutt Air Force Base , Joint Base San Antonio , its interim location at Peterson Space Force Base , and Patrick Space Force Base .

[ 34 ] Despite Peterson Space Force Base in Colorado, being both the original and interim location of Space Command headquarters, Redstone Arsenal was selected, reportedly due to political pressure directly from then-president Donald Trump.

[ 35 ] A formal review from the DoD IG was initiated to ensure the process that selected Huntsville as the preferred location was impartial and factually sound. Former Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin came out with his public support and backed the Department of the Air Force's decision process which resulted in the selection of Redstone Arsenal.

[ 36 ] In May 2022, the review found that the selection of Redstone Arsenal as the permanent site was reasonable and justified.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] In July 2023, the move to Huntsville was cancelled. General James H. Dickinson , USA, Commander of the U.S. Space Command, argued that moving the headquarters to Alabama from its current location in Colorado Springs would hurt military readiness. Republicans have accused the Biden administration of acting due to a partisan standoff over the Pentagon's abortion access policies at the time.

[ 39 ] Relocation discussions intensified in early 2025, with the change in administrations. U.S. Rep.

Mike Rogers (R-Ala.), who chairs the House Armed Services Committee, predicted an announcement by the end of April, but no such statement was issued. On 2 May 2025, two sources told a Huntsville television station that a decision had been reached to move USSPACECOM to Redstone Arsenal and -- barring a reversal -- the announcement would follow confirmation of a new Secretary of the Air Force.

[ 40 ] Organization [ edit ] Name Function Headquarters Service components [ 41 ] United States Space Forces – Space Combined Joint Force Space Component Commander (CJFSCC) Plans, integrates, conducts, and assesses global space operations in order to deliver combat relevant space effects, in, from, and to space Vandenberg Space Force Base , California Army Space and Missile Defense Command Develop and provide Army space, missile defense, and high altitude forces Redstone Arsenal , Alabama Marine Corps Forces Space Command Provides space operational support to the Fleet Marine Force Peterson Space Force Base , Colorado Navy Space Command Responsible for Navy information network operations, offensive and defensive cyberspace operations, space operations and signals intelligence Fort Meade , Maryland Air Forces Space Ensures the aerospace control and air defense of the continental United States, U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico Tyndall Air Force Base , Florida Functional components [ 41 ] Joint Functional Component Command for Integrated Missile Defense Synchronizes global missile defense planning Schriever Space Force Base , Colorado Combined Space Operations Center (subordinated to SPACEFOR–SPACE ) Execute operational command and control of space forces to achieve theater and global objectives.

[ 42 ] Vandenberg Space Force Base , California Joint Navigation Warfare Center (subordinate to SPACEFOR–SPACE) Enable positioning, navigation and timing superiority [ 43 ] Kirtland Air Force Base , New Mexico Joint Overhead Persistent Infrared Center (subordinate to SPACEFOR–SPACE) Conduct integrated mission management to optimize the overhead persistent infrared enterprise [ 44 ] Buckley Space Force Base , Colorado Missile Warning Center (subordinate to SPACEFOR–SPACE) Delivers global strategic and theater missile warning and nuclear detonation detection [ 45 ] Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station , Colorado National Space Defense Center (subordinate to SPACEFOR–SPACE) Coordinates military, intelligence, civil, and commercial space for unified space defense operations [ 46 ] Schriever Space Force Base , Colorado Joint Force Headquarters Cyber - Air Force Cyber support from U.S. Cyber Command [ 47 ] Joint Base San Antonio , Texas Previous, now-deactivated functional components included the Combined Force Space Component Command at Vandenberg Space Force Base , California, and the Joint Task Force–Space Defense at Schriever Space Force Base , Colorado. Both were disestablished with the creation of U.S. Space Forces – Space to take on SpOC's Space Force responsibilities.

[ 48 ] Relationship with the United States Space Force [ edit ] United States Space Command is the unified combatant command for all military space operations, while the United States Space Force is the military service responsible for organizing, training, and equipping the majority of forces for U.S. Space Command. Space Command's Space Force service component is Space Operations Command , providing the majority of space forces.

[ 49 ] U.S. Space Command also consists of smaller amounts of forces from the United States Army , United States Marine Corps , United States Navy , and United States Air Force . This mirrors the relationship between the Space Force's predecessor, Air Force Space Command , and U.S. Space Command (and between 2002 and 2019, United States Strategic Command ).

[ 50 ] Emblem and symbols [ edit ] Seals of United States Space Command and its predecessors U.S. Space Command (2019–present) Joint Force Space Component Commander (2017–2019) Joint Functional Component Command for Space (2006–2017) U.S. Space Command (1985–2002) U.S. Space Command seal (2019) [ edit ] Shield: The bald eagle , a traditional symbol of American strength and vigilance, carries an olive branch in his right talon, symbolizing the worldwide goal of peaceful operations in space. In his left talon is a cluster of thirteen arrows with the silver delta as arrowheads, indicative of the strength and power necessary to protect our citizens and allies. The delta symbol is historically associated with space and represents change and innovation, and the cluster of deltoids thrusting upward into space signifies our ever growing aspirations in space beyond earth’s orbit. The blue globe with silver land masses, as viewed from space, signifies the origin and control point for all space assets and represents the global operations of the command in mission areas such as surveillance, navigation, communications and missile warning. The silver and white Polaris signifies our constant presence and vigilance in space now and in the future. Encompassing the globe are two white elliptical orbits representing the unity of U.S. Space Command with our joint and combined partners, and which intersect over the United States, the terrestrial heart of the command. An arc of four silver stars above the eagle symbolizes the four-star combatant commander of U.S. Space Command. The black background represents the infinity of space.

Seal: The coat of arms as blazoned in full color on a black disk, bearing the night sky, enclosed by a silver border, and inscribed "UNITED STATES" above and "SPACE COMMAND" below, all silver.

Army element shoulder sleeve and distinctive unit insignia [ edit ] Army element insignia Shoulder Sleeve Insignia Distinctive Unit Insignia Shoulder sleeve insignia [ edit ] Black and gold together symbolize the United States Army. Black signifies the vast infinity of space and gold denotes high standards for excellence. The demi-globe represents the earth as seen from space and symbolizes the global operations of the command. The crossed orbital rings denote the unity of United States Space Command (USSPACECOM) with joint and combined partners. The rings intersect over the United States, identifying the terrestrial heart of the command. The gold pheon represents the combat power of Army Space. Four stars represent the four-star combatant commander of USSPACECOM. The Polaris star signifies constant presence and vigilance in space now and into the future.

[ 51 ] Distinctive unit insignia [ edit ] Black and gold together symbolize the United States Army. Black signifies the vast infinity of space and gold denotes high standards for excellence. The demi-globe represents the earth as seen from space and symbolizes the global operations of the command. The crossed orbital rings denote the unity of United States Space Command (USSPACECOM) with joint and combined partners. The gold pheon represents the combat power of Army Space. Four stars represent the four-star combatant commander of USSPACECOM. The Polaris star signifies constant presence and vigilance in space now and into the future. The motto translates to, "MUD TO SPACE." [ 52 ] Locations [ edit ] Locations in the contiguous United States .

Buckley Cheyenne Mountain Kirtland Meade Peterson Redstone Schriever Tyndall Vandenberg class=notpageimage| U.S. Space Command locations.

U.S. Space Force Base U.S. Air Force Base U.S. Army Base U.S. Space Command locations Name Location State Major USSPACECOM unit emblem Major USSPACECOM unit Other USSPACECOM units Buckley Space Force Base Aurora Colorado Joint Overhead Persistent Infrared Center Kirtland Air Force Base Albuquerque New Mexico Joint Navigation Warfare Center Fort Meade Fort Meade Maryland Navy Space Command Peterson Space Force Base Colorado Springs Colorado United States Space Command Marine Corps Forces Space Command Redstone Arsenal Huntsville Alabama Army Space and Missile Defense Command Schriever Space Force Base Colorado Springs Colorado National Space Defense Center Tyndall Air Force Base Panama City Florida Air Forces Space Vandenberg Space Force Base Lompoc California United States Space Forces – Space Combined Space Operations Center Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station Cheyenne Mountain Colorado Missile Warning Center List of commanders [ edit ] Main article: Leadership of the United States Space Command Note: The numeric order of the commanders were reset due to the second establishment being considered a different command than the first.

No.

Commander Term Service branch Portrait Name Took office Left office Term length Commander–in–Chief, United States Space Command 1 General Robert T. Herres 23 September 1985 [ 53 ] 6 February 1987 1 year, 136 days U.S. Air Force 2 General John L. Piotrowski 6 February 1987 30 March 1990 [ 54 ] [ 55 ] 3 years, 84 days U.S. Air Force 3 General Donald J. Kutyna 1 April 1990 30 June 1992 2 years, 60 days U.S. Air Force 4 General Chuck Horner 30 June 1992 13 September 1994 2 years, 75 days U.S. Air Force 5 General Joseph W. Ashy 13 September 1994 26 August 1996 1 year, 348 days U.S. Air Force 6 General Howell M. Estes III 26 August 1996 14 August 1998 1 year, 353 days U.S. Air Force 7 General Richard B. Myers 14 August 1998 22 February 2000 1 year, 192 days U.S. Air Force 8 General Ralph Eberhart 22 February 2000 1 October 2002 2 years, 221 days U.S. Air Force Commander, United States Space Command 1 General John W. Raymond 29 August 2019 20 August 2020 357 days U.S. Space Force 2 General James H. Dickinson 20 August 2020 10 January 2024 3 years, 143 days U.S. Army 3 General Stephen Whiting 10 January 2024 Incumbent 1 year, 219 days U.S. Space Force See also [ edit ] French Space Command United Kingdom Space Command References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Space Command .

Citations [ edit ] ^ "Air Force Magazine" . Air Force Association. 21 December 2006 – via Google Books.

^ a b "United States Space Command Organizational Fact Sheet" (PDF) . United States Space Command. 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ U.S. Air Force Academy, Band (27 August 2009).

"Space Command March" .

Spotify . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ "Approved JMUAs - 2020 09 30" (PDF) .

prhome.defense.gov . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ "CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT JACOB C. SIMMONS" .

United States Space Command . 7 August 2023.

^ "Frequently Asked Questions" . United States Space Command.

^ Handberg, Roger (2000).

Seeking New World Vistas: The Militarization of Space . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 109.

ISBN 0-275-96295-4 .

^ Commander's Strategic Vision (PDF) . U.S. Space Command. January 2021.

^ Strout, Nathan (2 February 2021).

"We hold these Space Truths to be self-evident" .

C4ISRNet . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ a b Spires, David N. (25 January 2011).

Beyond Horizons: A Half-Century of Air Force Space Leadership (PDF) (Revised ed.). Air Force Space Command.

ISBN 978-1-58566-060-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2020.

^ Chapter 4: Renewed Interest in Space and The War in the Persian Gulf, 1985-1991: The Army Returns to Space (PDF) .

^ a b c d "History of the Unified Command Plan" (PDF) .

www.jcs.mil . 2013 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 .

^ a b c Shugart, Gary (1 October 2018).

"Re-establishing U.S. Space Command" .

purview.dodlive.mil . Archived from the original on 2 January 2019 . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ "USSTRATCOM reaches first milestone in command restructure" . 3 October 2017.

^ Cooney, Michael (28 July 2010).

"NASA identifies Top Ten space junk missions" .

Network World . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "U.S. Will Not Let China, Russia Deny Its Space Superiority, DOD Officials Say" .

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE .

^ "JSpOC intergral to Burnt Frost success" .

Vandenberg Space Force Base . 29 February 2008 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Operation Burnt Frost: The Power of Social Networks | APPEL Knowledge Services" .

appel.nasa.gov . 1 June 2008 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ a b Erwin, Sandra (26 March 2019).

"Trump nominates Raymond to be commander of U.S. Space Command" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

^ Thomas, Will (17 August 2018).

"Trump Signs National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019" . American Institute of Physics . Retrieved 27 August 2018 .

^ Trump, Donald J. (18 December 2018).

"Text of a Memorandum from the President to the Secretary of Defense Regarding the Establishment of the United States Space Command" .

whitehouse.gov . Retrieved 20 December 2018 – via National Archives .

^ Note: General Raymond later transferred from the Air Force to the Space Force on 20 December 2019.

^ Pawlyk, Oriana (26 March 2019).

"Air Force General Tapped to Head US Space Command" .

Military.com . Retrieved 27 March 2019 .

^ Browne, Ryan (5 April 2019).

"Trump's Space Command to be based in Colorado, Alabama or California" . CNN . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ Mehta, Aaron (20 August 2019).

"Space Command to launch Aug. 29" .

Defense News . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ "Trump formally reestablishes U.S. Space Command at White House ceremony" .

SpaceNews . 29 August 2019.

^ Secretary of the Air Force Public Affairs (15 May 2020).

"Department of the Air Force expands potential basing locations for US Space Command Headqu" .

United States Space Force . Retrieved 4 August 2022 .

^ a b Hitchens, Theresa (30 August 2019).

"Raymond's First SPACECOM Move: Two New Subcommands and Their Leaders" .

Breaking Defense . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ Erwin, Sandra (23 October 2019).

"Five things to know about U.S. Space Command" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 29 October 2020 .

^ Harper, Jon (24 August 2021).

"SPACE SYMPOSIUM NEWS: Spacecom Achieves Initial Operational Capability" .

National Defense .

^ Miller, Amanda (10 December 2021).

"Space Command's Goal of Uniting All US Military Space Functions" .

Air Force Magazine .

^ Hitchens, Teresa (15 November 2021).

"Exclusive: SPACECOM reorganizing amidst theater component command debate" .

Breaking Defense .

^ Hitchens, Theresa (31 May 2023).

"SPACECOM takes over missile defense ops from Strategic Command" .

Breaking Defense . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Robinson-Smith, Will (13 January 2021).

"Space Command headquarters coming to Huntsville" .

www.waaytv.com . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Koren, Marina (26 January 2021).

"What Happens to the Space Force Now?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Erwin, Sandra (22 February 2021).

"Pentagon chief Austin stands behind Air Force amid investigation of Space Command basing decision" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 23 February 2021 .

^ Roop, Lee (10 May 2022).

"Air Force backs plan to move Space Command HQ to Alabama" .

al . Retrieved 5 August 2022 .

^ Insinna, Valerie (10 May 2022).

"OIG finds Huntsville choice for SPACECOM HQ justified" .

Breaking Defense . Retrieved 11 May 2022 .

^ Demirjian, Karoun (31 July 2023).

"Biden Cancels Space Command Move to Alabama Amid Tuberville Feud" .

New York Times .

^ "FOX54 News Huntsville - YouTube" .

www.rocketcitynow.com . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ a b "Warfighting Units" .

United States Space Command . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Combined Space Operations Center / Space Delta 5 Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

Vandenberg Space Force Base . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

^ "Kirtland Air Force Base > Units > Joint Navigation Warfare Center" .

www.kirtland.af.mil . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Joint Overhead Persistent-Infrared Center (JOPC)" (PDF) .

Vandenberg Space Force Base . 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

^ "Missile Warning Center Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

Vandenberg Space Force Base . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

^ "National Space Defense Center" .

Joint Task Force-Space Defense . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Pomerleau, Mark (8 April 2022).

"Cyber Command's force is growing, in part, to support space" .

FedScoop . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "USSF Creates New Component for SPACECOM" . 12 December 2023.

^ "About Space Operations Command" .

www.spoc.spaceforce.mil . Retrieved 4 August 2022 .

^ Kirby, Lynn (21 October 2020).

"Space Force activates first field command" .

United States Space Force . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Shoulder Sleeve Insignia" .

tioh.army.mil . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Distinctive Unit Insignia" . Archived from the original on 5 September 2024 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ Mehuron, Tamara A. (August 2009).

"2009 Space Almanac: The US military space operation in facts and figures" (PDF) .

Air Force Magazine . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 May 2020 – via Space-Library.com.

^ " "USAF Almanac: Facts and Figures" " (PDF) .

Air Force Magazine . February 2000 . Retrieved 12 May 2021 .

^ " "General John L. Piotrowski" " .

United States Air Force Historical Support Division . March 2021 . Retrieved 12 May 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] General Accounting Office (November 1990).

"Defence Reorganization: DOD's Efforts to Streamline the Space Command" (PDF) .

v t e United States Space Command Subordinate organizations Combined Force Space Component Command Combined Space Operations Center Missile Warning Center Joint Overhead Persistent Infrared Center Joint Navigation Warfare Center Joint Task Force–Space Defense National Space Defense Center Service component commands Space and Missile Defense Command (land) Marine Corps Forces Space Command (Marine Corps) Navy Space Command (maritime) First Air Force (air) United States Space Forces – Space (space) Joint Force Headquarters-Cyber Air Force (cyber) Former service component commands Naval Space Command Air Force Space Command Fourteenth Air Force v t e Unified combatant commands of the United States Department of Defense Geographic combatant commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Functional combatant commands Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command Inactivated Atlantic Command Joint Forces Command Strike Command v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Pete Hegseth , Secretary of Defense Steve Feinberg , Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including defense agencies and DoD field activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Local Defense Community Cooperation Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Defense Microelectronics Activity Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency White House Communications Agency National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service Director/Chief Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute Defense Travel Management Office Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity American Forces Network Defense Information School Defense Visual Information Distribution Service Stars and Stripes Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services ( White House Military Office ) Reports directly Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Programs Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Energy, Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps : Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations : Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Energy) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff : Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff : Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service v t e United States Armed Forces Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard Leadership President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Vice Chairman Committees on Armed Services Senate House Active duty four-star officers Active duty three-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Components Military departments Department of Defense Secretary Department of the Army Secretary Department of the Navy Secretary Department of the Air Force Secretary Department of Homeland Security Secretary Service branches and heads Chief of Staff of the United States Army Commandant of the Marine Corps Chief of Naval Operations Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Chief of Space Operations Commandant of the Coast Guard Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard : A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified combatant command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Budget Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II Demographics African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Sikh Americans Hispanic Americans Civil War Air Force Coast Guard Marine Corps Navy Academy History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies : A ( prep ) MC/N ( prep ) AF/SF ( prep ) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer : A MEPS ASVAB The Basic School (MC) Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms : A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations : Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges : Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Officer Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers : A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty / Rating / Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System / Tricare Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains : A MC N AF CG Equipment A ( Designations ) MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles ( active ) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N active future AF CG MSC Weapons: N Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active future Aircraft designation Helicopter arms Other WWII equipment Nuclear football Electronics ( designations ) Flags : A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs : Nuclear Biological Chemical Category A MC N AF SF CG Navboxes A MC N AF SF CG v t e List of space forces and space commands Space forces China Russia United States Air and Space force Colombia France Iran Netherlands Russia Spain Air forces with space units and formations Australia Brazil Canada Germany Iran Israel Japan New Zealand North Korea Pakistan South Korea Thailand Turkey United Kingdom Vietnam Space commands Australia Brazil France India Italy Japan NATO NORAD Peru Russia South Korea United Kingdom United States Ranks and insignia of space forces v t e Missile defense in the United States Systems Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD) Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS) Sensors Radar AN/SPY-1 AN/TPY-2 AN/SPY-3 AN/SPY-6 Air and Missile Defense Radar (AMDR) AN/SPY-7 Long Range Discrimination Radar (LRDR) PAVE Phased Array Warning System (PAVE PAWS) Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) AN/FPQ-16 EPARCS AN/FPS-85 Space Track Radar AN/FPS-108 Cobra Dane Solid State Phased Array Radar System (SSPARS) AN/FPS-132 Upgraded Early Warning Radar (UEWR) Sea-based X-band radar (SBX-1) Optical Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS) Space Tracking and Surveillance System (STSS) Space Surveillance Telescope (SST) Weapons RIM-67 Standard (SM-2) MIM-104F (PAC-3) RIM-161 Standard Missile 3 (SM-3) RIM-174 Standard Extended Range Active Missile (SM-6) Boeing YAL-1 Kinetic Energy Interceptor (KEI) Network Centric Airborne Defense Element Missile Defense Agency (MDA) North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) United States Space Command (USSPACECOM) Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cd4gs
Cached time: 20250817152141
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.148 seconds
Real time usage: 1.367 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7127/1000000
Revision size: 54150/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 378155/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10439/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 264894/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.638/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8928154/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1032.692      1 -total
 39.56%  408.485      1 Template:Reflist
 28.46%  293.884     43 Template:Cite_web
 10.20%  105.333      8 Template:Military_navigation
  8.65%   89.343      1 Template:Infobox_military_unit
  7.58%   78.307      2 Template:Short_description
  7.43%   76.760      1 Template:United_States_Space_Command
  7.15%   73.794      1 Template:Infobox
  5.61%   57.926      1 Template:Location_map+
  5.47%   56.442     11 Template:Officeholder_table Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:742825:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817152141 and revision id 1306122993. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Space_Command&oldid=1306122993 " Categories : Unified combatant commands of the U.S. Department of Defense Military units and formations disestablished in 2002 Military units and formations established in 1985 Military units and formations established in 2019 Military units and formations in Colorado Organizations based in Colorado Springs, Colorado Space units and formations of the United States 1985 establishments in the United States Military space program of the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 02:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Space Command 20 languages Add topic

