Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Relation to Goddess Katyayini 3 Works 4 Views 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Kātyāyana 16 languages العربية বাংলা Català Français हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen മലയാളം नेपाल भाषा Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sanskrit grammarian, mathematician and Vedic priest For the Buddhist monk, see Katyayana (Buddhist) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kātyāyana" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kātyāyana Born est. 3rd century BCE Deccan , Southern India Academic work Era Vedic period Main interests Sanskrit grammarian , mathematician and Vedic priest Notable works Vārttikakāra , Vyākarana, later Śulbasūtras Kātyāyana (कात्यायन) also spelled as Katyayana ( c.

3rd century BCE) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was a Sanskrit grammarian , mathematician and Vedic priest who lived in ancient India .

Origins [ edit ] According to some legends [ citation needed ] , he was born in the Katya lineage originating from Vishwamitra , thus [ citation needed ] called Katyayana.

The Kathāsaritsāgara mentions Kātyāyana as another name of Vararuci , a re-incarnation of Lord Shiva 's gana or follower Pushpadanta. The story also mentions him learning grammar from Shiva's son Kartikeya which is corroborated in the Garuda Purana where Kartikeya (also called Kumara) teaches Katyayana the rules of grammar in a way that it could be understood even by children.

[ 4 ] It may be that his full name was in fact Vararuci Kātyāyana.

[ 5 ] Relation to Goddess Katyayini [ edit ] In texts like Kalika Purana , it is mentioned that he worshipped Mother Goddess to be born as his daughter hence she came to be known as Katyayani or the "daughter of Katyayan" who is worshipped on the sixth day of Navratri festival.

[ 6 ] According to the Vamana Purana once the gods had gathered together to discuss the atrocities of the demon Mahishasura and their anger manifested itself in the form of energy rays. The rays crystallized in the hermitage of Kātyāyana Rishi , who gave it proper form therefore she is also called Katyayani.

[ 7 ] Works [ edit ] He is known for two works: The Vārttikakāra , an elaboration on Pāṇini grammar. Along with the Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali , this text  became a core part of the Vyākaraṇa ( grammar ) canon.  This was one of the six Vedangas , and constituted compulsory education for students in the following twelve centuries.

He also composed one of the later Śulbasūtras , a series of nine texts on the geometry of altar constructions, dealing with rectangles, right-sided triangles, rhombuses, etc.

[ 8 ] Views [ edit ] Kātyāyana's views on the sentence-meaning connection tended towards naturalism. Kātyāyana believed, that the word-meaning relationship was not a result of human convention. For Kātyāyana, word-meaning relations were siddha , given to us, eternal. Though the object a word is referring to is non-eternal, the substance of its meaning, like a lump of gold used to make different ornaments, remains undistorted, and is therefore permanent.

[ citation needed ] Realizing that each word represented a categorization, he came up with the following conundrum (following Bimal Krishna Matilal ): "If the 'basis' for the use of the word 'cow' is cowhood (a universal) what would be the 'basis' for the use of the word 'cowhood' [ citation needed ] ?

Clearly, this leads to infinite regress. Kātyāyana's solution to this was to restrict the universal category to that of the word itself — the basis for the use of any word is to be the very same word-universal itself." This view may have been the nucleus of the Sphoṭa doctrine enunciated by Bhartṛhari in the 5th century, in which he elaborates
the word-universal as the superposition of two structures — the meaning-universal or the semantic structure ( artha-jāti ) 
is superposed on the sound-universal or the phonological structure ( śabda-jāti ).

In the tradition of scholars like Pingala , Kātyāyana was also interested in mathematics. Here his text on the sulvasutras dealt with geometry , and extended the treatment of the Pythagorean theorem as first presented in 800 BCE by Baudhayana .

[ 9 ] Kātyāyana belonged to the Aindra School of Grammar [ citation needed ] .

Notes [ edit ] ^ www.wisdomlib.org (2013-06-05).

"Katyayana, Kātyāyana: 24 definitions" .

www.wisdomlib.org .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-13 . Retrieved 2021-11-20 .

^ "Approximate Chronology of Indian Philosophers" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 2011-10-17 . Retrieved 2022-02-21 .

^ "Kātyāyana" .

Oxford Reference .

Archived from the original on 2022-03-09 . Retrieved 2022-02-21 .

^ "Topic 101" .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-31 . Retrieved 2019-07-31 .

^ Winternitz, Moriz (1920).

Geschichte der indischen Literatur. Bd. 3: Die Kunstdichtung. Die wissenschaftliche Litteratur. Neuindische Litteratur. Nachträge zu allen drei Bänden . Leipzig: Amelang. p. 391.

^ "Forms of Durga" .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-15 . Retrieved 2019-07-17 .

^ "Topic 1" .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-31 . Retrieved 2019-07-31 .

^ Joseph (2000), p. 328 ^ Pingree (1981), p. 6 References [ edit ] Joseph, George Gheverguese: The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics Pingree, David.

Jyotihsastra: Astral and Mathematical Literature . Otto Harrassowitz. Wiesbaden, 1981.

ISBN 3-447-02165-9 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Kātyāyana" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Authority control databases International VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kātyāyana&oldid=1259202560 " Categories : Ancient Sanskrit grammarians Ancient Indian mathematicians 3rd-century BC writers Indian Sanskrit scholars 2nd-century BC mathematicians Ancient Indian mathematical works 3rd-century BC clergy 3rd-century BC mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 This page was last edited on 23 November 2024, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kātyāyana 16 languages Add topic

