Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formulation 2 Implications 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Suslin's problem 10 languages Čeština Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Problem in set theory In mathematics , Suslin's problem is a question about totally ordered sets posed by Mikhail Yakovlevich Suslin ( 1920 ) and published posthumously.
It has been shown to be independent of the standard axiomatic system of set theory known as ZFC ; Solovay & Tennenbaum (1971) showed that the statement can neither be proven nor disproven from those axioms, assuming ZF is consistent.

(Suslin is also sometimes written with the French transliteration as Souslin , from the Cyrillic Суслин .) Un ensemble ordonné (linéairement) sans sauts ni lacunes et tel que tout ensemble de ses intervalles (contenant plus qu'un élément) n'empiétant pas les uns sur les autres est au plus dénumerable, est-il nécessairement un continue linéaire (ordinaire)?

Is a (linearly) ordered set without jumps or gaps and such that every set of its intervals (containing more than one element) not overlapping each other is at most denumerable, necessarily an (ordinary) linear continuum?

The original statement of Suslin's problem from ( Suslin 1920 ) Formulation [ edit ] Suslin's problem asks: Given a non-empty totally ordered set R with the four properties R does not have a least nor a greatest element ; the order on R is dense (between any two distinct elements there is another); the order on R is complete , in the sense that every non-empty bounded subset has a supremum and an infimum ; and every collection of mutually disjoint non-empty open intervals in R is countable (this is the countable chain condition for the order topology of R ), is R necessarily order-isomorphic to the real line R ?

If the requirement for the countable chain condition is replaced with the requirement that R contains a countable dense subset (i.e., R is a separable space ), then the answer is indeed yes: any such set R is necessarily order-isomorphic to R (proved by Cantor ).

The condition for a topological space that every collection of non-empty disjoint open sets is at most countable is called the Suslin property .

Implications [ edit ] Any totally ordered set that is not isomorphic to R but satisfies properties 1–4 is known as a Suslin line . The Suslin hypothesis says that there are no Suslin lines: that every countable-chain-condition dense complete linear order without endpoints is isomorphic to the real line. An equivalent statement is that every tree of height ω 1 either has a branch of length ω 1 or an antichain of cardinality ℵ 1 .

The generalized Suslin hypothesis says that for every infinite regular cardinal κ every tree of height κ either has a branch of length κ or an antichain of cardinality κ.

The existence of Suslin lines is equivalent to the existence of Suslin trees and to Suslin algebras .

The Suslin hypothesis is independent of ZFC.

Jech (1967) and Tennenbaum (1968) independently used forcing methods to construct models of ZFC in which Suslin lines exist.

Jensen later proved that Suslin lines exist if the diamond principle , a consequence of the axiom of constructibility V = L, is assumed. (Jensen's result was a surprise, as it had previously been conjectured that V = L implies that no Suslin lines exist, on the grounds that V = L implies that there are "few" sets.) On the other hand, Solovay & Tennenbaum (1971) used forcing to construct a model of ZFC without Suslin lines; more precisely, they showed that Martin's axiom plus the negation of the continuum hypothesis implies the Suslin hypothesis.

The Suslin hypothesis is also independent of both the generalized continuum hypothesis (proved by Ronald Jensen ) and of the negation of the continuum hypothesis . It is not known whether the generalized Suslin hypothesis is consistent with the generalized continuum hypothesis; however, since the combination implies the negation of the square principle at a singular strong limit cardinal —in fact, at all singular cardinals and all regular successor cardinals —it implies that the axiom of determinacy holds in L(R) and is believed to imply the existence of an inner model with a superstrong cardinal .

See also [ edit ] List of statements independent of ZFC Continuum hypothesis AD + Cantor's isomorphism theorem References [ edit ] K. Devlin and H. Johnsbråten, The Souslin Problem, Lecture Notes in Mathematics (405) Springer 1974.

Jech, Tomáš (1967), "Non-provability of Souslin's hypothesis", Comment. Math. Univ. Carolinae , 8 : 291– 305, MR 0215729 Souslin, M. (1920), "Problème 3" (PDF) , Fundamenta Mathematicae , 1 : 223, doi : 10.4064/fm-1-1-223-224 Solovay, R. M.; Tennenbaum, S. (1971), "Iterated Cohen Extensions and Souslin's Problem", Annals of Mathematics , 94 (2): 201– 245, doi : 10.2307/1970860 , JSTOR 1970860 Tennenbaum, S. (1968), "Souslin's problem.", Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.

, 59 (1): 60– 63, Bibcode : 1968PNAS...59...60T , doi : 10.1073/pnas.59.1.60 , MR 0224456 , PMC 286001 , PMID 16591594 Grishin, V. N. (2001) [1994], "Suslin hypothesis" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suslin%27s_problem&oldid=1298492506 " Categories : Independence results Order theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 21:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suslin's problem 10 languages Add topic

