Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Capitalism as a historical specificity Toggle Capitalism as a historical specificity subsection 2.1 A heterodox Marxist 2.2 Marx's Capital : a critique immanent to its purpose 2.3 Against the traditional critique of capital from the standpoint of labour 2.4 "Commodity fetishism" 3 Modern antisemitism and the destruction of the abstract 4 Publications 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Moishe Postone 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Polski Português Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian historian and social theorist This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Moishe Postone" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Moishe Postone Born 17 April 1942 Edmonton , Alberta , Canada Died 19 March 2018 (age 75) Chicago , Illinois , U.S.

Other names Morris Postone Academic background Alma mater Goethe University Frankfurt Thesis The Present as Necessity [ 1 ] (1983) Doctoral advisor Iring Fetscher , Heinz Steinert [ de ] , Albrecht Wellmer [ 1 ] Influences G. W. F. Hegel , Karl Marx , György Lukács , Isaak Illich Rubin , Max Weber , Herbert Marcuse , Theodor W. Adorno , Alfred Sohn-Rethel Academic work Discipline History , sociology Sub-discipline 20th-century German history , [ 2 ] modern European intellectual history , social theory School or tradition Critical theory Institutions University of Chicago Doctoral students Catherine Chatterley , Loïc Wacquant , Chris Cutrone [ 1 ] Notable works Time, Labor and Social Domination (1993) Influenced Martin Hägglund , [ 3 ] Gáspár Miklós Tamás Moishe Postone (17 April 1942 – 19 March 2018) was a Canadian historian , sociologist , political philosopher and social theorist . He was a professor of history at the University of Chicago , where he was part of the Committee on Jewish Studies .

Life and career [ edit ] Postone was born on 17 April 1942, the son of a Canadian rabbi . He received his PhD from University of Frankfurt in 1983.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] His research interests included modern European intellectual history ; social theory , especially critical theories of modernity ; 20th-century Germany ; antisemitism ; [ 5 ] and contemporary global transformations. He was co-editor with Craig Calhoun and Edward LiPuma of Bourdieu : Critical Perspectives and author of Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . He was also co-editor with Eric Santner of Catastrophe and Meaning: The Holocaust and the Twentieth Century , a collection of essays that consider the meaning of the Holocaust in twentieth-century history and its influence on historical practice. Postone's work has had a large influence on the anti-Germans .

[ citation needed ] He was originally denied tenure by the University of Chicago's sociology department, sparking a great deal of public resentment from graduate students he taught. He was later granted tenure by the history department.

[ citation needed ] Postone was the Thomas E. Donnelley Professor of Modern History and co-director of the Chicago Center for Contemporary Theory.

Postone died on 19 March 2018.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Capitalism as a historical specificity [ edit ] Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e A heterodox Marxist [ edit ] In 1978, Postone started a critical analysis on Marx's theory of value.

[ 8 ] However, his most distinguished main work, Time, Labor and Social Domination , was published in 1993 (translated into German in 2003, French in 2009 and Japanese in 2012).

In his works he proposed a fundamental reinterpretation of Karl Marx 's critique of political economy , focusing on Marx's original concepts value, capital and labour. Inspired by heterodox Marxist thinkers such as Isaak Rubin and Roman Rosdolsky , and certain authors of the Frankfurt School , for example Alfred Sohn-Rethel , he demonstrated that the assumptions of the "pessimistic turn" of Horkheimer were historically rather than theoretically founded. Postone interpreted critical writings on Marx's critique of political economy, especially in its Capital 1 edition, and Grundrisse , as the development of a social-mediational theory of value.

Marx's Capital : a critique immanent to its purpose [ edit ] Postone thought that in writing the Grundrisse Marx concludes that adequate critical theory must be completely immanent to its purpose. The criticism cannot be taken from a point of view external to its object, but must appear in the mode of presentation itself.

Das Kapital is so structured with a surface level immanent to political economics discourse and a deeper layer that grounds this discourse, which makes it particularly difficult to interpret. Because of the inherent nature of the format Marx uses, the object of the critique of Marx has often been taken as the standpoint of this criticism. For example, not only is the category of exchange value historically specific to the capitalist period, but value's basis, the capitalist form of wage labour, must also be historically specific, and does not apply conceptually to other periods. The methodological sections of the Grundrisse clarify not only Marx's presentation, but other sections make explicit that the categories of capital such as value and exchange-labour, are historically specific to the capitalist social formation. The labour theory of value is not a theory of the material wealth created by labour but is in a parallel manner also seen when looked at transhistorically as "human metabolism with nature." Precisely because it is not structured immanently, the Grundrisse provides a key to read Capital.

Against the traditional critique of capital from the standpoint of labour [ edit ] Starting in this demonstration of the historically specific character of what Marx critiques, Postone provided a new critical theory that attacks the form of labour specific to the capitalist social formation. In non-capitalist societies, work is distributed by overt social relations. An individual acquires goods produced by others through the medium of undisguised social relations. Work activities derive their meaning and are determined by personal relationships, openly social and qualitatively specific (differentiated by social group, social status, the wide range of customs, traditional ties, etc.). But in a capitalist social formation, the objectification of labour is the means by which goods produced by others is acquired; the purpose of work is to acquire other products so someone other than producer uses the product (as well as its value). It is in this sense that a product is a commodity. It is both use-value for each other and medium of exchange for the producer; on one hand, it is a specific type of work that produces goods individuals to others; but on the other hand, the work, regardless of its specific content, is the producer of means to acquire the products of others. This feature of the work, which is specific to the social life in capitalism, is the basis of modern socialization, called "abstract labour". In the functioning of these new social relationships, labour under capitalism is no longer an external activity to capitalism but the foundation of capitalism, and so it is the labour that must be abolished.

"Commodity fetishism" [ edit ] Postone asserted that the new concept of " commodity fetishism ", which has nothing to do with a hoax of consciousness (an inverted representation), is the central part of the intellectual heritage of Marx. "Commodity fetishism" is not a misrepresentation, nor an exaggerated adoration, of goods. The " fetish " instead is to be referred to the structure of the commodity. The subjects are not humans, but it is rather their objectified relationships that are at the heart of socialization under capitalism. Fetishism, Postone noted, must be analyzed "in terms of the structure of social relations constituted by forms of praxis and its seizure by objectifying the category of capital (and hence value). The Subject for Marx, like Hegel is so abstract and can not be identified with any social actor whatsoever." [ 9 ] This is the world where abstract labour (which is not immaterial labour) becomes the social bond, social mediation that mediates itself, reducing actual work to a simple expression of abstract labour. Abstract labour is then the source of alienation. The self-moving subject, Geist , is misrecognized in Hegel. It is described by Marx as Capital and its self-valorization. It is not, Postone suggested, similar to György Lukács 's use of Hegel, wherein the proletariat are identified as Geist, for the spirit would be labour not emancipation.

Postone attempted to build a radical critique of the commodity, money, value, labour and politics not limited to describing the struggles around management and distribution. Pointing out that the market is a mechanism of distribution, and so secondary to the core of capitalism, allowed Postone to broaden the historical scope of Marx's theory so that it can be applied to the Soviet Union . In the Soviet Union, the main difference was that instead of a market handling distribution it was planners. The abstract exchange of labour, which is the core of capitalism for Postone, was as it was in the West.

Modern antisemitism and the destruction of the abstract [ edit ] In his 1980 article "Anti-Semitism and National Socialism", Postone developed new thinking on modern antisemitism , and particularly on National Socialist ideology. Postone saw antisemitism as a major element in the development of a socio-historical theory of consciousness determined by social forms that are subjected to socialization under capitalism. What is said about modern antisemitism may also describe a trend of vulgar anti-capitalism that seeks the personification of the elements of capitalism that are so hated. Postone showed that modern antisemitism is very different from most forms of racism and Christian antisemitism because it casts a huge global invisible power of international Jewry , the idea of a global conspiracy that is intrinsic to modern antisemitism.

Postone analyzed antisemitism against the Marxian notion of the dual character of the commodity category. He observed that the characteristics that antisemitism attributes to Jews are the same as for value: abstraction , invisibility, automation , and impersonal domination. Postone argued that the form of socialization under capitalism (the historically specific function of the spirit of labour under capitalism) makes it possible to separate the concrete (as socially "natural" sound, true, etc.) and the abstract (as socially constructed, historically specific and contingent). This opposition between the concrete and the abstract, determined by social forms, pervades all forms of subjectivity, and thus helps to understand a central feature of the National Socialist ideology, because this ideology was not fundamentally anti-modern. It is true, Postone argued, that Nazism claimed to defend the peasantry and craftsmanship, but it also valued modern technological and industrial production. Nazism was rather a vulgar form of anti-capitalism. The rejection of the bourgeoisie and its values is present in Nazism, but Postone saw Nazi ideology as the affirmation of the concrete dimension of capitalism – which includes technology and industrial production, as well as the peasantry and manual labour – as the heart of a healthy, organic social life. This stood in contrast with the abstract dimension represented by finance capital . The abstract is instead rejected, and it is personified by the Jews. Postone analyzed the figure of the Jew in modern antisemitism as the embodiment of abstract value, and extermination camps as a misbegotten notion of a "factory" to destroy value.

Publications [ edit ] Books Critique du fétiche-capital: Le capitalisme, l’antisemitisme et la gauche . Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2013.

History and Heteronomy: Critical Essays . Tokyo: University of Tokyo Center for Philosophy, 2009.

Marx Reloaded. Repensar la teoría crítica del capitalismo . Madrid: Editorial Traficantes de Sueños, 2007.

Deutschland, die Linke und der Holocaust - Politische Interventionen . Freiburg, Germany: Ca Ira Verlag, 2005.

Catastrophe and Meaning: The Holocaust and the Twentieth Century . [Co-editor with Eric Santner] Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Marx est-il devenu muet: Face à la mondialisation?

Paris: les éditions de l'Aube, 2003.

Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory . New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Bourdieu: Critical Perspectives . co-editor with Craig Calhoun and Edward LiPuma, Chicago and Cambridge: University of Chicago Press and Polity Press, 1993.

Articles and chapters "The Current Crisis and the Anachronism of Value: A Marxian Reading." Continental Thought & Theory: A Journal of Intellectual Freedom 1, no. 4 (2017): 38-54.

[1] "History and Helplessness: Mass Mobilization and Contemporary Forms of Anticapitalism" Public Culture 18.1 Duke UP 2006.

"Critique, State, and Economy" in Fred Rush (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Critical Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

"The Holocaust and the Trajectory of the Twentieth Century," in M. Postone and E. Santner (eds.) Catastrophe and Meaning . University of Chicago Press, 2003.

"Lukács and the Dialectical Critique of Capitalism," in R. Albritton and J. Simoulidis, (eds.), New Dialectics and Political Economy , Houndsmill, Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

"Hannah Arendts Eichmann in Jerusalem: Die unaufgelöste Antinomie von Universalität und Besonderem," in Gary Smith (ed.), Hannah Arendt Revisited: "Eichmann in Jerusalem" und die Folgen , Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt a.M., 2000.

"Contemporary Historical Transformations: Beyond Postindustrial and Neo-Marxist Theories," Current Perspectives in Social Theory . Vol. 19, 1999. Stamford, Conn: JAI Press Inc., 1999.

"Deconstruction as Social Critique: Derrida on Marx and the New World Order," [review essay on Jacques Derrida, Specters of Marx] in History and Theory , October, 1998.

"Rethinking Marx in a Postmarxist World," in Charles Camic (ed.), Reclaiming the Sociological Classics . Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1998.

"Political Theory and Historical Analysis," in C. Calhoun (ed.), Habermas and the Public Sphere , Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.

"History and Critical Social Theory," (Review essay on Jürgen Habermas , The Theory of Communicative Action) in Contemporary Sociology. Vol. 19, No. 2, March, 1990.

"After the Holocaust: History and Identity in West Germany," in K. Harms, L.R. Reuter and V. Dürr (eds.), Coping with the Past: Germany and Austria after 1945 , Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1990.

"Anti-Semitism and National Socialism," in A. Rabinbach and J. Zipes (eds.), Germans and Jews Since the Holocaust , New York: Holmes and Meier, 1986.

(Available in Farsi here) "On Nicolaus' 'Introduction' to the Grundrisse".

Telos 22 (Winter 1974-5). New York: Telos Press.

See also [ edit ] Post-Marxism Value criticism References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Curriculum Vitae" (PDF) .

The Department of History . The University of Chicago. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-03-19.

^ a b c "Moishe Postone, Social Theorist, 1942–2018" . University of Chicago, Department of History. March 21, 2018 . Retrieved 2020-12-06 .

^ "How to be a Marxist" .

^ Sewell, William H. Jr.

(Fall 2018).

"Remembering Moishe Postone" .

Critical Historical Studies .

5 (2).

Critical Historical Studies , University of Chicago Press , Volume 5, Number 2: 155– 164.

doi : 10.1086/699682 .

S2CID 149645318 . Retrieved 2020-12-06 .

^ Martin Thomas "Zionism, anti-semitism and the left" , Solidarity , 3:166, 4 February 2010 (Alliance for Workers' Liberty website, 5 February 2010) ^ "Funeral Details - Chicago Jewish Funerals" .

Chicago Jewish Funerals . Retrieved 2018-03-20 .

^ "Moishe Postone (1942-2018)" .

IWM . 2018-03-20 . Retrieved 2018-03-21 .

^ Postone, Moishe (1978).

"Necessity, Labor and Time: A Reinterpretation of the Marxian Critique of Capitalism" (PDF) .

Social Research .

45 .

^ Time, Labor and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx's Critical Theory.

New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 75–76.

Sources [ edit ] Russell Rockwell (2018), Hegel, Marx, and the Necessity and Freedom Dialectic: Marxist-Humanism and Critical Theory in the United States . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan. See especially Chapter 7: Moishe Postone's Deepened Interpretation of Marx's Value Theory: Grundrisse (pp. 145–60); and Chapter 8: Moishe Postone's Deepened Interpretation of Marx's Value Theory: Capital (pp. 161–194).

https://www.palgrave.com/gp/book/9783319756103 External links [ edit ] The Moishe Postone Legacy Project's archival documents Faculty profile at the University of Chicago Intervention d'Etienne Balibar & Moishe Postone Congrès Marx International V : Altermondialisme/ anticapitalisme. Pour une cosmopolitique alternative. Octobre 2007 Conference of Moishe Postone Interview with Moishe Postone v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nsfbq
Cached time: 20250817063734
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.479 seconds
Real time usage: 0.572 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3490/1000000
Revision size: 20884/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 90110/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11331/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72131/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.287/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7779368/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  497.495      1 -total
 22.55%  112.179      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 20.81%  103.545      1 Template:Reflist
 17.93%   89.210      1 Template:Marxian_critique_of_political_economy_sidebar
 17.58%   87.475      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.63%   67.819      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.03%   54.866      1 Template:Short_description
  9.90%   49.267      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.23%   45.904      1 Template:Ambox
  6.49%   32.306      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2115308:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817063734 and revision id 1298765927. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moishe_Postone&oldid=1298765927 " Categories : 1942 births 2018 deaths 20th-century Canadian Jews 20th-century Canadian male writers 20th-century Canadian philosophers 20th-century Canadian economists 20th-century Canadian educators 20th-century Canadian historians 21st-century Canadian essayists 21st-century Canadian male writers 21st-century Canadian philosophers 21st-century Canadian economists 21st-century Canadian educators 21st-century Canadian historians Canadian anti-capitalists Canadian educators Jewish Canadian writers Canadian male essayists Canadian male non-fiction writers Canadian sociologists Critical theorists Critics of political economy Deaths from cancer in Illinois Jewish American historians Jewish philosophers Philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics Philosophers of history Philosophers of social science Canadian philosophers of science Canadian philosophy academics Canadian political philosophers Canadian social philosophers Scholars of antisemitism Theorists on Western civilization University of Chicago faculty Writers about activism and social change Writers about globalization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references Use Canadian English from October 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 14:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moishe Postone 10 languages Add topic

