Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Strategies 2 Stalking Toggle Stalking subsection 2.1 Pushing 2.2 Stand hunting 2.2.1 Calling 2.2.2 Baiting 2.3 Still hunting 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Hunting strategy 3 languages Čeština Español فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tactic used to target, pursue, and kill an animal This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hunting strategy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hunting strategy or hunting method is any specific techniques or tactics that are used to target, pursue, and hunt an animal . The term mostly applies to humans catching and killing wild animals , but can also be used in ethology and nature documentaries to describe predation strategies adopted by carnivores .

The hunting strategy that a hunter uses depends mainly on the type of terrain, as well as game being hunted. Climate, local hunting techniques, and local hunting laws are also taken in consideration. Some of the most common hunting methods that are used include: still hunting, stalking, driving, stand hunting, calling, baiting, hunting with dogs and falconry.

Strategies [ edit ] Hunting strategies include: [ 1 ] Baiting is the use of decoys , lures, scent or food to attract targeted animals.

Blind or Stand hunting is waiting for animals in a concealed or elevated position.

Calling is the use of noises to attract or drive animals.

Camouflage is concealing oneself visually, or with scent, to blend in with the environment.

Use of hunting dogs to help flush, herd, drive, track, point at, pursue, or retrieve animals.

Game drive system was a prehistoric hunting strategy where game were herded into areas where they could be hunted in groups.

Driving is the herding of animals in a particular direction, as over a cliff or to other hunters.

Flushing is the practice of scaring targets from concealed areas.

Persistence hunting is a variant of pursuit predation in which a predator will bring down a prey item via indirect means, such as exhaustion, heat illness or injury.

Spotlighting is the use of artificial light to find or blind targets before capture. Modern lighting also includes IR and other devices.

Scouting consists of a variety of tasks and techniques for finding animals to hunt.

Stalking is the practice of walking stealthily, often in pursuit of an identified animal.

Tracking is the practice of interpreting physical evidence to pursue animals.

Trapping is the use of devices (e.g., snares, pits, deadfalls) to capture or kill an animal.

Stalking [ edit ] Though stalking and still-hunting may resemble in many ways, while the still hunter follows game through its haunts following tracks, stalking, or spot and stalk hunting, consists in locating game from afar and trying to approach within shooting distance, taking advantage of the territory's geography, forest, wind direction and sun location, thus, avoiding to be detected through sight, sounds and smells. Stalk hunting is mainly practiced in mountain terrain, inhabited by animals with low tolerance for human presence, such as sheep, goats, and several mountain deer species. In order to be successful, the hunter gets advantage from vantage points from where to spot game in open ground, that provides less concealment than forested areas.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Pushing [ edit ] This strategy is widely used to hunt elusive game in heavy covered areas. It is probably one of the first methods of hunting used by primitive tribes, and even used by animals, such as African lions, where male lions show themselves with aid of their smell and roar to spook antelope towards the position where the more agile lioness is concealed. Humans also use the same principle; pushing game out of forest towards a hunter ready to take a shot.

[ 4 ] Stand hunting [ edit ] Stand hunting is likely the most common form of hunting used today when hunting for most North American big game species, especially in the east. Stand hunting is when the hunter is stationary in one location and waits for the animal to come to them. Hunters often use tree-stands, ground blinds, and tripod stands to make the hunt more comfortable and to make it harder for the wildlife to spot them. The locations where hunters chose to stand hunt varies greatly. Often hunters will set up a stand near a food source that their target animal species is coming to for food. Hunters will also stand hunt along game trails, and even near water sources in drier climates.

[ 5 ] The stand hunting method is also the fundamental method used when using baiting, and often calling hunting methods.

Calling [ edit ] The technique of calling can be a very effective hunting technique. Calling is the process of using game calls or some other instrument to replicate the sounds of the animal that you are hunting. Game calls are especially effective during the desired species' mating season. During this time, animal mating calls can be a sure fire way to lure in an animal that is within earshot of you. The most common calls used when hunting deer are grunt calls, bleat calls, and rattling antlers. The grunt call can be aggressive buck grunts that would attract a buck that is looking to display his dominance, while bleat calls mimic the sound of a doe that is looking for a buck to breed her. Rattling antlers imitate the sound of two bucks fighting and can lure other bucks in to see what the commotion is all about.

[ 6 ] Baiting [ edit ] While baiting is an extremely popular and very effective way to encounter various species of wildlife, it is important to check local game laws to ensure that baiting is legal in the area. While most places allow baiting, some areas still deem it illegal to bait wildlife. Baiting is pretty simple and is just the act of using an artificial food source that is placed near your hunting stand to attract the species of animal that is being pursued. Some common baits that are used to attract big game in North America are things such as dried field corn, apples, salt, minerals, and even processed foods such as peanut butter and molasses.

[ 7 ] Still hunting [ edit ] Still hunting is a common method of hunting used to hunt North American big game species such as deer, elk, bear, and feral hogs. Still hunting is the process of hunting an animal by sneaking into habitats where the animal lives and trying to spot the animal before the animal spots you. The process emulates the final procedure of spot and stalk hunting throughout the entire process.

[ 8 ] The still hunting method of hunting is not the most popular hunting technique because it takes a fair amount of skill and time. Still hunting is an ancient method of hunting that was used by our ancestors to hunt and kill animals to eat. Still hunting is done by tracking animals down by looking for their tracks, droppings, mating signs, etc. and following this sign very carefully. When following the animal sign it is important to walk very slowly and very quietly while constantly scanning for movement and wildlife. It is also important to stop frequently to watch and listen for wildlife around you. Wind direction is another important aspect of still hunting because if the wind is blowing in the direction that you are walking, it is likely that the animal that you are hunting will smell you and scurry before you ever come into contact with the animal.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ Pike, Travis (7 November 2016).

"Hunting & Shooting Gear Guide" .

Outdoor Empire . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ O'Connor, Jack (1967).

The Art of Hunting Big Game in North America . Ney Hork: Outdoor Life Press. pp. 38, 60.

^ Rinella, Steven (August 19, 2018).

"Spot and Stalk Hunting Tactics" .

Meateater . Retrieved September 14, 2022 .

^ O'Connor, Jack (1967).

The Art of Hunting Big Game in North America (1st ed.). Ney York: Outdoor Life Press. pp. 39, 40.

^ "Tree Stand Hacks to Use During Deer Season - Raised Hunting" .

Raised Hunting . 2017-12-20. Archived from the original on 2022-09-14 . Retrieved 2018-11-26 .

^ "Field Notes - Put Down the Grunt Call" .

www.knightandhale.com . Archived from the original on 2018-11-27 . Retrieved 2018-11-26 .

^ "Baiting Big Game" .

Realtree Camo . Retrieved 2018-11-26 .

^ Rinella, Steven (September 13, 2018).

"Still Hunting Techniques" .

^ "10 Still Hunting Tips for Deer Hunting Winter Bucks | Bone Collector" .

Bone Collector . 2017-01-09. Archived from the original on 2022-08-19 . Retrieved 2018-11-26 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Hunting methods at Wikimedia Commons v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunting_strategy&oldid=1287717198 " Categories : Hunting Law enforcement techniques Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2017 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 00:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunting strategy 3 languages Add topic

