Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Double hermeneutic 5 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch فارسی Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed connection between lay concepts and social sciences The double hermeneutic is the theory, expounded by sociologist Anthony Giddens , that everyday "lay" concepts and those from the social sciences have a two-way relationship.

[ 1 ] A common example is the idea of social class , a social-scientific category that has entered into wide use in society. Since the 1970s, held to be a distinguishing feature of the social sciences, [ 2 ] the double hermeneutic has become a criterion for demarcating the human/social from the natural sciences.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Overview [ edit ] Anthony Giddens (1982) argues that there is an important difference between the natural and social sciences.

[ 5 ] In the natural sciences , scientists try to understand and theorize about the way the natural world is structured. The understanding is one-way; that is, while we seek to understand the actions of minerals or chemicals, chemicals and minerals don't seek to develop an understanding of us.  He refers to this as the "single hermeneutic ". (Hermeneutic means interpretation or understanding.

[ 6 ] ) By contrast, the social sciences are engaged in the double hermeneutic. The various social sciences study people and society, although the way they do so is different. Some social sciences such as sociology don't just study what people do, they also study how people understand their world, and how that understanding shapes their practice. Because people can think, make choices, and use new information to revise their understandings (and hence their practice), they can use the knowledge and insights of social science to change their practice.

[ 7 ] In outlining his notion of the double hermeneutic, Giddens explains that while philosophers and social scientists have often considered the way "in which lay concepts obstinately intrude into the technical discourse of social science," ... "(f)ew have considered the matter the other way around." [ 8 ] He explains that "the concepts of the social sciences are not produced about an independently constituted subject-matter, which continues regardless of what these concepts are. The findings of the social sciences very often enter constitutively into the world they describe." [ 9 ] Philosopher Dimitri Ginev said that since the 1970s, discussions about double hermeneutics in postempiricist epistemology and in critical theory have led to "a tendency to oppose the methodological to the ontological reading of double hermeneutics", the methodological standpoint traditionally understanding double hermeneutics as a differentia specifica of human-scientific inquiry.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Feedback § Social sciences Goodhart's Law Hermeneutics Interpretative phenomenological analysis Reflexivity (social theory) References [ edit ] ^ Giddens, A., Social Theory and Modern Sociology ( Cambridge : Polity Press , 1987), pp. 20–21 .

^ Richards, H.

, Understanding the Global Economy ( Thousand Oaks : Peace Education Books, 2004), p. 309 .

^ a b Ginev, D.

, Hermeneutic Realism: Reality Within Scientific Inquiry ( Berlin / Heidelberg : Springer , 2016), p. 148 .

^ Weinert, F., Copernicus, Darwin, and Freud: Revolutions in the History and Philosophy of Science ( Hoboken : Wiley-Blackwell , 2009), p. 228 .

^ Tucker, K. H., Jr., Anthony Giddens and Modern Social Theory ( London , Thousand Oaks & New Delhi : SAGE Publishing , 1998), p. 59 .

^ Zimmermann, J.

, Hermeneutics: A Very Short Introduction ( Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2015), p. 21 .

^ Giddens, New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of Interpretative Sociologies , 2nd ed. ( Stanford : Stanford University Press , 1993), p. 9 .

^ Dodig-crnkovic, G., & Burgin, M., eds., Philosophy And Methodology Of Information: The Study of Information in the Transdisciplinary Perspective ( Singapore : World Scientific , 2019), p. 221 .

^ Giddens, The Constitution of Society ( Cambridge : Polity , 1984), p. 20 .

Further reading [ edit ] Giddens, A., & Pierson, C., Conversations with Anthony Giddens (Cambridge: Polity Press; Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1998), ISBN 978-0-7456-6642-6 .

v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Double_hermeneutic&oldid=1297936273 " Categories : Sociological theories Hermeneutics Epistemology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 13:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Double hermeneutic 5 languages Add topic

