Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Societal attitudes 2 Politics Toggle Politics subsection 2.1 Female politicians 3 Violence against women 4 Employment 5 Organizations 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Women in Northern Cyprus 7 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча தமிழ் Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Feminism in Northern Cyprus ) Women in Northern Cyprus Ziynet Sali , a female singer from Northern Cyprus General Statistics Women in parliament 18% (2018) Women in labour force 39-40% (2015) Part of a series on Women in society Society Women's history ( legal rights ) Woman Animal advocacy Business Female entrepreneurs Gender representation on corporate boards of directors Combat Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic development Explorers and travelers Education Feminism Womyn Government Conservatives in the US Heads of state or government Legislators Queen regnant List Health Journalism Law Law enforcement Military Mother Nobel Prize laureates Piracy Positions of power Reproductive rights Sex segregation Feminist In Islam Venture capital Violence and abuse Voting rights Workforce Exchange of women Science Technology Computing Engineering Geology Medicine dentistry in the United States Organizations Science Science, technology, engineering and mathematics Space Telegraphy Arts Humanities Architecture Arts Art history field Women's cinema Dance Film "Chick flicks" Fine arts Literature Science fiction Philosophy Feminist philosophy Photographers Music Jazz Punk rock In Shakespeare's works Religion Theological figures Baháʼí Faith Bible Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Opus Dei Hinduism Islam Imams Mahr Segregation Women's testimony Judaism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism Popular culture Comics Portrayal in American comics Film industry Music Fictional pirates Speculative fiction Video games Gender representation in video games Women in the video game industry Sports Auto racing Baseball Basketball Boxing Cricket Curling Cycling Fastpitch softball Football / soccer Golf Gymnastics Ice hockey Lacrosse Mixed martial arts Netball Paralympic Games Rodeo Roller derby Rowing Surfing Swimming Tennis Track and field Volleyball Winter sports See also: List of sports By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Croatia Cuba Cyprus ( North ) Denmark DR Congo Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia FS Micronesia Fiji Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland Italy India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Ivory Coast Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Maldives Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Korea Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Spain Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sudan Suriname Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen v t e The women in Northern Cyprus are inhabitants of the internationally unrecognised Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus , where they have been contributors to the fields of science, law and justice.

[ 1 ] However, several factors have inhibited women's participation in politics, and women constitute only 8% of the Assembly of the Republic . In 2013, Sibel Siber became the first female prime minister of Northern Cyprus.

Northern Cyprus has no active women's shelters. In 2014, the parliament unanimously voted to establish a department promoting gender equality, which is establishing institutions for women's welfare.

Societal attitudes [ edit ] A survey of 600 women in 2010 for the Association for Support for Life from Women (KAYAD) indicated that 51% of women agreed that women had to conform to pre-determined gender roles, 88% agreed that above all else, women should be good mothers and caretakers of the home, 58% believed that women should be home before their husbands and 80% believed that girls should be raised to become "ladies", 20% believed that widowed or divorced women should not live alone. 40% stated that they had difficulties in achieving their goals due to societal pressure, while 38% believed that it was not as important for women to have a significant role in public life in comparison to men. 55% believed that women should be able to work outside the family even if not necessitated by economic conditions.

[ 2 ] Politics [ edit ] Constraints affecting women who have entered politics in Northern Cyprus include investing time for home, motherhood, family, and political life. The fact that coffeehouses and meyhane (traditional drinking taverns), social spaces that have been traditionally reserved for men, remain central to Turkish Cypriot politics is a restraining factor for women. Even some regional headquarters of political parties function as coffeehouses.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Female politicians [ edit ] As of 2010, there were only 7 female Northern Cypriots who held high-level positions in the Parliament of Northern Cyprus .

[ 3 ] The posts that the women occupied included parliamentarian and ministerial jobs, such as the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the appointed Minister of Education.

Fatma Ekenoğlu was the Speaker of the House of Representatives.

Onur Borman was the Minister of the Ministry of Economy and Finance and was also the Minister of the Ministry of Public Works between 1993 and 1999.

Gülsen Bozkurt was the former Minister of the Ministry of Health.

Gülin Sayıner was one of the first two elected female members of the Parliament of Northern Cyprus (Republican Assembly) and served from 1987 to 1993.

[ 1 ] Şerife Ünverdi used to be the Minister of Labor and Social Security.

[ 7 ] These women were able to reach out to voters of Northern Cyprus because of their medical backgrounds.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In 2013, Sibel Siber became the first female prime minister of Northern Cyprus [ 8 ] and is running for president from the ruling Republican Turkish Party (CTP) in the 2015 presidential election.

[ 9 ] In spite of this, women constitute only 8% of the parliament as of 2015. Only 4 out of 47 female candidates were elected in the 2013 parliamentary election .

[ 10 ] On February 29, 1980, Gönül Başaran Erönen became the first female Justice of Northern Cyprus. She was also appointed as the first female District Court Judge in Cyprus. At present, she is the only female justice of the Supreme Court on the whole island of Cyprus.

[ 11 ] In 2015, a new Political Parties Law brought a quota requiring that at least 30% of candidates for member of parliament are selected from each sex by each party. Any party that does not fulfill this requirement may not participate in elections.

[ 12 ] Violence against women [ edit ] In 2014, 204 women filed complaints to the police reporting violence against them.

Aziz Gürpınar , the Minister of Labour and Social Security at the time, called the figure "frightening".

[ 13 ] Between 2013 and 2015, the number of complaints was 442 in total, and according to Asım Akansoy , Minister of the Interior at the time, only 10% of victims were estimated to have reported violence. Northern Cyprus ratified the Istanbul Convention in 2011.

[ 14 ] A survey of 1000 married women in 2012 by the non-governmental organization Feminist Workshop found that 33% of married women experienced violence, while the participants reported knowing on average 2.58 women who experienced violence from their partners. 14% of women reported having experienced marital rape .

[ 15 ] Due to the lack of a reliable public transport system, students in Northern Cyprus sometimes have to hitchhike. Students have reported that female students often face sexual harassment in these hikes, while male students also reported harassment.

[ 16 ] Employment [ edit ] According to a 2015 survey by the State Planning Organization, 39-40% of women participated in the workforce as opposed to 71-72% of men. Female unemployment rate was found to be 8.9%, as opposed to 6.5% for men, and 36.5% of all employees were women. It was also found that 85.7% of women were employed in the services sector, as opposed to 67.8% of men.

[ 17 ] The same survey in 2008 indicated that only 36.2% of women participated in the workforce as opposed to 67.1% of men. Female unemployment rate was found to be 14%, as opposed to 7.6% for men, and 32.6% of all employees were women.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The Plan for the Support of Local Employment, whose implementation started in 2013, prioritised the increase of women's participation in the workforce. The plan resulted in the employment of 2091 women along with 1812 men until January 2015. The plan also allowed 78 women to start businesses in 39 sectors. These women owned their own businesses for the first time.

[ 20 ] Organizations [ edit ] The first and only [ 21 ] academic research and training center for women in Northern Cyprus is the Center for Women's Studies (CWS) of the Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU). It was established on November 17, 1998.

[ 22 ] The Cyprus Research Center of the Near East University also conducts research on women's human rights in Northern Cyprus.

[ 23 ] The first women's shelter in Northern Cyprus was opened by the Foundation for the Prevention of Social Risks in 2011; the center has been supported by volunteers and companies. However, the shelter was unable to host the victims of human trafficking and prostitution due to concerns over safety and lack of resources.

[ 24 ] In 2016, the shelter was permanently closed due to difficulties with security.

[ 25 ] In 2014, the Turkish Cypriot parliament unanimously approved the establishment of the Communal Gender Equality Department under the Ministry of Labor and Social Security. The department has prioritized the establishment of women's shelters, Violence Prevention and Consultation Centers, a Council of Consultation and Monitoring and organizing annual gender equality conferences.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Women of Northern Cyprus .

Human rights in Northern Cyprus Women in Cyprus References [ edit ] ^ a b "Turkish-Cypriot Women: Dr Gülin Sayiner" .

www.cypnet.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ "Kıbrıs'ın Kuzey Kesimindeki Kadınların Profili" (PDF) . KAYAD.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 September 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ a b c Yirmibeolu, Gözde.

Constraints on Women Politicians in Northern Cyprus - Research Essay , January 10, 2010 ^ a b Yirmibeolu, Gözde.

Constraints on Women Politicians in Northern Cyprus Archived 2011-07-21 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Özdenefe: "Örneğimiz Siber" " (in Turkish). Kıbrıs Postası.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ Dürüst, Çiğdem.

"Kadınları bıyık da paklamayacak (sakal şart)" (in Turkish). Kıbrıs Postası.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ MESSAGES HAVE BEEN ISSUED BY PRESIDENT DERVIS EROGLU, PRIME MINISTER IRSEN KUCUK AND MINISTER OF LABOR AND SOCIAL SECURITY SERIFE UNVERDI ( BRT ) Retrieved 2010-05-06.

^ "Turkish Cyprus to see first female prime minister - EUROPE" . 12 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 2014-10-19 . Retrieved 2013-11-17 .

Turkish Cyprus to see first female prime minister, Hürriyet Daily News, 12 June 2013 ^ "CTP'NİN CUMHURBAŞKANI ADAYI SİBER" (in Turkish).

Yeni Düzen . 15 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Kadın milletvekilleri yine azınlıkta!" (in Turkish). Kıbrıs Postası.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ Gönül Başaran Erönen Archived 2010-10-14 at the Wayback Machine , First woman Justice of the T.R. of Northern Cyprus], Turkish-Cypriot Women, People & Life, cypnet.co.uk ^ "Barajı geçememesine karşın en az yüzde 3 oy alan partiler devlet yardımı alabilecek" . Kıbrıs Postası.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2015 . Retrieved 26 October 2015 .

^ "Kadınlar şiddet kurbanı" . Kıbrıs. 23 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "İçişleri Bakanı'ndan 'Kadına Şiddet' Raporu" . Haber Kıbrıs. 16 February 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "Kıbrıs'ın Kuzeyinde Aile İçi Şiddet" . Yeni Düzen. 1 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "KKTC'de kadın ve erkek öğrenciler tacize uğruyor!" . Kıbrıs Ada Haber.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "Devlet Planlama Örgütü 2015 Hanehalkı İşgücü Anketi Sonuçları" (PDF) (in Turkish). State Planning Organization.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "Devlet Planlama Örgütü 2008 Hanehalkı İşgücü Anketi Sonuçları karnesi" (PDF) (in Turkish). State Planning Organization.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "İşgücüne katılım oranları karnesi" (in Turkish). Feminist Workshop.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Kadınların işgücüne katılımı konusunda atılan adımlar meyve vermeye başladı" . Kıbrıs Postası.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2015 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ Center for Women's Studies(CWS) , fsd.org.qa ^ CENTER FOR WOMEN’S STUDIES (CWS) Archived 2011-04-30 at the Wayback Machine , Eastern Mediterranean University, emu.edu.tr ^ "Kıbrıs Araştırmaları Merkezi (YDÜ-KAM)" (in Turkish). Near East University.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Sığınma Evi "gönülle" yürüyor" (in Turkish). Kıbrıs Postası.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ " "Artık KKTC'de kadınların sığınabileceği bir yer yok" " . Kıbrıs. 10 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 .

^ "TOCED gün sayıyor!" (in Turkish).

Kıbrıs Postası . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Lisaniler, Fatma Guven.

Gender Equality in North Cyprus (Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus) , 8 pages.

External links [ edit ] Turkish Cypriot Human Rights Foundation ‹ The template below ( Northern Cyprus topics ) is being considered for merging with Culture of Northern Cyprus. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › v t e Northern Cyprus articles History Cyprus dispute Intercommunal violence Green Line Turkish invasion Refugees Annan Plan 2004 Annan Plan referendums Turkish Federated State of Cyprus Declaration of independence Geography Cities, towns and villages Extreme points Mammals Foreign relations Diplomatic missions Representative Office to the United States Politics Assembly Constitution Districts Elections Law enforcement Political parties President Prime Minister Council of Ministers Embargoes Military Security Forces Command Turkish military forces in Northern Cyprus Economy Banks Central Bank Turkish lira (currency) Telecommunications Kuzey Kıbrıs Turkcell KKTC Telsim Tourism Society Citizenship Education universities and colleges Human rights LGBT Mass media Women abortion Culture Cuisine Dances Newspapers Television Museums Sport football Holidays Republic Day Demographics Ethnicities Turkish Cypriots diaspora Turkish settlers Enclaved Greek Cypriots Maronites Languages Turkish Cypriot Turkish Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Outline Category v t e Women in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Women in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women_in_Northern_Cyprus&oldid=1238347886#Organizations " Categories : History of women in Northern Cyprus Society of Northern Cyprus People from Northern Cyprus Women by country Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2024, at 12:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Women in Northern Cyprus 7 languages Add topic

