Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Errata sheets 3 Errata associated with integrated circuits 4 Errata associated with trading card games 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Erratum 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский سنڌي Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Correction of a published text Jules César tome 2 – p. 585 – Erratum An erratum or corrigendum ( pl.

: errata , corrigenda ) (comes from Latin : errata corrige ) is a correction of a published text. Generally, publishers issue an erratum for a production error (i.e., an error introduced during the publishing process) and a corrigendum for an author's error.

[ 1 ] It is usually bound into the back of a book, but for a single error a slip of paper detailing a corrigendum may be bound in before or after the page on which the error appears.

[ 2 ] An erratum may also be issued shortly after its original text is published.

Etymology [ edit ] Corrigendum is the gerundive form of the Latin compound verb corrigo -rexi -rectum (from the verb rego , "to make straight, rule", plus the preposition cum , "with"), "to correct", [ 3 ] and thus signifies [ 4 ] "(those things) which must be corrected" and in its single form Corrigendum it means "(that thing) which must be corrected".

[ 5 ] Errata sheets [ edit ] According to the Chicago Manual of Style , "Errata, lists of errors and their corrections, may take the form of loose, inserted sheets or bound-in pages. An errata sheet is definitely not a usual part of a book. It should never be supplied to correct simple typographical errors (which may be rectified in a later printing) or to insert additions to, or revisions of, the printed text (which should wait for the next edition of the book). It is a device to be used only in extreme cases where errors severe enough to cause misunderstanding are detected too late to correct in the normal way but before the finished book is distributed. Then the errors may be listed with their locations and their corrections on a sheet that is tipped in , either before or after the book is bound, or laid in loose, usually inside the front cover of the book. (Tipping and inserting must be done by hand, thus adding considerably to the cost of the book.)" [ 6 ] Errata associated with integrated circuits [ edit ] Design errors and mistakes in a microprocessor 's hardwired logic may also be documented and described as errata. One well-publicized example is Intel 's "FDIV" erratum in early Pentium processors, [ 7 ] known as the Pentium FDIV bug . This gave incorrect answers to a floating-point division instruction (FDIV) for a small set of numbers, due to an incorrect lookup table inside the Pentium chip.

Similarly, design errors in peripheral devices, such as disk controllers and video display units, can result in abnormal operation under certain conditions.

Errata associated with trading card games [ edit ] In trading card games , errata are official corrections or clarifications issued for cards whose printed text is incorrect or ambiguously worded. Errata may also be introduced to modify the functionality of a card that has been determined to be excessively powerful, in order to maintain game balance . This approach serves as an alternative to banning the card outright.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Addendum Bible errata Cancel leaf Correction (newspaper) Expression of concern Retractions in academic publishing References [ edit ] ^ "Authors and referees — corrections" . Nature publishing group. Archived from the original on 1 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 February 2017 .

^ Collins Dictionary of the English Language , 2nd edition, London, 1986, p. 352.

^ Cassell's Latin Dictionary, Marchant, J.R.V, & Charles, Joseph F., (Eds.), Revised Edition, 1928, p.139 ^ assuming the full form has added to it the verb sum or parts thereof, changing the meaning to the idea of necessity or compulsion ^ "That which is to be corrected; An error to be corrected", per: Collins Dictionary of the English Language, 2nd Edition, London, 1986, p.352 ^ The Chicago Manual of Style Archived 21 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . The University of Chicago Press, 14th Edition 1993, ISBN (cloth) 0-226-10389-7, p. 42, section 1.107.

^ "FDIV Replacement Program" . Intel. Archived from the original on 29 April 2001 . Retrieved 10 February 2010 .

^ Carangi, Kristy (19 July 2024).

"Why Errata Bucky Instead Of Just Banning Him?" .

TCGplayer . Retrieved 15 June 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Look up erratum or corrigendum in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Book Errata - Typos and More - Corrigenda" .

bookerrata.com . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

v t e Book design Page layout and typography Annotation Footnote Gloss Marginal note Scholia Canons of page construction Catchword Column Footer Header Headpiece Illumination Initial Historiated Inhabited Margin Miniature Ornament Page numbering Pull quote Recto and verso Rubric Rubrication Typeface Font Front and back covers Anthropodermic bibliopegy Bookbinding Buckram Dust jacket Hardcover Leather Paperback Picture cover Treasure binding Endpapers Marbled Front matter Half-title bastard title Frontispiece Title page Edition notice Imprimi potest Nihil obstat Imprimatur Dedication Epigraph Table of contents Foreword Preface Acknowledgments Introduction Prologue Printer's mark Body matter Body text Chapters Illustrations Parts Sections Tipped-in pages Back matter Afterword Conclusion Epilogue Outro Postscript Addendum/Appendix Endnotes Glossary Bibliography Index Errata Colophon Postface Author page Other elements Book curse Bookplate ex-librīs Book rhyme Die-cutting Endband Extra-illustration Fore-edge painting Intentionally blank page Pop-ups Slipcase Thumb index Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Erratum&oldid=1302146554 " Categories : Error Book terminology Publishing terminology Latin words and phrases Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from October 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 17:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Erratum 24 languages Add topic

