Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Utilization of water as an element 1.1.1 Based on ownership of the land 1.1.2 Based on previous use or prior appropriation 1.1.3 Community-based allocation of water 1.1.4 Right to clean water 1.2 The right to access and physically occupy water 2 History 3 Finland 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Water right 8 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी עברית 日本語 Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right of a user to use water from a water source This article is about water usage laws in common law . For a discussion of the right to water as a human right under international law , see right to water .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: too lengthy.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( July 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( May 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Water right in water law is the right of a user to use water from a water source, e.g., a [ 1 ] river, stream, pond or source of groundwater . In areas with plentiful water and few users, such systems are generally not complicated or contentious. In other areas, especially arid areas where irrigation is practiced, such systems are often the source of conflict, both legal and physical. Some systems treat surface water and ground water in the same manner, while others use different principles for each.

Types [ edit ] Water rights requires consideration of the context and origin of the right being discussed, or asserted.  Traditionally, water rights refers to the utilization of water as an element supporting basic human needs like drinking or irrigation.  Water rights could also include the physical occupancy of waterways for purposes of travel, commerce and recreational pursuits. The legal principles and doctrines that form the basis of each type of water rights are not interchangeable and vary according to local and national laws. Therefore, variations among countries and within national subdivisions exist in discussing and acknowledging these rights.

[ citation needed ] Utilization of water as an element [ edit ] Based on ownership of the land [ edit ] Often, [ where?

] water rights are based on ownership of the land upon which the water rests or flows. For example, under English common law , any rights asserted to "moveable and wandering" water must be based upon rights to the "permanent and immovable" land below.

[ 2 ] On streams and rivers, these are referred to as riparian rights or littoral rights , which are protected by property law .  Legal principles long recognized under riparian principles involve the right to remove the water – for drinking or irrigation – or to add more water into the channel – for drainage or effluence. Under riparian law, water rights are subject to the test of "reasonable use".  The judiciary has defined "reasonable use" principle as follows: "the true test of the principle and extent of the use is whether it is to the injury of the other proprietors or not." [ 3 ] Because of the limits on use, the doctrine of riparian rights is often [ where?

] known as the "downstream user rule" – the downstream users have rights to the water which the upstream users may not abridge.

[ 4 ] Based on previous use or prior appropriation [ edit ] Main article: Prior-appropriation water rights Where water is more scarce (like in the Western United States), allocation of flowing water is premised upon prior appropriation.  "The appropriation doctrine confers upon one who actually diverts and uses water the right to continue to do so provided that the water is used for reasonable and beneficial uses", regardless of whether that person owns land contiguous to the watercourse.

[ 5 ] "[A]s between appropriators, the rule of priority is 'first in time, first in right.

' " [ 6 ] The 20th century system of prior appropriation water rights is characterized by five principles: Exclusive right is given to the original appropriator, and all following privileges are conditional upon precedent rights.

All privileges are conditional upon beneficial use.

Water may be used on riparian lands or non-riparian lands (i.e., water may be used on the land next to the water source, or on land removed from the water source) Diversion is permitted, regardless of the shrinkage of the river or stream.

The privilege may be lost through non-use.

[ 7 ] Beneficial use is defined [ by whom?

] as agricultural, industrial, or urban use. Environmental uses, such as maintaining a body of water and the wildlife that use it, were not initially regarded as beneficial uses in some states but have been accepted in some areas.

[ 8 ] Every water right is parameterized by an annual yield and an appropriation date. When a water right is sold, it maintains its original appropriation date.

Community-based allocation of water [ edit ] In some jurisdictions, appropriative water rights can be granted directly to communities. Here, water is reserved to provide sufficient capacity for the future growth of that particular community. For example, California provides communities and other water users within watersheds senior status over appropriative (use-based) water rights solely because they are located where the water originates and naturally flows.

[ citation needed ] A second example of community-based water rights is pueblo water rights. As recognized by California , pueblo water rights are grants to individual settlements (i.e. pueblos) over all streams and rivers flowing through the city and to all groundwater aquifers underlying that particular city. The pueblo's claim expands with the needs of the city and may be used to supply the needs of areas that are later annexed to the city.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] While California recognizes pueblo water rights, pueblo water rights are controversial. Some scholars and courts have argued that the pueblo water rights doctrine lacks a historical basis in Spanish or Mexican water law.

[ 12 ] Right to clean water [ edit ] Due to humanity's dependence upon clean water, many nations, states and municipalities have enacted regulations to preemptively protect water quality and quantity. This right of a government to regulate water quality is premised upon protecting downstream navigable waters from contamination. These waters are publicly owned and include the right to receive these waters undiminished under both the riparian and appropriation doctrines under the Clean Water Act .

[ citation needed ] The right to access and physically occupy water [ edit ] The Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution gives Congress the power to regulate and occupy "navigable waters"; this is referred to as a navigable servitude . Congress has exercised this power in a variety of ways, including the construction of dams, diverting water from a stream and blocking and restricting use of waterways.  The servitude is a Federal power, not an individual right.

[ 13 ] Public trust rights to access and recreate upon navigable-in-fact waters may also exist. These rights are often based on local laws over property held in trust for the public. In the United States, each state holds the land submerged by navigable waters in trust for the public and can establish a public right to access or recreate within these public waterways.  Again, this "water right" is not an individual right, but rather a public right and individual privilege which may include restrictions and limitations based on local laws.

[ citation needed ] The Fifth and Eleventh Amendment to the U.S. Constitution limit the power of state or federal governments to impinge upon any exclusive use of water by prohibiting the enactment of any laws or regulations that amount to a "taking" of private property.  Laws and regulations that deprive a riparian owner of legally cognizable water rights constitute an illegal governmental taking of private property for which just compensation is owed to the water right holder.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] In ancient Rome , the law was that people could obtain temporary usufructuary rights for running water. These rights were independent of land ownership, and lasted as long as use continued.

[ 15 ] Under English common law, all tidal waters were held by the Crown and all freshwater streams were included with title to the lands, with full accompanying rights. However, under the riparian doctrine, landowners had the right to receive water undiminished by upstream landowners.

Over time, rights evolved from being strictly land-based to also include use-based, allowing non-landowners to hold enforceable rights to receive clean water. A reasonable use rule evolved in some countries.

Finland [ edit ] In Finland , waterbodies are generally privately owned, but Finland also applies the Roman law principle of aqua profluens (flowing water), according to which the freely flowing water in waterbodies cannot be owned or possessed. This means that the owners of waterbodies cannot prohibit diversion of water for agricultural, industrial, municipal, or domestic use according to the provisions of the Finnish Water Law.

[ 16 ] A separate act regulates provision of water.

[ 17 ] There also exists public easement over rivers.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] California State Water Resources Control Board Clean Water Report Climate migration and water rights Colorado River Water Conservation District v. United States Drainage law Grazing rights Optimum water content for tillage Permanent water rights (Alberta) Human right to water and sanitation Rio Grande border disputes Water conflict Water law Water law in the United States Water privatization in Bolivia Water quality Water resources Water resources law Water trading Ocean privatization Indus Waters Treaty Portals : Water Law References [ edit ] ^ Tyler v. Wilkinson, 24 F. Cas. 472, 474 (1827).

^ Blackstone Commentaries Vol.2, p.18; 3 Kent's Comm. p. 428, et seq. {ninth Report}; Carter v Murcot 4 Burr. 2126 (All Rights "accrue by reason of possession of the ground upon which water lies") ^ Tyler v. Wilkinson, 4 Mason 397 - 1827, and cited in PPL MONTANA v. MONTANA, 132 S.Ct. 1215 (2012) ^ E.g.

, " Introduction to Riparian Doctrine ", N.D. Water Law, North Dakota State University; accessed 2021.05.28.

^ United States v. State Water Res. Control Bd., 182 Cal.App.3d 82 (1986) ^ United States v. State Water Res. Control Bd., 182 Cal.App.3d 82 (1986) (citing Irwin v. Phillips, 5 Cal. 140, 147 (1855)).

^ Gopalakrishnan, Chennat (1973). "The Doctrine of Prior Appropriation and Its Impact on Water Development: A Critical Survey".

American Journal of Economics and Sociology . Vol. 32, no. 1. pp.

61– 72.

^ Western States Water Laws Western States Instream Flow Summary.

Archived 2007-07-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ City of Los Angeles v. Pomeroy, 124 Cal. 597, 640-41 (1899) ^ Hooker v. City of Los Angeles, 188 U.S. 314, 319-320 (1903) ^ City of Los Angeles v. City of San Fernando, 14 Cal.3d 199 (Cal 1978) ^ Text of STATE of New Mexico, ex rel. Eluid L. MARTINEZ, State Engineer, Plaintiff-Respondent, v. CITY OF LAS VEGAS, Defendant-Petitioner. No. 22,283 is available from: Findlaw ^ "Research Guides : Public Rights in Water: Federal Navigation Servitude" .

guides.law.fsu.edu . Retrieved 2022-05-22 .

^ Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 US 164 - Supreme Court 1979 ^ Guerin, K (2003).

"Property Rights and Environmental Policy: A New Zealand Perspective" . Wellington, New Zealand: New Zealand Treasury. Archived from the original on 2020-06-01 . Retrieved 2012-02-12 .

^ "FINLEX ® - Water Act" .

finlex.fi (in Finnish). 2011. p. 97 . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

Available online only in Finnish ; available in English from email address listed here ^ Finlex (2001). "Water Services Act (119/2001)".

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] deVilliers, Marq.

Water: The Fate of Our Most Precious Resource .  Mariner Books, 2001.

ISBN 0-618-12744-5 .

Idaho Department of Water Resources: Water Rights Primer Nevada Water Law Overview Frequently Asked Questions Concerning Water Rights in New Mexico Water Rights in Oregon Information Pertaining to Water Rights in California United Nations General Comment 15. 2002. "Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights: The Right to Water. New York.

Whose right to water?

School resource on water rights.

Outcome of the international experts’ meeting on the Right to Water (UNESCO) External links [ edit ] Arizona General Stream Adjudication Idaho Snake River Basin Adjudication Washington Department of Ecology Adjudications Website The Water Report The right to water and water rights in a changing world v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Israel Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐d4s4k
Cached time: 20250812020943
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.473 seconds
Real time usage: 0.567 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3195/1000000
Revision size: 14795/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 123883/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13453/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56686/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.267/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6403253/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  456.277      1 -total
 23.32%  106.392      6 Template:Navbox
 21.87%   99.796      1 Template:Reflist
 18.48%   84.300      1 Template:Property_navbox
 15.96%   72.806      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 13.51%   61.655      1 Template:Cite_news
 11.07%   50.496      1 Template:Cleanup
 10.89%   49.711     16 Template:Main_other
 10.52%   48.012      1 Template:Short_description
  9.07%   41.375      8 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1137934:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020943 and revision id 1304669105. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_right&oldid=1304669105 " Categories : Water law Property Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) CS1 errors: requires URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from July 2012 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from July 2012 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from July 2012 Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2010 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from March 2022 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 12:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water right 8 languages Add topic

