Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 2.1 Reception 2.1.1 Sokal and Bricmont 3 Bibliography 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Virilio 23 languages Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher, cultural theorist, and urbanist Paul Virilio Born 4 January 1932 Paris , Third French Republic Died 10 September 2018 (2018-09-10) (aged 86) Paris, France Education Alma mater University of Paris Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Christian anarchism Phenomenology (early) Main interests Aesthetics , urbanism , philosophy of Technology , philosophy of war Notable ideas Dromology • Aesthetics of disappearance • Logistics of perception Paul Virilio ( French: [viʁiljo] ; 4 January 1932 – 10 September 2018) [ 3 ] was a French cultural theorist , urbanist , architect and aesthetic philosopher. He is best known for his writings about technology as it has developed in relation to speed and power, with diverse references to architecture, the arts, the city and the military. Virilio was a prolific creator of neologisms, most notably his concept of " dromology ", the all-around, pervasive inscription of speed in every aspect of life.

According to two biographers, Virilio was a "historian of warfare, technology and photography, a philosopher of architecture, military strategy and cinema, and a politically engaged provocative commentator on history, terrorism, mass media and human-machine relations." [ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Paul Virilio was born in Paris in 1932 to an Italian communist father and a Catholic Breton mother.

[ 5 ] After being conscripted into the army during the Algerian War , Virilio attended lectures in phenomenology by Maurice Merleau-Ponty at the Sorbonne .

[ 6 ] In 1998, Virilio began to teach intensive seminars at the European Graduate School .

[ 6 ] His final projects involved working with homeless groups in Paris and building the first Museum of the Accident.

[ 6 ] Ideas [ edit ] This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Groningen city marker fountain sculpture, designed by Virilio in 1990 See also: Dromomania#Nonclinical usage and Hypermobility (travel) Virilio coined the term "dromology" (based on dromos , an Ancient Greek noun for race or racetrack) to signify the "logic and impact of speed". Dromology is important when considering the structuring of society in relation to warfare and modern media, as the speed at which something happens may change its essential nature, and that which moves with speed quickly comes to dominate that which is slower. Hence the study of dromology "necessarily implies the study of the organisation of territory, [as whoever] controls the territory possesses it. Possession of territory is not primarily about laws and contracts, but first and foremost a matter of movement and circulation".

[ 7 ] Reception [ edit ] Jean Baudrillard , while drawing on Virilio's works in 1985, eventually stated in 1988 that Virilio's analyses were out of date as "Speed is out!", stating that immobility has set in because "all trips have already taken place".

[ 8 ] A book-length criticism of Virilio's work to 2004 was written by Steve Redhead .

[ 9 ] He observed: His scattergun writing style is not always easy to follow, often provoking disorientation and dislocation at the very least. Insights, personal memories, detailed histories, major theoretical leaps and banalities sit side by side.

[ 9 ] : 137 He also notes that Virilio does not pass the grade in academic studies : Reading Virilio thoroughly does leave the reader with the feeling of many dislocated, undeveloped ideas swirling around often at the level of great generality. The content is often not particularly logical if viewed from a conventional academic perspective in the human or social sciences.

[ 9 ] : 138 However, for Law and Popular Culture, Redhead concedes Virilio as a factor: Paul Virilio's writing have long had a major role in the theoretical socio-legal studies subdiscipline of law and popular culture which has operated at the intersection of critical legal studies and cultural studies for over two decades.

[ 9 ] : 149 In 2014, Mark Lacy, an analyst of security, technology and global politics noted: Virilio is unlikely to be read in the 'mainstream' of academia (although one might find his works on the reading lists of a military academy ).

[ 1 ] : 10 Lacy credits Virilio with balancing the propaganda of progress against the management of fear at some cost: Virilio draws on and develops points that are made by many critical thinkers from (predominantly) the twentieth century (most notably Walter Benjamin ), assembling ideas in new contexts, creating a vision of the world through concepts and language that is often unsettling, a (re)description that makes the world feel strange and unfamiliar. Virilio's often alien-sounding concepts attempt to enable us to see the world anew, to view a world that is presented to us in terms of fear and progress as something alien (and alienating), to give a form to feelings and suspicions that remain vague, unclear, uncertain, out of place.

[ 1 ] : 17 Sokal and Bricmont [ edit ] Virilio was one of the many cultural theorists (and other postmodernists ) criticized by physicists Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont in 1997 for what they characterize as misunderstanding and misuse of science and mathematics.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Virilio's works are the subject of chapter 10 of Fashionable Nonsense . Their criticism consists of a series of quotes (often long) from Virilio's works, and then explanations of how Virilio confuses basic physics concepts and abuses scientific terminology, to the point of absurdity. In the authors' words: The writings of Paul Virilio revolve principally around the themes of technology, communication, and speed. They contain a plethora of references to physics, particularly the theory of relativity . Though Virilio's sentences are slightly more meaningful than those of Deleuze-Guattari, what is presented as "science" is a mixture of monumental confusions and wild fantasies. Furthermore, his analogies between physics and social questions are the most arbitrary imaginable, when he does not simply become intoxicated with his own words. We confess our sympathy with many of Virilio's political and social views; but the cause is not, alas, helped by his pseudo-physics.

[ 10 ] : 169 A criticism of a passage often reads something like this: Here Virilio mixes up velocity (vitesse) and acceleration , the two basic concepts of kinematics (the description of motion), which are introduced and carefully distinguished at the beginning of every introductory physics course.[221] Perhaps this confusion isn't worth stressing; but for a purported specialist in the philosophy of speed, it is nonetheless a bit surprising.

[ 10 ] : 170 They end their chapter with a long quote followed by this comment: This paragraph — which in the French original is a single 193-word sentence, whose "poetry" is unfortunately not fully captured by the translation — is the most perfect example of diarrhea of the pen that we have ever encountered. And as far as we can see, it means precisely nothing.

[ 10 ] : 175 Bibliography [ edit ] Speed and Politics: An Essay on Dromology.

New York: Semiotext(e), 1977 [1986] War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception . London: Verso, 1989.

Popular Defense and Ecological Struggles . New York: Semiotext(e), 1990.

The Aesthetics of Disappearance . New York: Semiotext(e), 1991.

Lost Dimension . New York: Semiotext(e), 1991.

Atom Egoyan . Paris: Dis Voir, 1994.

The Vision Machine . Bloomington: Indiana University Press , 1994.

Bunker Archaeology . New York: Princeton University Press , 1994.

The Art of the Motor . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press , 1995.

Open Sky . London: Verso, 1997.

Pure War . New York: Semiotext(e), 1997.

Politics of the Very Worst . New York: Semiotext(e), 1999.

Polar Inertia . London: Sage, 1999.

A Landscape of Events . Cambridge: MIT Press , 2000.

The Information Bomb . London: Verso, 2000.

Strategy of Deception . London: Verso, 2000.

Virilio Live: Selected Interviews . Edited by John Armitage.  London: Sage , 2001.

Ground Zero .  London: Verso , 2002.

Desert Screen: War at the Speed of Light . London: Continuum, 2002.

Crepuscular Dawn . New York: Semiotext(e), 2002.

Art and Fear . London: Continuum, 2003. ( originally published in 2000 by Editions Galilee under the title La Procedure Silence, meaning "The Silence Trial". ) Unknown Quantity . New York: Thames & Hudson , 2003.

City of Panic . Oxford: Berg, 2005.

The Accident of Art . (with Sylvère Lotringer ) New York: Semiotext(e) , 2005.

Negative Horizon: An Essay in Dromoscopy . London: Continuum , 2005.

Art as Far as the Eye Can See . Oxford: Berg Publishers , 2007.

The Original Accident . Cambridge: Polity, 2007 Grey Ecology . New York/Dresden: Atropos Press, 2009.

The University of Disaster . Cambridge: Polity , 2010.

The Futurism of the Instant: Stop-Eject . Cambridge: Polity, 2010.

A Winter's Journey : Four Conversations with Marianne Brausch . The French list.

Seagull Books , 2011.

The Administration of Fear . New York: Semiotext(e), 2012.

The Great Accelerator . Cambridge: Polity, 2012.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Mark Lacy (2014) Security, Technology and Global Politics, thinking with Virilio , Routledge ISBN 978-0-415-57604-8 ^ Dana Arnold, Andrew Ballantyne (eds.), Architecture as Experience: Radical Change in Spatial Practice , Routledge, 2004, ch. 7.

^ Mort de Paul Virilio, penseur de l'accélération du monde (in French) ^ Tim Luke & Gearóid Ó Tuathail (2000) "Thinking Geopolitical Space: The spatiality of war, speed and vision in the work of Paul Virilio", in Thinking Space , Mike Crang & Nigel Thrift editors, Routledge, page 361 ^ Berthou, Benoît; Chautard, Sophie; Guislain, Gilbert (2003).

100 hommes qui ont fait la France du XXe siècle . Studyrama. p. 193.

ISBN 9782844723239 .

^ a b c Paul Virilio . Faculty page at European Graduate School . Accessed: March 1, 2016.

^ Virilio, Paul; Armitage, John (19 October 2000).

"CTheory interview with Paul Virilio: The Kosovo War took place in orbital space" .

Theory .

23 (3): 10-18.

^ Dr. Bernardo Attias.

"S(t)imulacrum(b)" . Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 16 December 2022 .

^ a b c d Steve Redhead (2004) Paul Virilio: Theorist for an Accelerated Culture , Edinburgh University Press ISBN 0-7486-1927-5 ^ a b c d Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont (1998) Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals' Abuse of Science , first published in French as Impostures Intellectuelles in 1997 ^ Sokal, Alan (2008) Beyond the Hoax: Science, Philosophy and Culture References [ edit ] "Paul Virilio spricht mit Heinz-Norbert Jocks. Universität des Unglücks. Von Krieg, Raum und Zeit und vom Sterben am Meer in La Rochelle", Lettre International , Berlin, pages 24–31, 2018, ISSN 0945-5167 Armitage, John, editor (2000) Paul Virilio: From Modernism to Hypermodernism and Beyond . London: Sage Derian, James Der , editor (1998) The Virilio Reader , Malden (Massachusetts): Blackwell Publishers James, Ian (2007) Paul Virilio , London: Routledge External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Paul Virilio .

Paul Virilio . Faculty page at European Graduate School . Biography, bibliography, photos and video lectures.

Paul Virilio.

'Red Alert in Cyberspace' in Radical Philosophy . November/December 1995 Paul Virilio and Louise Wilson.

"Cyberwar, God and Television".

Archived 2010-07-06 at the Wayback Machine Interview. In: ctheory. December 1, 1994.

Paul Virilio and Jérôme Sans.

"Game Of Love & Chance" . Discussion. In: virtually2k. 1995.

Jason Adams.

"Popular Defense in the Empire of Speed: Paul Virilio and the Phenomenology of the Political Body" . MA Thesis, Simon Fraser University . 2002.

John Armitage.

"Beyond Postmodernism? Paul Virilio's Hypermodern Cultural Theory" . In: ctheory. November 15, 2000.

Steinmann, Kate.

Apparatus, Capture, Trace: Photography and Biopolitics in: Fillip . Fall 2011.

Bocquet, Denis.

Paul Virilio (1932-2018) , Il Giornale dell'Architettura, September 2018 (in Italian) Paul Virilio spricht mit Heinz-Norbert Jocks. Universität des Unglücks. Von Krieg, Raum und Zeit und vom Sterben am Meer in La Rochelle. Lettre International, Berlin, p. 24–31, 2018, ISSN 0945-5167 v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists Museum of Modern Art FID People Trove Structurae Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Virilio&oldid=1293916976 " Categories : 1932 births 2018 deaths 20th-century anarchists 20th-century French male writers 20th-century French non-fiction writers 20th-century French philosophers 20th-century Roman Catholics 21st-century anarchists 21st-century French male writers 21st-century French non-fiction writers 21st-century French philosophers 21st-century Roman Catholics Academic staff of European Graduate School Aphorists Catholic anarchists Catholic philosophers Christian humanists Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism Critical theorists Criticism of transhumanism French anarchists French film critics French male non-fiction writers French military historians French people of Breton descent French people of Italian descent French philosophers of art French philosophers of culture French philosophers of history French philosophers of science French philosophers of technology French political philosophers French Roman Catholic writers French systems scientists French technology writers Futurologists Historians of technology Historians of warfare Historians of weapons Mass media theorists Media historians Military theorists Phenomenologists Philosophers of war Postmodern theory Postmodernists University of Paris alumni Urban theorists War writers Writers from Paris Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2025 All articles with style issues Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 12:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Virilio 23 languages Add topic

