Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents De Arte Combinatoria 4 languages Español Esperanto Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1666 scientific book by Gottfried Leibniz Frontispiece of the book printed in 1690 The Dissertatio de arte combinatoria ("Dissertation on the Art of Combinations" or "On the Combinatorial Art") is an early work by Gottfried Leibniz published in 1666 in Leipzig .

[ 1 ] It is an extended version of his first doctoral dissertation , [ 2 ] written before the author had seriously undertaken the study of mathematics.

[ 3 ] The booklet was reissued without Leibniz' consent in 1690, which prompted him to publish a brief explanatory notice in the Acta Eruditorum .

[ 4 ] During the following years he repeatedly expressed regrets about its being circulated as he considered it immature.

[ 5 ] Nevertheless it was a very original work and it provided the author the first glimpse of fame among the scholars of his time.

The book was created as part of Leibniz's efforts to create the Characteristica Universalis , the perfect language which would provide a direct representation of ideas along with a calculus for the philosophical reasoning .

Summary [ edit ] The main idea behind the text is that of an alphabet of human thought , which is attributed to Descartes . All concepts are nothing but combinations of a relatively small number of simple concepts, just as words are combinations of letters. All truths may be expressed as appropriate combinations of concepts, which can in turn be decomposed into simple ideas, rendering the analysis much easier. Therefore, this alphabet would provide a logic of invention, opposed to that of demonstration which was known so far. Since all sentences are composed of a subject and a predicate , one might Find all the predicates which are appropriate to a given subject, or Find all the subjects which are convenient to a given predicate.

For this, Leibniz was inspired in the Ars Magna of Ramon Llull , although he criticized this author because of the arbitrariness of his categories indexing.

Leibniz discusses in this work some combinatorial concepts. He had read Clavius' comments to Sacrobosco 's De sphaera mundi , and some other contemporary works. He introduced the term variationes ordinis for the permutations , combinationes for the combinations of two elements, con3nationes (shorthand for conternationes ) for those of three elements, etc. His general term for combinations was complexions . He found the formula ( n r ) = ( n − − 1 r ) + ( n − − 1 r − − 1 ) {\displaystyle {n \choose r}={n-1 \choose r}+{n-1 \choose r-1}} which he thought was original.

The first examples of use of his ars combinatoria are taken from law, the musical registry of an organ , and the Aristotelian theory of generation of elements from the four primary qualities. But philosophical applications are of greater importance. He cites the idea of Thomas Hobbes that all reasoning is just a computation.

The most careful example is taken from geometry, from where we shall give some definitions. He introduces the Class I concepts, which are primitive.

Class I 1 point, 2 space, 3 included, [...] 9 parts, 10 total, [...] 14 number, 15 various [...] Class II contains simple combinations.

Class II.1 Quantity is 14 των 9 Where των means "of the" (from Ancient Greek : τῶν ). Thus, "Quantity" is the number of the parts. Class III contains the con3nationes : Class III.1 Interval is 2.3.10 Thus, "Interval" is the space included in total. Of course, concepts deriving from former classes may also be defined.

Class IV.1 Line is 1/3 των 1 Where 1/3 means the first concept of class III. Thus, a "line" is the interval of (between) points.

Leibniz compares his  system to the Chinese and Egyptian languages , although he did not really understand them at this point. For him, this is a first step towards the Characteristica Universalis , the perfect language which would provide a direct representation of ideas along with a calculus for the philosophical reasoning.

As a preface, the work begins with a proof of the existence of God , cast in geometrical form, and based on the argument from motion .

Notes [ edit ] ^ G.W. Leibniz, Dissertatio de arte combinatoria , 1666, Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe (Berlin: Akademie Verlag , 1923), A VI 1, p. 163; Philosophische Schriften (edited by Carl Immanuel Gerhardt), Bd. IV, p. 30; ^ The first part of the book was his doctoral thesis in Philosophy at Leipzig University . Leibniz defended his thesis in March 1666 (see Richard T. W. Arthur, Leibniz , John Wiley & Sons, 2014, p. x).

^ Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz .

Hauptschriften zur Grundlegung der Philosophie. Zur allgemeinen Charakteristik.

Philosophische Werke Band 1. p. 32. Translated in German by Artur Buchenau. Published, reviewed and added an introduction and notes by Ernst Cassirer. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1966, p. 32.

^ G.G.L.

Ars Combinatoria , Acta Eruditorum , Feb. 1691, pp. 63–64 ^ Leibniz complained to various correspondents, e.g., to Morell (1 October 1697) or to Meier (23 January 1699); see Akademie I.14, p. 548 or I.16, p. 540.

References [ edit ] E. J. Aiton, Leibniz: A Biography . Hilger, Bristol, 1985.

ISBN 0-85274-470-6 .

External links [ edit ] De Arte Combinatoria , the original Latin-language text Partial English translation Partial German translation v t e Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliography Outline Mathematics and philosophy Alternating series test Best of all possible worlds Calculus controversy Calculus ratiocinator Characteristica universalis Compossibility Difference Dynamism Identity of indiscernibles Individuation Law of continuity Leibniz wheel Leibniz's gap Leibniz's notation Lingua generalis Mathesis universalis Pre-established harmony Plenitude Sufficient reason Salva veritate Theodicy Transcendental law of homogeneity Rationalism Universal science Vis viva Works De Arte Combinatoria (1666) Discourse on Metaphysics (1686) New Essays on Human Understanding (1704) Théodicée (1710) Monadology (1714) Leibniz–Clarke correspondence (1715–1716) Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=De_Arte_Combinatoria&oldid=1300786227 " Categories : 1666 non-fiction books 1666 in the Holy Roman Empire 17th-century books in Latin History of Leipzig Combinatorics Philosophy of language literature Books by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 11:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents De Arte Combinatoria 4 languages Add topic

