Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Pintupi Nine 6 languages Deutsch Igbo Polski Русский Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of Aboriginal Australian traditional hunter-gatherers Gibson Desert The Pintupi Nine are a group of nine Pintupi people who remained unaware of European colonisation of Australia and lived a traditional desert-dwelling life in Australia's Gibson Desert until 1984, when they made contact with their relatives near Kiwirrkurra .

[ 1 ] They are sometimes also referred to as "the lost tribe". The group were hailed as "the last nomads" in the international press when they left their nomadic life in October 1984.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The group roamed between waterholes near Lake Mackay , near the Western Australia - Northern Territory border, wearing hairstring belts and armed with two-metre-long ( 6 + 1 ⁄ 2 ft) wooden spears and spear throwers , and intricately carved boomerangs . Their diet was dominated by goanna and rabbit as well as bush food native plants. The group was a family, consisting of two co-wives (Nanyanu and Papalanyanu) and seven children. There were four boys ( Warlimpirrnga , Walala , Tamlik , and Piyiti) and three girls ( Yalti , Yikultji and Takariya ). The children were all in their teens, although their exact ages were not known; the mothers were in their late 30s.

On the death of the father – husband of the two wives [ 1 ] – the group travelled south to where they thought their relatives might be, as they had seen "smokes" in that direction. They encountered two campers from Kiwirrkura but due to a misunderstanding involving a shotgun they fled back north while the campers returned to the community and alerted others who then travelled back with them to find the group. The community members quickly realised that the group were relatives who had been left behind in the desert twenty years earlier, when many had travelled into the missions nearer Alice Springs . The community members travelled by vehicle to where the group were last seen and then tracked them for some time before finding them. After making contact and establishing their relationships, the Pintupi nine were invited to come and live at Kiwirrkura, where most of them still reside.

[ 3 ] The Pintupi -speaking trackers told them there was plenty of food, and water that came out of pipes; Yalti has said that this concept astounded them.

[ 1 ] Medical examination revealed that the Tjapaltjarri clan (as they are also known) were "in beautiful condition. Not an ounce of fat, well proportioned, strong, fit, healthy".

[ 4 ] At Kiwirrkura , near Kintore , they met with other members of their extended family.

In 1986, Piyiti returned to the desert.

[ 5 ] Warlimpirrnga , Walala and Tamlik (now known as "Thomas") have gained international recognition in the art world as the Tjapaltjarri Brothers.

[ 6 ] The three sisters, Yalti , Yikultji and Takariya , are also well-known Aboriginal artists whose works can be seen on exhibition and purchased from a number of art dealers. One of the mothers has died; the other has settled with the three sisters in Kiwirrkurra.

[ 5 ] Although at the time of their discovery the group was hailed as "the last nomads", two years later in 1986, another group of previously uncontacted aboriginal tribesmen still living a hunter-gatherer existence, the 7-person Richter family , were located in the Great Victoria Desert in south-western Australia.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Bindibu expedition Ishi Warri and Yatungka Richters (Australian Aboriginal family) References [ edit ] ^ a b c Mahony, Alana (23 December 2014).

"The day the Pintupi Nine entered the modern world" . BBC News . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "The Last Nomads" .

Aboriginal Art Store . Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.

^ Myers, Fred (November 1988). "Locating ethnographic practice: Romance, reality and politics in the outback".

American Ethnologist .

15 (4): 609– 624.

doi : 10.1525/ae.1988.15.4.02a00010 .

^ Charlie McMahon: Sunday Times [ full citation needed ] ^ a b Adam, Nigel (3 February 2007).

"Lost tribe happy in modern world" .

Herald Sun . Archived from the original on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "The Tjapaltjarri Brothers: The Last Nomads (Online Exhibition)" .

Aboriginal Art Store .

^ Smith, Emily JB; Bertoglio, Giulia (27 November 2022).

"Reflections on Australia's last desert nomads, Pintupi Nine and Richters, and the homelands movement" . ABC.

"The End of an Era" The Sunday Times (Western Australia) , 4 February 2007, pp 14–17 External links [ edit ] Aboriginal art website Takariya Napaltjarri's artist page at the Aboriginal Art Store Photo on Newspix - Nine Pintupi speakers who made national headlines on their first contact with white Australia. (NPX396927 - 31 October 1984) Colliding worlds: first contact in the western desert, 1932-1984 . National Museum of Australia reCollections journal, vol. 1 no. 2, September 2006 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pintupi_Nine&oldid=1303725957 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal culture Australian folklore History of Indigenous Australians History of Western Australia Indigenous Australians from Western Australia People from Goldfields–Esperance Pintupi Uncontacted peoples Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 18:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pintupi Nine 6 languages Add topic

