Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 1.1 Notable Ricardians 2 Richard III Society 3 The Richard III Foundation, Inc.

4 Plantagenet Alliance 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ricardian (Richard III) 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person interested in rehabilitating the reputation of Richard III of England For other uses of "Ricardian", see Ricardian (disambiguation) .

Richard, his wife Anne Neville , and their son Edward of Middleham, Prince of Wales standing on white boars in a contemporary heraldic roll by John Rous .

Ricardians are people who dispute the negative posthumous reputation of King Richard III of England (reigned 1483–1485).  Richard III has long been portrayed unfavourably, most notably in Shakespeare 's play Richard III , in which he is portrayed as murdering his 12-year-old nephew Edward V to secure the English throne for himself. Ricardians believe these portrayals are false and politically motivated by Tudor propaganda .

[ 1 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Ricardians accept as facts: that first the young king Edward V was placed under the protection of his uncle Richard III; that Richard III himself was then crowned as the new king instead of young Edward V; and finally that the young king disappeared at some point over the coming years, never to be seen again.  However, they dispute the initial common assumption by many, that Richard III was personally responsible for the disappearance (or perhaps murder) of Edward V.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Richard III's reign lasted for only two years, and his short reign came to a violent end on 22 August 1485 at the Battle of Bosworth ; the last battle of the War of the Roses . In the aftermath of the battle, Richard III's body was not given a proper state funeral, and the location of his remains was soon forgotten; there was even a belief, now proved false, that they had been thrown into the River Soar in Leicester following the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Ricardians assert that many of the original assumptions about Richard III's motives and likely responsibility relating to these events were not supported by the facts of the day, that these assumptions were most probably instead the result of the political claims of his successors, and that they were most probably mistaken assumptions.

The two most notable societies of Ricardians are the Richard III Society , and the Richard III Foundation, Inc. A third much smaller Ricardian organisation, composed of "collateral descendants" of Richard III, was the Plantagenet Alliance . In 2012, the Richard III Society was instrumental in leading an archaeological effort to positively locate and identify the long-lost remains of Richard III, which resulted in the discovery and retrieval of the remains from beneath a Leicester car park.

[ 4 ] Subsequently, much popular historical interest was generated in this historical period.  Such historical interest resulted in the review and publication of many articles and documents regarding Richard's reign, which have contributed to the scholarship of latter 15th-century England .  After their discovery, Richard III's remains were first scientifically evaluated, then formally re-interred within the interior of Leicester Cathedral on 26 March 2015.  Their re-interment occurred amidst days of solemn ceremonies and pageantry.

[ 5 ] Notable Ricardians [ edit ] Ricardian historiography includes works by Horace Walpole and by Sir George Buck , who was the king's first defender, after the Tudor period.

Ricardian fiction includes Josephine Tey 's The Daughter of Time and Sharon Kay Penman 's The Sunne in Splendour .

Elizabeth George writes of the fictional discovery of an exonerating document in her short story "I Richard".

Science fiction writer Andre Norton , in the 1965 novel Quest Crosstime , depicted an alternate history in which Richard III won at Bosworth and turned out to be one of England's greatest kings, "achieving the brilliance of the Elizabethan era two generations earlier".

Other notable Ricardians include: Laurence Olivier , actor [ 6 ] Tallulah Bankhead , actress [ 6 ] José Ferrer , actor [ 6 ] T. S. Eliot , author [ 6 ] Philippa Gregory , author [ 7 ] Richard III Society [ edit ] Main article: Richard III Society The arms of the society, granted in 1989 [ 8 ] The Richard III Society was founded in 1924 by Liverpool surgeon Samuel Saxon Barton (1892-1957) as The Fellowship of the White Boar, Richard's badge and a symbol of the Yorkist army in the Wars of the Roses . Its membership was originally a small group of interested amateur historians whose aim was to bring about a re-assessment of the reputation of Richard III.

The society became moribund during the Second World War .

[ citation needed ] In 1951, Josephine Tey published her detective novel The Daughter of Time , in which Richard's guilt is examined and doubted. In 1955, Laurence Olivier released his film of Shakespeare's Richard III , which at the beginning admitted that the play was based on legend, and a sympathetic, detailed biography of Richard was published by Paul Murray Kendall , all of which went some way towards re-invigorating the society.

[ citation needed ] The Fellowship of the White Boar was renamed The Richard III Society in 1959.

In 2012, the society, working in partnership with the University of Leicester and Leicester City Council , exhumed a skeleton at the site of the former Greyfriars Church that was later confirmed to be that of the King.

[ 9 ] Philippa Langley , the secretary of the Scottish Branch of the Richard III Society, inaugurated the quest for King Richard's lost grave as part of her ongoing research into the controversial monarch. Her project marked the first-ever search for the grave of an anointed King of England. For their role in the exhumation, Langley and John Ashdown-Hill were awarded the MBEs in recognition of their services to "the Exhumation and Identification of Richard III" ( London Gazette ) in the 2015 Queen's Birthday Honours .

The Richard III Foundation, Inc.

[ edit ] The Foundation is a US educational organization. The aims of the Foundation are to study, share and stimulate interest in the life and times of King Richard III and the Wars of the Roses.

Its website states, "The Foundation seeks to challenge the popular view of King Richard III by demonstrating through rigorous scholarship that the facts of Richard’s life and reign are in stark contrast to the Shakespearian caricature." [ 10 ] Their aim is to identify and translate documents and texts that shed new insight into this important period of history.

[ 10 ] Plantagenet Alliance [ edit ] Main article: Plantagenet Alliance The Plantagenet Alliance was a grouping of 15 individuals who claimed to be "collateral [non-direct] descendants" of Richard III, [ 11 ] and have been described as a "Ricardian fan club".

[ 12 ] The group, formed for the purpose, unsuccessfully campaigned during 2013 and 2014 to have Richard re-interred at York Minster rather than Leicester Cathedral , believing that that was his wish.

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] During the campaign, the group failed to attract enough support to petition parliament.

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ Ashdown-Hill, John (15 April 2015).

The Mythology of Richard III . Amberley Publishing Limited.

ISBN 978-1-4456-4473-8 .

^ Langley, Philippa (19 November 2023).

The Princes in the Tower: Solving History's Greatest Cold Case . History Press.

ISBN 978-1-80399-542-7 .

^ Ashdown-Hill, John (15 July 2018).

The Mythology of the 'Princes in the Tower' . Amberley Publishing Limited.

ISBN 978-1-4456-7942-6 .

^ "Search for Richard III confirms that remains are the long-lost Church of the Grey Friars" . University of Leicester. 5 September 2012. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012 . Retrieved 4 February 2013 .

^ Richard III burial: five centuries on, the last medieval king finally gains honour in death The Telegraph.  By Tom Rowley. 23 Mar 2015.  Downloaded 24 Sep, 2017.

^ a b c d Venant, Elizabeth (22 July 1991).

"REHAB FOR RICHARD: CLEARING A KING'S NAME" .

The Washington Post .

^ Thorpe, Vanessa (30 July 2023).

" 'His story just continues to grip people': Philippa Gregory revisits the history of Richard III for stage" .

The Guardian .

^ "Richard III Society | SOCIETY BADGES and DEVICES" .

^ "LIVE UPDATES: Richard III DNA results announced - Leicester University reveals identity of human remains found in car park" . This is Leicestershire. Archived from the original on 21 April 2013 . Retrieved 7 February 2013 .

^ a b Richard III Foundation Archived 2013-07-04 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b Watson, Greig (13 September 2013).

"The Plantagenet Alliance: Who do they think they are?" .

BBC . Retrieved 26 March 2015 .

^ Kennedy, Maev (26 March 2013).

"Richard III's distant relatives threaten legal challenge over burial" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 26 March 2015 .

^ "Richard III reburial court bid fails" . BBC News. 23 May 2014 . Retrieved 26 March 2015 .

^ "Richard III parliamentary petition misses target" .

BBC News . 24 September 2013.

External links [ edit ] Richard III Society Society of Friends of King Richard III Richard III Foundation Ricardian Friends Richard III & Yorkist History Trust website Archived 13 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine v t e Richard III of England Duke of Gloucester (1461–83) King of England and Lord of Ireland (1483–85) Family Richard, 3rd Duke of York (father) Cecily Neville (mother) Anne Neville (wife) Anne, Duchess of Exeter (sister) Edward IV of England (brother) Edmund, Earl of Rutland (brother) Elizabeth, Duchess of Suffolk (sister) Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy (sister) George, Duke of Clarence (brother) Children Edward, Prince of Wales (son) John of Gloucester (illegitimate son) Katherine Herbert, Countess of Pembroke (illegitimate daughter) Reign Titulus Regius Princes in the Tower Buckingham's rebellion Life White boar Council of the North Exhumation and reburial Military career Battle of Barnet Battle of Tewkesbury English invasion of Scotland Battle of Bosworth Depictions Film Richard III (1955) Tower of London (1962) Richard III (1995) Looking for Richard (1996) Richard III (2007) The Lost King (2022) Novels The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck (1830) The Last of the Barons (1843) The Black Arrow: A Tale of the Two Roses (1888) Dickon (1929) The Daughter of Time (1951) The Sunne in Splendour (1982) The Reluctant Queen (1990) The White Queen (2009) The Red Queen (2010) The Kingmaker's Daughter (2012) Television An Age of Kings (1960) The Black Adder (1983) The Hollow Crown (2012) The White Queen (2013) Plays Richardus Tertius (1579) Henry VI, Part 2 (1591) Henry VI, Part 3 (1591) Richard III (1593) The True Tragedy of Richard III (1594) Richard III (1699) Plantagenet (2012) Related King Richard III Visitor Centre Richard III Society Ricardians Plantagenet Alliance Richard III Experience at Monk Bar Bibliography Richard III ← Edward V Henry VII → v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐j9sw7
Cached time: 20250812004857
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.703 seconds
Real time usage: 0.855 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6769/1000000
Revision size: 12319/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 358144/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9559/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 44/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73282/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.350/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7913305/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  662.439      1 -total
 48.96%  324.315     20 Template:Navbox
 31.89%  211.227      1 Template:Historiography
 31.37%  207.819      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 28.73%  190.295      1 Template:Reflist
 17.65%  116.942     36 Template:Ill
 14.42%   95.511      1 Template:Richard_III
 14.17%   93.840      3 Template:Cite_book
 10.23%   67.786      1 Template:Short_description
  6.73%   44.568     36 Template:Separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:600204:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004857 and revision id 1303232315. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ricardian_(Richard_III)&oldid=1303232315 " Categories : Richard III of England Wars of the Roses Historiography of the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 20:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ricardian (Richard III) 1 language Add topic

