Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and overview Toggle Definition and overview subsection 1.1 Home hygiene overview 1.2 Hand washing 1.3 Respiratory hygiene 1.4 Hygiene in the kitchen, bathroom and toilet 1.5 Laundry hygiene 1.6 Medical hygiene at home 1.7 Disinfectants and antibacterials in home hygiene 2 Personal hygiene Toggle Personal hygiene subsection 2.1 Regular activities 2.2 Hygiene of internal ear canals 2.3 Oral hygiene 2.4 Sleep hygiene 2.5 Personal care services hygiene 2.6 Challenges 2.6.1 Hygiene hypothesis and allergies 3 Medical hygiene 4 Food hygiene 5 Hygiene aspects in low- and middle-income countries Toggle Hygiene aspects in low- and middle-income countries subsection 5.1 Household water treatment and safe storage 6 History Toggle History subsection 6.1 Asia 6.1.1 China 6.1.2 Japan 6.1.3 Indian subcontinent 6.2 Americas 6.2.1 Mesoamerica 6.3 Europe 6.3.1 Antiquity 6.3.2 Middle Ages 6.3.3 Modernity 6.4 Middle East 6.5 Sub-Saharan Africa 6.6 Soap and soap makers 7 Society and culture Toggle Society and culture subsection 7.1 Religious hygienic customs 8 Etymology 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Hygiene 91 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча पालि Patois Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Sardu Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practices performed to preserve health "Hygienist" redirects here. For specific kinds of hygienist, see Industrial hygienist and Dental hygienist .

For the social movement, see Social hygiene . For the community in the United States, see Hygiene, Colorado .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hygiene" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Washing one's hands, [ 1 ] a form of hygiene, is the most effective way to prevent the spread of infectious diseases .

Hygiene is a set of practices performed to preserve health .
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), "Hygiene refers to conditions and practices that help to maintain health and prevent the spread of diseases ." [ 2 ] Personal hygiene refers to maintaining the body's cleanliness. Hygiene activities can be grouped into the following: home and everyday hygiene, personal hygiene, medical hygiene, sleep hygiene, and food hygiene . Home and every day hygiene includes hand washing , respiratory hygiene, food hygiene at home, hygiene in the kitchen, hygiene in the bathroom, laundry hygiene, and medical hygiene at home. And also environmental hygiene in the society to prevent all kinds of bacterias from penetrating into our homes.

Many people equate hygiene with "cleanliness", but hygiene is a broad term. It includes such personal habit choices as how frequently to take a shower or bath, wash hands, trim fingernails , and wash clothes. It also includes attention to keeping surfaces in the home and workplace clean, including bathroom facilities. Adherence to regular hygiene practices is often regarded as a socially responsible and respectable behavior, while neglecting proper hygiene can be perceived as unclean or unsanitary, and may be considered socially unacceptable or disrespectful, while also posing a risk to public health.

Definition and overview [ edit ] Hygiene is a practice [ 3 ] related to lifestyle , cleanliness , health , and medicine . In medicine and everyday life, hygiene practices are preventive measures that reduce the incidence and spread of germs leading to disease .

[ 4 ] Hygiene practices vary from one culture to another.

[ 5 ] In the manufacturing of food, [ 6 ] pharmaceuticals, [ 7 ] cosmetics, [ 8 ] and other products, good hygiene is a critical component of quality assurance .

The terms cleanliness and hygiene are often used interchangeably, which can cause confusion. In general, hygiene refers to practices that prevent spread of disease-causing organisms. Cleaning processes (e.g., handwashing [ 1 ] ) remove infectious microbes as well as dirt and soil, and are thus often the means to achieve hygiene.

Other uses of the term are as follows: body hygiene , personal hygiene , sleep hygiene , mental hygiene , dental hygiene , and occupational hygiene , used in connection with public health .

Home hygiene overview [ edit ] Home hygiene pertains to the hygiene practices that prevent or minimize the spread of disease at home and other everyday settings such as social settings, public transport, the workplace, public places, and more. Hygiene in a variety of settings plays an important role in preventing the spread of infectious diseases.

[ 9 ] It includes procedures like hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, food and water hygiene, general home hygiene (hygiene of environmental sites and surfaces), care of domestic animals, and home health care (the care of those who are at greater risk of infection).

[ 10 ] At present, these components of hygiene tend to be regarded as separate issues, although based on the same underlying microbiological principles. Preventing the spread of diseases means breaking the chain of infection transmission so that infection cannot spread. "Targeted hygiene" is based on identifying the routes of pathogen spread in the home and introducing hygiene practices at critical times to break the chain of infection.

[ 11 ] It uses a risk-based approach based on Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point ( HACCP ).

[ 12 ] The main sources of infection in the home are people (who are carriers or are infected), foods (particularly raw foods), water, pets, and domestic animals.

[ 13 ] Sites that accumulate stagnant water – such as sinks, toilets , waste pipes, cleaning tools, and face cloths – readily support microbial growth and can become secondary reservoirs of infection, though species are mostly those that threaten "at risk" groups.

Pathogens (such as potentially infectious bacteria and viruses – colloquially called "germs") are constantly shed via mucous membranes, feces, vomit, skin scales, and other means. When circumstances combine, people are exposed, either directly or via food or water, and can develop an infection.

[ 14 ] The main "highways" for the spread of pathogens in the home are the hands, hand and food contact surfaces, and cleaning cloths and utensils (e.g.

fecal–oral route of transmission). Pathogens can also be spread via clothing and household linens, such as towels . Utilities such as toilets and wash basins were invented to deal safely with human waste but still have risks associated with them. Safe disposal of human waste is a fundamental need; poor sanitation is a primary cause of diarrhea disease in low-income communities. Respiratory viruses and fungal spores spread via the air.

[ 15 ] Good home hygiene means engaging in hygiene practices at critical points to break the chain of infection.

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] Because the "infectious dose" for some pathogens can be very small (10–100 viable units or even less for some viruses), and infection can result from direct transfer of pathogens from surfaces via hands or food to the mouth, nasal mucous, or the eye, "hygienic cleaning" procedures should be adopted to eliminate pathogens from critical surfaces.

[ 16 ] Hand washing during pandemic Hand washing [ edit ] Hand hygiene sign in public restroom This section is an excerpt from Hand washing .

[ edit ] Hand washing (or handwashing), also called hand hygiene, is the process of cleaning the hands with soap or handwash and water to eliminate bacteria , viruses , dirt , microorganisms , and other potentially harmful substances. Drying of the washed hands is part of the process as wet and moist hands are more easily recontaminated.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] If soap and water are unavailable, hand sanitizer that is at least 60% ( v/v ) alcohol in water can be used as long as hands are not visibly excessively dirty or greasy.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Hand hygiene is central to preventing the spread of infectious diseases in home and everyday life settings.

[ 21 ] The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends washing hands for at least 20 seconds before and after certain activities.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] These include the five critical times during the day where washing hands with soap is important to reduce fecal-oral transmission of disease: after using the toilet (for urination , defecation , menstrual hygiene ), after cleaning a child's bottom (changing diapers ), before feeding a child, before eating and before/after preparing food or handling raw meat, fish, or poultry .

[ 24 ] Regular handwashing with soap is one of the most effective ways to prevent the transmission of pathogens. It significantly reduces the risk of gastrointestinal and respiratory infections.

A tippy tap for handwashing after using a urine-diverting dry toilet in Pumpuentsa, Ecuador Washing hygiene Respiratory hygiene [ edit ] See also: Cough etiquette Correct respiratory and hand hygiene when coughing and sneezing reduces the spread of pathogens particularly during the cold and flu season: [ 9 ] Carry tissues and use them to catch coughs and sneezes, or sneeze into your elbow.

Dispose of tissues as soon as possible.

Hygiene in the kitchen, bathroom and toilet [ edit ] Hygiene in the kitchen Hygiene in the bathroom Routine cleaning of hands, food, sites, and surfaces (such as toilet seats and flush handles, door and tap handles, work surfaces, and bath and basin surfaces) in the kitchen, bathroom , and toilet rooms reduces the spread of pathogens.

[ 25 ] The infection risk from flush toilets is not high, provided they are properly maintained, although some splashing and aerosol formation can occur during flushing, particularly when someone has diarrhea. Pathogens can survive in the scum or scale left behind on baths, showers , and washbasins after washing and bathing .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Hygiene in the toilet Thorough cleaning is important to prevent the spread of fungal infections. Molds can live on wall and floor tiles and on shower curtains. Mold can be responsible for infections, cause allergic reactions, deteriorate/damage surfaces, and cause unpleasant odors. Primary sites of fungal growth are inanimate surfaces, including carpets and soft furnishings.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Airborne fungi are usually associated with damp conditions, poor ventilation, or closed air systems.

[ 31 ] Hygiene cleaning Hygienic cleaning can be done through: [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Mechanical removal (i.e., cleaning) using a soap or detergent . To be effective as a hygiene measure, this process must be followed by thorough rinsing under running water to remove pathogens from the surface.

Hygiene cleaning to improve sanitation in Kampala Using a process or product that inactivates the pathogens in situ . Pathogen kill is achieved using a "micro-biocidal" product, i.e., a disinfectant or antibacterial product; waterless hand sanitizer ; or by application of heat.

In some cases, combined pathogen removal with kill is used, e.g., laundering of clothing and household linens such as towels and bed linen.

House deep-cleaning an intensive cleaning process targeting often-neglected areas, enhancing aesthetics, and improving health by reducing allergens and bacteria. It typically includes tasks like detailed dusting, appliance cleaning, and carpet shampooing, recommended biannually to maintain a home's hygiene and air quality.

Laundry hygiene [ edit ] Laundry hygiene involves practices that prevent disease and its spread via soiled clothing and household linens such as towels.

[ 34 ] Items most likely to be contaminated with pathogens are those that come into direct contact with the body, e.g., underwear, personal towels, facecloths, nappies. Cloths or other fabric items used during food preparation, or for cleaning the toilet or cleaning up material such as feces or vomit are a particular risk.

[ 13 ] Microbiological and epidemiological data indicates that clothing and household linens are a risk factor for infection transmission in home and everyday life settings as well as institutional settings. The lack of quantitative data linking contaminated clothing to infection in the domestic setting makes it difficult to assess the extent of this risk.

[ 34 ] [ 13 ] [ 35 ] This also indicates that risks from clothing and household linens are somewhat less than those associated with hands, hand contact and food contact surfaces, and cleaning cloths, but even so these risks need to be managed through effective laundering practices. In the home, this should be carried out as part of a multibarrier approach to hygiene which includes hand, food, respiratory, and other hygiene practices.

[ 34 ] [ 13 ] [ 35 ] Infectious disease risks from contaminated clothing can increase significantly under certain conditions - for example, in healthcare situations in hospitals, care homes, and the domestic setting where someone has diarrhoea, vomiting, or a skin or wound infection. The risk increases in circumstances where someone has reduced immunity to infection.

Hygiene measures, including laundry hygiene, are an important part of reducing spread of antibiotic-resistant strains of infectious organisms.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] In the community, otherwise-healthy people can become persistent skin carriers of MRSA , or faecal carriers of enterobacteria strains which can carry multi-antibiotic resistance factors (e.g.

NDM-1 or ESBL -producing strains). The risks are not apparent until, for example, they are admitted to hospital, when they can become "self infected" with their own resistant organisms following a surgical procedure. As persistent nasal, skin, or bowel carriage in the healthy population spreads "silently" across the world, the risks from resistant strains in both hospitals and the community increases.

[ 37 ] In particular the data indicates that clothing and household linens are a risk factor for spread of S. aureus (including MRSA and PVL -producing MRSA strains), and that effectiveness of laundry processes may be an important factor in defining the rate of community spread of these strains.

[ 34 ] [ 39 ] Experience in the United States suggests that these strains are transmissible within families and in community settings such as prisons, schools, and sport teams. Skin-to-skin contact (including unabraded skin) and indirect contact with contaminated objects such as towels, sheets, and sports equipment seem to represent the mode of transmission.

[ 34 ] During laundering, temperature and detergent work to reduce microbial contamination levels on fabrics. Soil and microbes from fabrics are severed and suspended in the wash water. These are then "washed away" during the rinse and spin cycles. In addition to physical removal, micro-organisms can be killed by thermal inactivation which increases as the temperature is increased. Chemical inactivation of microbes by the surfactants and activated oxygen-based bleach used in detergents contributes to the hygiene effectiveness of laundering. Adding hypochlorite bleach in the washing process achieves inactivation of microbes. A number of other factors can contribute including drying and ironing.

Drying laundry on a line in direct sunlight is known to reduce pathogens.

[ 40 ] In 2013, the International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene reviewed 30 studies of the hygiene effectiveness of laundering at temperatures ranging from room temperature to 70 °C (158 °F), under varying conditions.

[ 41 ] A key finding was the lack of standardization and control within studies, and the variability in test conditions between studies such as wash cycle time, number of rinses, and other factors. The consequent variability in the data (i.e., the reduction in contamination on fabrics) in turn makes it extremely difficult to propose guidelines for laundering with any confidence. As a result, there is significant variability in the recommendations for hygienic laundering given by different agencies.

[ 42 ] Medical hygiene at home [ edit ] Medical hygiene pertains to hygiene practices that prevent or minimize disease and the spreading of disease in relation to administering medical care to those who are infected or who are more at risk of infection in the home. Members of "at-risk" groups are cared for at home by a carer who may be a household member and who requires a good knowledge of hygiene. People with reduced immunity to infection, who are looked after at home, make up an increasing proportion of the population (as of 2009 [update] , up to 20%).

[ 9 ] The largest proportion are the elderly who have co-morbidities that reduce their immunity to infection. It also includes the very young, patients discharged from hospital, taking immuno-suppressive drugs, or using invasive systems, etc. For patients discharged from hospital, or being treated at home, special "medical hygiene" procedures may need to be performed for them, such as catheter or dressing replacement, which puts them at higher risk of infection.

Antiseptics may be applied to cuts, wounds, and abrasions of the skin to prevent the entry of harmful bacteria that can cause sepsis. Day-to-day hygiene practices, other than special medical hygiene procedures, [ 43 ] are no different for those at increased risk of infection than for other family members. The difference is that, if hygiene practices are not correctly carried out, the risk of infection is much greater.

Disinfectants and antibacterials in home hygiene [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hygiene" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chemical disinfectants [ 44 ] are products that kill pathogens . If the product is a disinfectant, the label on the product should say "disinfectant" or "kills" pathogens. Some commercial products, e.g. bleaches, even though they are technically disinfectants, say that they "kill pathogens" but are not actually labelled as "disinfectants". Not all disinfectants kill all types of pathogens. All disinfectants kill bacteria (called bactericidal). Some also kill fungi (fungicidal), bacterial spores (sporicidal), or viruses (virucidal).

An antibacterial product acts against bacteria in some unspecified way. Some products labelled "antibacterial" kill bacteria while others may contain a concentration of active ingredient that only prevents them from multiplying. It is, therefore, important to check whether the product label states that it "kills bacteria". An antibacterial is not necessarily anti-fungal or anti-viral unless this is stated on the label.

The term sanitizer has been used to define substances that both clean and disinfect. More recently this term has been applied to alcohol-based products that disinfect the hands ( alcohol hand sanitizers ). Alcohol hand sanitizers however are not considered to be effective on soiled hands.

[ 45 ] The term biocide is a broad term for a substance that kills, inactivates or otherwise controls living organisms. It includes antiseptics and disinfectants, which combat micro-organisms, and pesticides .

Personal hygiene [ edit ] Regular activities [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A clear plastic toiletry bag Personal hygiene involves those practices performed by a person to care for their bodily health and well-being through cleanliness. Motivations for personal hygiene practice include reduction of personal illness, healing from illness, optimal health and sense of wellbeing, social acceptance, and prevention of spread of illness to others. What is considered proper personal hygiene can be culture-specific and may change over time.

Practices that are generally considered proper hygiene include showering or bathing regularly, washing hands regularly and especially before handling food, face washing , washing scalp hair, keeping hair short or removing hair, wearing clean clothing, brushing teeth, and trimming fingernails and toenails. Some practices are sex-specific, such as by a woman during menstruation .

Toiletry bags hold body hygiene and toiletry supplies.

Anal hygiene is the practice that a person performs on their anal area after defecation . The anus and buttocks may be either washed with liquids or wiped with toilet paper , or by adding gel wipe to toilet tissue as an alternative to wet wipes or other solid materials in order to remove remnants of feces .

People tend to develop a routine for attending to their personal hygiene needs. Other personal hygienic practices include covering one's mouth when coughing, disposal of soiled tissues appropriately, making sure toilets are clean, and making sure food handling areas are clean, besides other practices. Some cultures do not kiss or shake hands in order to reduce transmission of bacteria by contact.

Personal grooming extends personal hygiene as it pertains to the maintenance of a good personal and public appearance, which need not necessarily be hygienic. It may involve, for example, using deodorants or perfume, shaving , or combing .

Hygiene of internal ear canals [ edit ] See also: Earwax Excessive cleaning of the ear canals can result in infection or irritation. The ear canals require less care than other parts of the body because they are sensitive and mostly self-cleaning. There is a slow and orderly migration of the skin lining the ear canal from the eardrum to the outer opening of the ear. Old earwax is constantly being transported from the deeper areas of the ear canal out to the opening where it usually dries, flakes, and falls out.

[ 46 ] Attempts to clean the ear canals through the removal of earwax can push debris and foreign material into the ear that the natural movement of ear wax out of the ear would have removed.

Oral hygiene [ edit ] Main article: Oral hygiene It is recommended that all healthy adults brush twice a day, [ 47 ] [ 48 ] softly, [ 49 ] with the correct technique, replacing their toothbrush every few months (~3).

[ 50 ] Teaching a child how to properly brush the teeth There are a number of common oral hygiene misconceptions. The National Health Service (NHS) of England recommends not rinsing the mouth with water after brushing – only to spit out excess toothpaste . They claim that this helps fluoride from toothpaste bond to teeth for its preventative effects against tooth decay.

[ 51 ] It is also not recommended to brush immediately after drinking acidic substances, including sparkling water.

[ 52 ] It is also recommended to floss once a day, [ 53 ] with a different piece of floss at each flossing session. The effectiveness of amorphous calcium phosphate products, such as Tooth Mousse, is in debate.

[ 54 ] Visits to a dentist for a checkup every year at least are recommended.

[ 55 ] Sleep hygiene [ edit ] Main article: Sleep hygiene Sleep hygiene is the recommended behavioral and environmental practices that promote better quality sleep.

[ 56 ] These recommendations were developed in the late 1970s as a method to help people with mild to moderate insomnia , but, as of 2014 [update] , the evidence for effectiveness of individual recommendations is "limited and inconclusive".

[ 56 ] Clinicians assess the sleep hygiene of people who present with insomnia and other conditions, such as depression, and offer recommendations based on the assessment. Sleep hygiene recommendations include establishing a regular sleep schedule, using naps with care, not exercising physically or mentally too close to bedtime, and avoiding alcohol as well as nicotine , caffeine , and other stimulants in the hours before bedtime.

[ 57 ] Further recommendations include limiting worry, limiting exposure to light in the hours before sleep, getting out of bed if sleep does not come, not using the bed for anything but sleep, and having a peaceful, comfortable, and dark sleep environment.

Personal care services hygiene [ edit ] Personal care services hygiene pertains to the care and use of instruments used in the administration of personal care services to people: Personal care hygiene practices include: sterilization of instruments used by service providers including hairdressers , aestheticians , and other service providers sterilization by autoclave of instruments used in body piercing and tattooing cleaning hands Challenges [ edit ] Excessive body hygiene is a possible sign of obsessive–compulsive disorder . Neglecting bodily hygiene, or the cleanliness of one's environment, may be a sign of major depression and other psychological disorders.

Hygiene hypothesis and allergies [ edit ] Main article: Hygiene hypothesis Although media coverage of the hygiene hypothesis has declined, popular folklore continues to sometimes assert that dirt is healthy and hygiene unnatural. This has caused health professionals to be concerned that hygiene behaviors which are the foundation of public health are being undermined. In response to the need for effective hygiene in home and everyday life settings, the International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene developed a "risk-based" or targeted approach to home hygiene that seeks to ensure that hygiene measures are focused on the places and times most critical for infection transmission.

[ 11 ] While targeted hygiene was originally developed as an effective approach to hygiene practice, it also seeks, as far as possible, to sustain "normal" levels of exposure to the microbial flora of our environment to the extent that is important to build a balanced immune system.

Although there is substantial evidence that some microbial exposures in early childhood can in some way protect against allergies, there is no evidence [ citation needed ] that humans need exposure to harmful microbes (infection) or that it is necessary to develop a clinical infection.

[ 58 ] Nor is there evidence [ citation needed ] that hygiene measures such as hand washing, food hygiene, etc., are linked to increased susceptibility to atopic disease . If this is the case, there is no conflict between the goals of preventing infection and minimizing allergies. A consensus is now developing among experts that the answer lies in more fundamental changes in lifestyles that have led to decreased exposure to certain microbial or other species, such as helminths, that are important for development of immuno-regulatory mechanisms.

[ 59 ] There is still much uncertainty as to which lifestyle factors are involved.

Medical hygiene [ edit ] Medical hygiene pertains to hygiene practices related to the administration of medicine and medical care that prevents or minimizes the spread of disease.

Medical hygiene practices include: isolation of infectious persons or materials to prevent spread of infection sterilization of instruments used in surgical procedures proper bandaging and dressing of injuries safe disposal of medical waste disinfection of reusables (i.e., linen, pads, uniforms) scrubbing up, handwashing , especially in an operating room, but in more general health-care settings as well, where diseases can be transmitted ethanol-based sanitizers Most of these practices were developed in the 19th century and were well-established by the mid-20th century. Some procedures (such as disposal of medical waste ) were refined in response to late-20th century disease outbreaks , notably AIDS and Ebola .

Food hygiene [ edit ] Main article: Food safety Culinary hygiene (or food hygiene) pertains to practices of food management and cooking that prevent food contamination , prevent food poisoning , and minimize the transmission of disease to other foods, humans, or animals. Culinary hygiene practices specify safe ways to handle, store, prepare, serve, and eat food.

This section is an excerpt from Food safety .

[ edit ] Food safety (or food hygiene) is used as a scientific method/discipline describing handling, preparation , and storage of food in ways that prevent foodborne illness . The occurrence of two or more cases of a similar illness resulting from the ingestion of a common food is known as a food-borne disease outbreak.

[ 60 ] Food safety includes a number of routines that should be followed to avoid potential health hazards . In this way, food safety often overlaps with food defense to prevent harm to consumers. The tracks within this line of thought are safety between industry and the market and then between the market and the consumer. In considering industry-to-market practices, food safety [ 61 ] considerations include the origins of food including the practices relating to food labeling , food hygiene, food additives and pesticide residues , as well as policies on biotechnology and food and guidelines for the management of governmental import and export inspection and certification systems for foods. In considering market-to-consumer practices, the usual thought is that food ought to be safe in the market and the concern is safe delivery and preparation of the food for the consumer. Food safety, nutrition and food security are closely related. Unhealthy food creates a cycle of disease and malnutrition that affects infants and adults as well.

[ 62 ] Hygiene aspects in low- and middle-income countries [ edit ] Further information: Water, sanitation and hygiene In developing countries (or low- and middle-income countries), universal access to water and sanitation , coupled with hygiene promotion, is essential in reducing infectious diseases. This approach has been integrated into the Sustainable Development Goal Number 6 whose second target states: "By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation , paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations".

[ 63 ] Due to their close linkages, water, sanitation, hygiene are together abbreviated and funded under the term WASH in development cooperation .

About two million people die every year due to diarrheal diseases; most of them are children less than five years of age.

[ 64 ] The most affected are people in developing countries who live in extreme conditions of poverty, normally peri-urban dwellers or rural inhabitants. Providing access to sufficient quantities of safe water and facilities for a sanitary disposal of excreta, and introducing sound hygiene behaviors are important in order to reduce the burden of disease.

Research shows that, if widely practiced, hand washing with soap could reduce diarrhea by almost fifty percent [ 65 ] and respiratory infections by nearly twenty-five percent [ 66 ] Hand washing with soap also reduces the incidence of skin diseases, [ 67 ] and eye infections like trachoma and intestinal worms, especially ascariasis and trichuriasis .

[ 68 ] Other hygiene practices, such as safe disposal of waste, surface hygiene, and care of domestic animals, are important in low income communities to break the chain of infection transmission.

[ 69 ] Cleaning of toilets and hand wash facilities is important to prevent odors and make them socially acceptable. Social acceptance is an important part of encouraging people to use toilets and wash their hands, in situations where open defecation is still seen as a possible alternative, e.g. in rural areas of some developing countries.

Household water treatment and safe storage [ edit ] Solar water disinfection (SODIS) application in Indonesia using clear polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastic beverage bottles Household water treatment and safe storage ensure drinking water is safe for consumption. These interventions are part of the approach of self-supply of water for households.

[ 70 ] Drinking water quality remains a significant problem in developing [ 71 ] and in developed countries; [ 72 ] even in the European region it is estimated that 120 million people do not have access to safe drinking water . Point-of-use water quality interventions can reduce diarrheal disease in communities where water quality is poor or in emergency situations where there is a breakdown in water supply.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] Since water can become contaminated during storage at home (e.g. by contact with contaminated hands or using dirty storage vessels), safe storage of water in the home is important.

Methods for treatment of drinking water at the household level include: [ 25 ] [ 74 ] chemical disinfection using chlorine or iodine boiling filtration using ceramic filters solar disinfection — Solar disinfection is an effective method, especially when no chemical disinfectants are available.

[ 75 ] UV irradiation — Community or household UV systems may be batch or flow-though. The lamps can be suspended above the water channel or submerged in the water flow.

combined flocculation/disinfection systems — available as sachets of powder that act by coagulating and flocculating sediments in water followed by release of chlorine multibarrier methods — Some systems use two or more of the above treatments in combination or in succession to optimize efficacy.

portable water purification devices History [ edit ] Three young women bathing, 440–430 BCE . Ancient Greece.

Swedish advert for toiletries, 1905–1906 See also: Public health § History , and History of water supply and sanitation Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] Bathing culture in Chinese literature can be traced back to the Shang dynasty (1600–1046 BCE ), when Oracle bone inscriptions describe people washing their hair and body in a bath. The Book of Rites , a work regarding Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BCE ) ritual, politics, and culture compiled during the Warring States period , recommends that people take a hot shower every five days, and wash their hair every three days. It was also considered good manners to take a bath provided by the host before a dinner . In the Han dynasty , bathing became a regular activity, and for government officials bathing was required every five days.

[ 76 ] Ancient bath facilities have been found in ancient Chinese cities, such as Dongzhouyang archaeological site in Henan Province . Bathrooms were called Bi ( Chinese : 湢 ), and bathtubs were made of bronze or timber.

[ 77 ] Bath beans – a powdery soap mixture of ground beans, cloves, eaglewood, flowers, and even powdered jade – were recorded in the Han Dynasty. Bath beans were considered luxury toiletries, while common people simply used powdered beans without spices mixed in. Luxurious bathhouses built around hot springs were recorded in Tang dynasty .

[ 76 ] While royal bathhouses and bathrooms were common among ancient Chinese nobles and commoners, public bathhouses were a relatively late development. In the Song dynasty (960–1279 CE ), public bathhouses became popular and people could find them readily.

[ 77 ] Bathing became an essential part of social life and recreation. Bathhouses often provided massage, nail cutting service, rubdown service, ear cleaning , food, and beverages.

[ 77 ] Marco Polo , who traveled to China during the Yuan dynasty , noted Chinese bathhouses were using coal to heat the bathhouse, which he had never seen before in Europe.

[ 78 ] Coal was so plentiful that Chinese people of every social class had bathrooms in their houses, and people took showers every day in the winter for enjoyment.

[ 79 ] A typical Ming dynasty bathhouse had slabbed floors and brick domed ceilings. A huge boiler would be installed in the back of the house, connected with the bathing pool through a tunnel. Water could be pumped into the pool by turning wheels attended by the staff.

[ 77 ] Japan [ edit ] The origin of Japanese bathing is misogi , ritual purification with water.

[ 80 ] In the Heian period (794–1185 CE ), houses of prominent families, such as the families of court nobles or samurai, had baths. The bath had lost its religious significance and instead became leisure.

Misogi became gyōzui (to bathe in a shallow wooden tub).

[ 80 ] : 36 In the 17th century, the first European visitors to Japan recorded the habit of daily baths in mixed sex groups.

[ 80 ] Indian subcontinent [ edit ] The earliest written account of elaborate codes of hygiene can be found in several Hindu texts, such as the Manusmriti and the Vishnu Purana .

[ 81 ] Bathing is one of the five nitya karmas (daily duties) in Hinduism, and not performing it leads to sin, according to some scriptures.

Ayurveda is a system of medicine developed in ancient times that is still practiced in India, mostly combined with conventional Western medicine. Contemporary Ayurveda stresses a sattvic diet and good digestion and excretion . Hygiene measures include oil pulling , and tongue scraping . Detoxification also plays an important role.

[ 82 ] Americas [ edit ] Mesoamerica [ edit ] Codex Magliabechiano from the Loubat collection, 1904 Spanish chronicles describe the bathing habits of the peoples of Mesoamerica during and after the conquest .

Bernal Díaz del Castillo describes Moctezuma (the Mexica, or Aztec , emperor at the arrival of Cortés ) in his Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España as being "...Very neat and cleanly, bathing every day each afternoon...".

Bathing was not restricted to the elite, but was practiced by all people; the chronicler Tomás López Medel wrote after a journey to Central America that " and the custom of washing oneself is so quotidian [common] amongst the Indians, both of cold and hot lands, as is eating, and this is done in fountains and rivers and other water to which they have access, without anything other than pure water..." [ 83 ] The Mesoamerican bath, known as temazcal in Spanish , from the Nahuatl word temazcalli , a compound of temaz ("steam") and calli ("house"), consists of a room, often in the form of a small dome, with an exterior firebox known as texictle ( teʃict͜ɬe ) that heats a small portion of the room's wall made of volcanic rocks; after this wall has been heated, water is poured on it to produce steam, an action known as tlasas . As the steam accumulates in the upper part of the room a person in charge uses a bough to direct the steam to the bathers who are lying on the ground, with which he later gives them a massage, then the bathers scrub themselves with a small flat river stone and finally the person in charge introduces buckets with water along with soap and grass used to rinse. This bath had also ritual importance, and was tied to the goddess Toci ; it is also therapeutic when medicinal herbs are used in the water for the tlasas . It is still used in Mexico .

[ 83 ] Europe [ edit ] Antiquity [ edit ] Roman public baths ( Thermae ) in Bath , England Regular bathing was a hallmark of Roman civilization .

[ 84 ] Elaborate baths were constructed in urban areas to serve the public, who typically demanded the infrastructure to maintain personal cleanliness. The complexes usually consisted of large, swimming pool-like baths, smaller cold and hot pools, saunas, and spa-like facilities where people could be depilated, oiled, and massaged. Water was constantly changed by an aqueduct -fed flow. Bathing outside of urban centers involved smaller, less elaborate bathing facilities, or simply the use of clean bodies of water. Roman cities also had large sewers , such as Rome's Cloaca Maxima , into which public and private latrines drained. Romans did not have demand-flush toilets but did have some toilets with a continuous flow of water under them. The Romans used scented oils (mostly from Egypt), among other alternatives.

Christianity has always placed a strong emphasis on hygiene .

[ 85 ] Despite rejecting mixed bathing , [ 86 ] early Christian clergy encouraged believers to bath, [ 85 ] which contributed to hygiene and good health according to the Church Fathers Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] The Church built public bathing facilities that were separated by sex near monasteries and pilgrimage sites.

Further information: Hygiene in Christianity § History Middle Ages [ edit ] Contrary to popular belief, [ 89 ] bathing and sanitation were not lost in Europe with the collapse of the Roman Empire .

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Starting in the early Middle Ages, popes situated baths within church basilicas and monasteries.

[ 87 ] Pope Gregory the Great promoted bathing as a bodily need.

[ 88 ] The use of water in many Christian countries is partly due to Biblical toilet etiquette which encourages washing after all instances of defecation.

[ 92 ] Bidet and bidet showers were used in regions where water was considered essential for anal cleansing .

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Public bathhouses were common in medieval Christendom larger towns and cities such as Constantinople , Paris , Regensburg , Rome and Naples .

[ 94 ] Great bathhouses were built in Byzantine centers such as Constantinople and Antioch .

[ 95 ] Byzantine Bath in Thessaloniki In the 11th and 12th centuries, bathing was essential to the Western European upper class: the Cluniac monasteries (popular centers for resorting and retiring) were always equipped with bathhouses. These baths were also used ritually when the monks took full immersion baths at the two Christian festivals of renewal.

[ 96 ] The rules of the Augustinians and Benedictines contained references to ritual purification , [ 97 ] and, inspired by Benedict of Nursia , encouraged the practice of therapeutic bathing.

Benedictine monks also played a role in the development and promotion of spas .

[ 98 ] On the other hand, bathing also sparked erotic phantasies, played upon by the writers of romances intended for the upper class; [ citation needed ] in the tale of Melusine the bath was a crucial element of the plot.

Bathing and grooming were regarded with suspicion by moralists, however, because they unveiled the attractiveness of the body. Bathing was said to be a prelude to sin, and in the penitential of Burchard of Worms we find a full catalogue of the sins that ensued when men and women bathed together.

[ 96 ] Cities regulated public bathing – the 26 public baths of Paris in the late 13th century were strictly overseen by the civil authorities [ 96 ] and guild laws banned prostitutes from bathhouse admission.

[ 99 ] Women's Bath , 1496, by Albrecht Dürer In 14th century Tuscany, newlywed couples commonly took a bath together and we find an illustration of this custom in a fresco in the town hall of San Gimignano.

[ 100 ] As evident in Hans Folz ' Bath Booklet (a late 15th century guide on European baths) [ 101 ] and various artistic depictions such as Albrecht Dürer 's Women's Bath (see above ) , public bathing continued to be a popular past time in the Renaissance . In Britain, the rise of Protestantism also played a prominent role in the development of spa culture.

[ 98 ] Modernity [ edit ] Until the late 19th century, only the elite in Western cities typically possessed indoor facilities for relieving bodily functions. The poorer majority used communal facilities built above cesspools in backyards and courtyards. This changed after Dr.

John Snow discovered that cholera was transmitted by the fecal contamination of water. Though it took decades for his findings to gain wide acceptance, governments and sanitary reformers were eventually convinced of the health benefits of using sewers to keep human waste from contaminating the water. This encouraged the widespread adoption of both the flush toilet and the moral imperative that bathrooms should be indoors and as private as possible.

[ 102 ] [ verification needed ] Modern sanitation was not widely adopted until the 19th and 20th centuries. According to medieval historian Lynn Thorndike, people in Medieval Europe probably bathed more than people did in the 19th century.

[ 103 ] [ better source needed ] Some time after Louis Pasteur 's experiments proved the germ theory of disease and Joseph Lister and others put this into practice in sanitation , hygienic practices came to be regarded as synonymous with health , as they are in modern times.

The importance of hand washing for human health – particularly for people in vulnerable circumstances like mothers who had just given birth or wounded soldiers in hospitals – was first recognized in the mid 19th century by two pioneers of hand hygiene: the Hungarian physician Ignaz Semmelweis who worked in Vienna, Austria, and Florence Nightingale , the English "founder of modern nursing".

[ 104 ] At that time most people still believed that infections were caused by foul odors called miasmas .

Middle East [ edit ] Ali Gholi Agha hammam , Isfahan , Iran Islam stresses the importance of cleanliness and personal hygiene.

[ 105 ] Islamic hygienical jurisprudence , which dates back to the 7th century, has a number of elaborate rules.

Taharah (ritual purity) involves performing wudu (ablution) for the five daily salah (prayers), as well as regularly performing ghusl (bathing), which led to bathhouses being built across the Islamic world .

[ 106 ] Islamic toilet hygiene also requires washing with water after using the toilet, for purity and to minimize pathogens.

[ 107 ] In the Abbasid Caliphate (8th–13th centuries), its capital city of Baghdad (Iraq) had 65,000 baths, along with a sewer system.

[ 108 ] Cities and towns of the medieval Islamic world had water supply systems powered by hydraulic technology that supplied drinking water along with much greater quantities of water for ritual washing, mainly in mosques and hammams (baths). Bathing establishments in various cities were rated by Arabic writers in travel guides . Medieval Islamic cities such as Baghdad, Córdoba ( Islamic Spain ), Fez (Morocco), and Fustat (Egypt) also had sophisticated waste disposal and sewage systems with interconnected networks of sewers. The city of Fustat also had multi-storey tenement buildings (with up to six floors) with flush toilets , which were connected to a water supply system, and flues on each floor carrying waste to underground channels.

[ 109 ] A basic form of contagion theory dates back to the Persian medicine in the medieval, where it was proposed by Persian physician Ibn Sina (also known as Avicenna) in The Canon of Medicine (1025), the most authoritative medical textbook of the Middle Ages. He mentioned that people can transmit disease to others by breath, noted contagion with tuberculosis , and discussed the transmission of disease through water and dirt.

[ 110 ] The concept of invisible contagion was eventually widely accepted by Islamic scholars . In the Ayyubid Sultanate , they referred to them as najasat ("impure substances"). The fiqh scholar Ibn al-Haj al-Abdari ( c.

1250–1336 ), while discussing Islamic diet and hygiene, gave advice and warnings about how contagion can contaminate water, food, and garments, and could spread through the water supply.

[ 111 ] In the 9th century, Ziryab invented a type of deodorant .

[ 112 ] He also promoted morning and evening baths, and emphasized the maintenance of personal hygiene. Ziryab is thought to have invented a type of toothpaste , which he popularized throughout Islamic Iberia .

[ 113 ] The exact ingredients of this toothpaste are not known, [ 114 ] but it was reported to have been both "functional and pleasant to taste." [ 113 ] Sub-Saharan Africa [ edit ] In West Africa , various ethnic groups such as the Yoruba have used black soap to treat skin diseases.

[ 115 ] In Southern Africa , the Zulu people conducted methods of sanitation by using water stored in pottery at Ulundi .

[ 116 ] The Himba people of Namibia and Angola also utilized mixtures of smoke and otjitze to treat skin diseases in regions where water is scarce.

Soap and soap makers [ edit ] Main article: Soap § History Marseille soap in blocks of 600 g (21 oz) Hard toilet soap with a pleasant smell was invented in the Middle East during the Islamic Golden Age when soap-making became an established industry. Recipes for soap-making are described by Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi ( c.

865–925 ), who also gave a recipe for producing glycerine from olive oil . In the Middle East, soap was produced from the interaction of fatty oils and fats with alkali . In Syria , soap was produced using olive oil together with alkali and lime . Soap was exported from Syria to other parts of the Muslim world and to Europe.

[ 117 ] Two key Islamic innovations in soapmaking was the invention of bar soap , described by al-Razi, and the addition of scents using perfume technology perfected in the Islamic world.

[ 118 ] By the 15th century, the manufacture of soap in Christendom had become virtually industrialized, with sources in Antwerp , Castile , Marseille , Naples , and Venice .

[ 119 ] In the 17th century the Spanish Catholic manufacturers purchased the monopoly on Castile soap from the cash-strapped Carolinian government.

[ 120 ] Industrially-manufactured bar soaps became available in the late 18th century, as advertising campaigns in Europe and America promoted popular awareness of the relationship between cleanliness and health.

[ 121 ] A major contribution of the Christian missionaries in Africa , [ 122 ] China , [ 123 ] Guatemala , [ 124 ] India , [ 125 ] Indonesia , [ 126 ] Korea , [ 127 ] and other places was better health care through hygiene and introducing and distributing soap, [ 128 ] and "cleanliness and hygiene became an important marker of being identified as a Christian".

[ 129 ] Society and culture [ edit ] Religious hygienic customs [ edit ] Main article: Ritual purification Further information: Ablution in Christianity , Hygiene in Christianity , Islamic hygienical jurisprudence , Ritual washing in Judaism , and Islamic toilet etiquette Many religions require or encourage ritual purification via bathing or immersing the hands in water. In Islam , washing oneself via wudu or ghusl is necessary for performing prayer .

Islamic tradition also lists a variety of rules concerning proper hygiene after using the bathroom. The Baháʼí Faith mandates the washing of the hands and face prior to the obligatory Baháʼí prayers .

Orthodox Judaism requires a mikveh bath following menstruation and childbirth, while washing the hands is performed upon waking up and before eating bread.

Water plays a role in Christian rituals as well, [ 130 ] and in certain denominations of Christianity such as the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church which prescribes several kinds of hand washing for example after leaving the latrine, lavatory, or bathhouse, or before prayer, or after eating a meal, or ritual handwashing.

[ 131 ] [ 130 ] Etymology [ edit ] First attested in English in 1676, the word hygiene comes from the French hygiène , the latinisation of the Greek ὑγιεινή ( τέχνη ) hygieinē technē , meaning "(art) of health", from ὑγιεινός hygieinos , "good for the health, healthy", [ 132 ] in turn from ὑγιής ( hygiēs ), "healthful, sound, salutary, wholesome".

[ 133 ] In ancient Greek religion , Hygeia ( Ὑγίεια ) was the personification of health, cleanliness, and hygiene.

[ 134 ] See also [ edit ] Cleaning station – Location where aquatic life congregate to be cleaned Contamination control – Activities aiming to reduce contamination Human decontamination – Process of removing hazardous materials from the human body Hygiene program – Hygiene services for people experiencing homelessness Hygiene theater – Hygiene measures that give the illusion of safety Mysophobia – Pathological fear of contamination and germs School hygiene – Health education in schools Waterborne diseases – Diseases caused by pathogenic microorganisms transmitted by waters Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ a b UNICEF and WHO (2021), State of the World's Hand Hygiene: A global call to action to make hand hygiene a priority in policy and practice , New York: UNICEF ^ "Hygiene: Overview" . World Health Organization (WHO) . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

^ Anderson PL, Lachan JP, eds. (2008).

Hygiene and its role in health . New York: Nova Science Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-60456-195-1 .

OCLC 181862629 .

^ Aiello AE, Coulborn RM, Perez V, Larson EL (2008).

"Effect of Hand Hygiene on Infectious Disease Risk in the Community Setting: A Meta-Analysis" .

American Journal of Public Health .

98 (8): 1372– 1381.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2007.124610 .

hdl : 2027.42/61196 .

PMC 2446461 .

PMID 18556606 .

^ WHO guidelines on hand hygiene in health care: first global patient safety challenge clean care is safer care . Geneva: World Health Organization. 2009.

ISBN 978-92-4-159790-6 .

OCLC 854907565 .

^ Lelieveld H, Holah J, Napper D, eds. (2014).

Hygiene in food processing: principles and practice (2nd ed.). Oxford: Woodhead.

ISBN 978-0-85709-863-4 .

OCLC 870650548 .

^ Wood JP, ed. (2020).

Containment in the pharmaceutical industry . Boca Raton: CRC Press.

ISBN 978-0-429-07494-3 .

OCLC 1148475943 .

^ Geis PA, ed. (2020).

Cosmetic microbiology: a practical approach (Third ed.). Boca Raton: CRC Press.

ISBN 978-0-429-52443-1 .

OCLC 1202989365 .

^ a b c Bloomfield SF, Exner M, Fara GM, Nath KJ, Scott EA, Van der Voorden C (2009).

"The global burden of hygiene-related diseases in relation to the home and community" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "Surface Hygiene | HARTMANN SCIENCE CENTER" .

www.hartmann-science-center.com . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ a b c Developing and promoting hygiene in home and everyday life to meet 21st Century needs (PDF) . the International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene. July 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-05-17.

^ "Environmental hygiene in healthcare" .

Government of South Australia . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ a b c d e Bloomfield SF, Exner M, Signorelli C, Nath KJ, Scott EA (2012).

"The chain of infection transmission in the home and everyday life settings, and the role of hygiene in reducing the risk of infection" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "environmental hygiene — European Environment Agency" .

www.eea.europa.eu . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ "Environmental health" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ "Around home – household hygiene – Hygiene for Health" . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ "Show Me the Science – How to Wash Your Hands" .

www.cdc.gov . 2020-03-04 . Retrieved 2020-03-06 .

^ Huang C, Ma W, Stack S (August 2012).

"The hygienic efficacy of different hand-drying methods: a review of the evidence" .

Mayo Clinic Proceedings .

87 (8): 791– 8.

doi : 10.1016/j.mayocp.2012.02.019 .

PMC 3538484 .

PMID 22656243 .

^ "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 11 February 2020.

^ Centers for Disease Control (2 April 2020).

"Handwashing Facts" .

cdc.gov .

^ Bloomfield SF, Aiello AE , Cookson B, O'Boyle C, Larson EL (December 2007).

"The effectiveness of hand hygiene procedures in reducing the risks of infections in home and community settings including hand washing and alcohol-based hand sanitizers" .

American Journal of Infection Control .

35 (10): S27 – S64 .

doi : 10.1016/j.ajic.2007.07.001 .

PMC 7115270 .

^ "WHO: How to handwash? With soap and water" .

YouTube . 20 October 2015.

^ "Hand Hygiene: How, Why & When" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

^ "UNICEF Malawi" .

www.unicef.org . Retrieved 2020-01-05 .

^ a b Beumer R, Bloomfield SF, Exner M, Fara GM, Nath KJ, Scott EA (2008).

"Hygiene procedures in the home and their effectiveness: a review of the scientific evidence base" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "Hygiene in the Kitchen" .

www.hansgrohe.com . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ Cushelle.

"10 Important Bathroom Rules – With Printable Toilet Rules!" .

Cushelle . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ "Proper use of the toilet" .

lessonotes.com . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ Australia H (2023-10-31).

"Personal hygiene" .

www.healthdirect.gov.au . Retrieved 2024-07-25 .

^ Cole E (2000). "Allergen control through routine cleaning of pollutant reservoirs in the home environment".

Proceedings of Healthy Building .

4 : 435– 36.

^ Saad-Hussein A, Ibrahim KS (2019), Laher I (ed.), "Health Impact of Airborne Fungi" , Handbook of Healthcare in the Arab World , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

1– 16, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-74365-3_59-1 , ISBN 978-3-319-74365-3 , retrieved 2024-07-23 ^ "Types of Hygiene – Humanitarian Global" . Retrieved 2024-07-23 .

^ "Hygiene cleaning" .

The janitorial store .

^ a b c d e Bloomfield SF, Exner M, Signorelli C, Nath KJ, Scott EA (2011).

"The infection risks associated with clothing and household linens in home and everyday life settings, and the role of laundry" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ a b Larson EL, Lin SX, Gomez-Pichardo C (2004). "Predictors of infectious disease symptoms in inner city households".

Nurs Res .

53 (3): 190– 97.

doi : 10.1097/00006199-200405000-00006 .

PMID 15167507 .

S2CID 46126212 .

^ "Recommendations for future collaboration between the U.S. and EU" (PDF) . Transatlantic Taskforce on Antimicrobial Resistance. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-07-08.

^ a b Bloomfield SF (2013).

"Spread of Antibiotic Resistant Strains in the Home and Community" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ Maillard JY, Bloomfield SF, Courvalin P, Essack SY, Gandra S, Gerba CP, Rubino JR, Scott EA (September 2020).

"Reducing antibiotic prescribing and addressing the global problem of antibiotic resistance by targeted hygiene in the home and everyday life settings: A position paper" .

American Journal of Infection Control .

48 (9): 1090– 1099.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajic.2020.04.011 .

PMC 7165117 .

PMID 32311380 .

^ Bloomfield SF, Cookson BD, Falkiner FR, Griffith C, Cleary V (2006).

"Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Clostridium difficile and ESBL-producing Escherichia coli in the home and community: assessing the problem, controlling the spread" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "Hanging your clothes under sun OR using laundry dryer" .

SiOWfa15: Science in Our World: Certainty and Controversy . 2015-10-21 . Retrieved 2020-10-04 .

^ Bloomfield SF, Exner M, Signorelli C, Scott EA (2013).

"Effectiveness of laundering processes used in domestic (home) settings" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "Clothing, household linens, laundry and hygiene Factsheet" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene. 2013.

"Laundry treatments at high and low temperatures" . UK health and Safety Executive. 2013.

^ "Home Hygiene: Prevention of infection at home and in everyday life: a learning and training resource" .

Home Hygiene & Health . 2018. Archived from the original on 2022-07-02.

^ "Cleaning and disinfection: Chemical Disinfectants Explained" .

Home Hygiene & Health . 2014.

Fraise AP, Maillard J, Sattar S, eds. (2013).

Russell, Hugo & Ayliffe's principles and practice of disinfection, preservation and sterilization (5th ed.). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-118-42587-9 .

OCLC 825550689 .

^ Pickering AJ, Davis J, Boehm AB (2011-09-01).

"Efficacy of alcohol-based hand sanitizer on hands soiled with dirt and cooking oil" .

Journal of Water and Health .

9 (3): 429– 433.

doi : 10.2166/wh.2011.138 .

ISSN 1477-8920 .

PMID 21976190 .

S2CID 11800640 .

^ Stöppler MC.

"How to Remove Ear Wax" .

MedicineNet .

^ "Brushing & Flossing: Technique & Choosing Dental Products" .

www.colgate.com . Archived from the original on 2017-11-20 . Retrieved 2018-04-15 .

^ "Oral Hygiene | National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research" .

www.nidcr.nih.gov . Retrieved 2023-09-18 .

^ "Are you brushing your teeth too hard?" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 3 June 2019.

^ "Brushing Your Teeth" .

mouthhealthy . American Dental Association.

^ "How to keep your teeth clean" .

NHS . 26 April 2018.

^ Kleist MK (2013-04-01).

"Wait, Before You Brush — Why Brushing your Teeth After Eating Could be Bad for You" .

Naperville Magazine . Archived from the original on 2020-02-20 . Retrieved 2020-10-04 .

^ "The Medical Benefit of Daily Flossing Called Into Question" .

American Dental Association . Archived from the original on 2018-04-16.

^ Raphael S, Blinkhorn A (25 September 2015).

"Is there a place for Tooth Mousse® in the prevention and treatment of early dental caries? A systematic review" .

BMC Oral Health .

15 (1): 113.

doi : 10.1186/s12903-015-0095-6 .

PMC 4583988 .

PMID 26408042 .

^ Hammond C (2014-09-26).

"How often do you need to see a dentist?" .

BBC Future .

^ a b Irish LA, Kline CE, Gunn HE, Buysse DJ, Hall MH (October 2014).

"The role of sleep hygiene in promoting public health: A review of empirical evidence" .

Sleep Medicine Reviews .

22 : 23– 36.

doi : 10.1016/j.smrv.2014.10.001 .

PMC 4400203 .

PMID 25454674 .

^ "Healthy Sleep" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 2023-09-20 .

^ Stanwell Smith R, Bloomfield SF, Rook GA (2012).

"The Hygiene Hypothesis and its Implications for Home Hygiene, Lifestyle and Public Health" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

"The Hygiene Hypothesis and its implications for home hygiene, lifestyle and public health: Summary" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene. 2012.

Bloomfield SF, Stanwell-Smith R, Crevel R, Pickup J (April 2006).

"Too clean, or not too clean: the Hygiene Hypothesis and home hygiene" (PDF) .

Clinical and Experimental Allergy .

36 (4): 402– 25.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2006.02463.x .

PMC 1448690 .

PMID 16630145 .

^ Rook G (11 March 2010).

"99th Dahlem Conference on Infection, Inflammation and Chronic Inflammatory Disorders: Darwinian medicine and the 'hygiene' or 'old friends' hypothesis" .

Clinical & Experimental Immunology .

160 (1): 70– 79.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04133.x .

PMC 2841838 .

PMID 20415854 .

The scientific establishment is slowly beginning to accept evidence for the involvement of specific organisms (for example, hepatitis A virus, gut microbiota and helminths) in the regulation of the immune system.

^ Texas Food Establishment Rules . Texas DSHS website: Texas Department of State Health Services. 2015. p. 6.

^ "Food Safety Definition & Why is Food Safety Important" .

fooddocs.com . Retrieved 2022-11-16 .

^ "Food safety" .

who.int . Retrieved 2022-11-01 .

^ "Goal 6: Clean water and sanitation" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on 2021-04-14 . Retrieved 18 April 2017 .

Roser M (2023).

"Sustainable Development Goal 6: Ensure access to water and sanitation for all" .

Our World in Data .

^ "The global burden of disease: 2004 update" .

World Health Organization . Archived from the original on March 24, 2009.

^ Curtis V, Cairncross S (2003). "Effect of washing hands with soap on diarrhea risk in the community: a systematic review".

Lancet Infectious Diseases .

3 (5): 275– 81.

doi : 10.1016/S1473-3099(03)00606-6 .

PMID 12726975 .

Aiello AE, Coulborn RM, Perez V, Larson EL (August 2008).

"Effect of Hand Hygiene on Infectious Disease Risk in the Community Setting: A Meta-Analysis" .

American Journal of Public Health .

98 (8): 1372– 81.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2007.124610 .

PMC 2446461 .

PMID 18556606 .

Fewtrell L, Kauffman RB, Kay D, Enanoria W, Haller L, Colford JM (2005).

"Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhea in less developed countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis" (PDF) .

Lancet Infectious Diseases .

5 (1): 42– 52.

doi : 10.1016/S1473-3099(04)01253-8 .

PMID 15620560 .

^ Ensink J (2006).

"Health impact of handwashing with soap" . WELL. Archived from the original on 2010-06-19.

Jefferson T, Foxlee R, Del Mar C, et al. (2007).

"Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses: systematic review" .

British Medical Journal .

336 (7635): 77– 80.

doi : 10.1136/BMJ.39393.510347.BE .

PMC 2190272 .

PMID 18042961 .

^ Luby S, Agboatalla M, Feikin DR, Painter J, Billhimmer W, Atref A, Hoekstra RM (2005). "Effect of hand-washing on child health: a randomized control trial".

Lancet .

366 (9481): 225– 33.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66912-7 .

PMID 16023513 .

S2CID 13024434 .

Luby S, Agboatwalla M, Schnell BM, Hoekstra RM, Rahbar MH, Keswick BH (2002). "The effect of antibacterial soap on impetigo incidence, Karachi, Pakistan".

American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene .

67 (4): 430– 35.

doi : 10.4269/ajtmh.2002.67.430 .

PMID 12452499 .

S2CID 9987503 .

^ Bloomfield SF, Nath KJ (2009).

"Use of ash and mud for hand-washing in low income communities" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "Guidelines for the prevention of infection and cross-infection in the domestic environment: focus on home hygiene issues in developing countries" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene. 2002.

^ Priadi CR, Putri GL, Foster T, Willetts J, Odagiri M (February 2022), Self-supply for safely managed water: To promote or to deter?

(PDF) ^ a b "Combating waterborne disease at the household level" (PDF) . World Health Organization. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-03-08.

^ a b Nath KJ, Bloomfield S, Jones M (2006).

"Household water storage, handling and point-of-use treatment" . International Scientific Forum on Home Hygiene.

^ "Water quality interventions to prevent diarrhoea: Cost and cost-effectiveness" .

World Health Organization . 2008. Archived from the original on September 30, 2016.

^ a b "Household Water Treatment and Safe Storage Following Emergencies and Disasters" (PDF) .

World Health Organisation . 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-03-01.

^ "Managing water in the home" .

World Health Organization . 2002. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016.

^ a b Sun J (1 July 2021).

"Bathing in Ancient Times" .

theworldofchinese .

^ a b c d Awen (30 April 2019).

"Ancient Chinese Bath Culture" .

View of China .

^ Golas PJ, Needham J (1999).

Science and Civilisation in China . Cambridge University Press. pp.

186– 91.

ISBN 0-521-58000-5 .

^ The travels of Marco Polo the Venetian . 1914. pp.214-215.

^ a b c Clark S (1994).

Japan: A View from the Bath . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-1657-5 .

^ "Aryan Code of Toilets (2nd Century AD)" .

Sulabh International Museum of Toilets .

^ Ajanal M, Nayak S, Prasad BS, Kadam A (2013-10-23).

"Adverse drug reaction and concepts of drug safety in Ayurveda: An overview" .

Journal of Young Pharmacists .

5 (4): 116– 120.

doi : 10.1016/j.jyp.2013.10.001 .

ISSN 0975-1483 .

PMC 3930110 .

PMID 24563588 .

^ a b Noriega Hernández JC (2004).

El baño temascal novohispano, de Moctezuma a Revillagigedo. Reflexiones sobre prácticas de higiene y expresiones de sociabilidad (PDF) (Thesis) (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-04-06 . Retrieved 2012-12-18 .

^ "Roman bath houses" .

Time Team . Channel Four Television Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 February 2007.

^ a b Rutherdale M (2006). "Ordering the Bath: Children, Health, and Hygiene in Northern Canadian Communities, 1900–1970". In Warsh CK, Strong-Boag V (eds.).

Children's Health Issues in Historical Perspective . Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press. p. 315.

ISBN 978-0-88920-912-1 .

... Thus bathing also was considered a part of good health practice. For example, Tertullian attended the baths and believed them hygienic. Clement of Alexandria, while condemning excesses, had given guidelines for Christian] who wished to attend the baths ...

^ Gibson MD (1903).

The Didascalia Apostolorum in English . C.J. Clay. pp.

9– 10.

^ a b Thurlkill M (2016).

Sacred Scents in Early Christianity and Islam: Studies in Body and Religion . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

6– 11.

ISBN 978-0-7391-7453-1 .

...Clement of Alexandria (d. c. 215 CE) allowed that bathing contributed to good health and hygiene... Christian skeptics could not easily dissuade the baths' practical popularity, however; popes continued to build baths situated within church basilicas and monasteries throughout the early medieval period...

^ a b Squatriti P (2002).

Water and Society in Early Medieval Italy, AD 400-1000, Parti 400–1000 . Cambridge University Press. p. 54.

ISBN 978-0-521-52206-9 .

...but baths were normally considered therapeutic until the days of Gregory the Great, who understood virtuous bathing to be bathing "on account of the needs of body"...

^ Snell M.

"Middle Ages Weddings and Hygiene" .

ThoughtCo . Archived from the original on 2017-01-30 . Retrieved 2008-03-05 .

^ Nelson LH.

"The Great Famine and the Black Death – 1315–1317, 1346–1351" .

Lectures in Medieval History .

^ "Middle Ages Hygiene" .

middle-ages.org.uk .

^ a b E Clark M (2006).

Contemporary Biology: Concepts and Implications . University of Michigan Press. p. 613.

ISBN 978-0-7216-2597-3 .

Douching is commonly practiced in Catholic countries. The bidet... is still commonly found in France and other Catholic countries.

^ Forgione A (2013).

Made in Naples: Come Napoli ha civilizzato l'Europa (e come continua a farlo) [ Made in Naples. How Naples civilised Europe (And still does it) ] (in Italian). Addictions-Magenes Editoriale.

ISBN 978-88-6649-039-5 .

^ Black W (2019).

The Middle Ages: Facts and Fictions . ABC-CLIO. p. 61.

ISBN 978-1-4408-6232-8 .

Public baths were common in the larger towns and cities of Europe by the twelfth century.

Kleinschmidt H (2005).

Perception and Action in Medieval Europe . Boydell & Brewer. p. 61.

ISBN 978-1-84383-146-4 .

^ Kazhdan A , ed. (1991), Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-504652-6 [ page needed ] Kourkoutidou-Nikolaidou E, Tourta A (1997).

Wandering in Byzantine Thessaloniki . Kapon Editions. p. 87.

ISBN 960-7254-47-3 .

^ a b c Braunstein P (1988). "Solitude: eleventh to the thirteenth century". In Duby G (ed.).

A History of Private Life . Vol. II. Revelations of the Medieval World. p. 525.

^ Hembry P (1990).

The English Spa, 1560–1815: A Social History . Fairleigh Dickinson Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-8386-3391-5 .

^ a b Bradley I (2012).

Water: A Spiritual History . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4411-6767-5 .

^ de Boileu E (1993). "Le Livre des Métiers". In Amt E (ed.).

Women's Lives in Medieval Europe: A Sourcebook . Routledge. p. 162.

^ Fresco of c.

1320 illustrated in de la Roncière C (1988). "Tuscan notables on the eve of the Renaissance". In Duby G (ed.).

A History of Private Life . Vol. II. Revelations of the Medieval World. p. 232.

^ Classen A (2017).

Bodily and Spiritual Hygiene in Medieval and Early Modern Literature: Explorations of Textual Presentations of Filth and Water . de Gruyter. p. 535.

ISBN 978-3-11-052379-9 .

^ "Water Sanitation and Hygiene" .

Bill & Melinda Gates foundation . 2001 . Retrieved 2020-10-04 .

^ Matterer JL.

"Daily Life" .

Gode Cookery: Tales of the Middle Ages . Retrieved 22 February 2017 .

^ "History" .

Global Handwashing Partnership . 19 March 2015 . Retrieved 18 April 2015 .

^ Majeed A (22 December 2005).

"How Islam changed medicine" .

BMJ .

331 (7531): 1486– 1487.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.331.7531.1486 .

ISSN 0959-8138 .

PMC 1322233 .

PMID 16373721 .

^ "Ṭahāra | Islam" .

Britannica .

^ Hasan I (2006), Muslims in America , AuthorHouse, p.

144 , ISBN 978-1-4259-4243-4 ^ Kidd J, Rees R, Tudor R (2000).

Life in Medieval Times . Heinemann. p.

165 .

ISBN 0-435-32594-9 .

^ Chant C, Goodman D (2005).

Pre-Industrial Cities and Technology . Routledge. pp.

136 –38.

ISBN 1-134-63620-2 .

^ Byrne JP (2012).

Encyclopedia of the Black Death .

ABC-CLIO . p.

29 .

ISBN 978-1-59884-253-1 .

^ Reid MH (2013).

Law and Piety in Medieval Islam .

Cambridge University Press . pp. 106, 114, 189– 190.

ISBN 978-1-107-06711-0 .

^ Menocal MR, Scheindlin RP, Sells MA, eds. (2000).

The Literature of Al-Andalus . Cambridge University Press.

^ a b van Sertima I (1992).

The Golden Age of the Moor .

Transaction Publishers . p.

267 .

ISBN 978-1-56000-581-0 .

^ Lebling RW Jr (July–August 2003).

"Flight of the Blackbird" .

Saudi Aramco World : 24– 33. Archived from the original on 2007-12-14 . Retrieved 28 January 2008 .

^ Ikpoh I, Lennox J, Agbo B, Udoekong N, Ekpo I, Iyam S (January 2012).

"Comparative studies on the effect of locally made black soap and conventional medicated soaps on isolated human skin microflora" .

Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology Research .

2 (4): 533– 537 – via ResearchGate .

^ Mbatha S.

"99 Zulu Indigenous Practices in Water and Sanitation: Preliminary Field Research on Indigenous Practices in Water and Sanitation Conducted at Ulundi" .

^ al-Hassan AY , ed. (2001).

Science and Technology in Islam: Technology and applied sciences . The Different Aspects of Islamic Culture. Vol. 4.

UNESCO . pp.

73 –74.

^ Kalın İ (2014).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Science, and Technology in Islam .

Oxford University Press . p.

137 .

ISBN 978-0-19-981257-8 .

^ Bistline RG Jr (1996). "Anionic and Related Lime Soap Dispersants". In Stache HW (ed.).

Anionic Surfactants: Organic Chemistry . Surfactant science series. Vol. 56. CRC Press. p. 632.

ISBN 0-8247-9394-3 .

^ Gregg P (1981).

King Charles I . London: Dent. p.

218 .

ISBN 978-0-460-04437-0 .

OCLC 9944510 .

^ McNeil I (1990).

An Encyclopaedia of the History of Technology . Taylor & Francis. pp.

203 –205.

ISBN 978-0-415-01306-2 .

Archived from the original on 2016-05-05.

^ Newell S (2006).

International Encyclopaedia of Tribal Religion: Christianity and tribal religions . Ohio University Press. p. 40.

ISBN 978-0-8214-1709-6 .

^ Grypma S (2008).

Healing Henan: Canadian Nurses at the North China Mission, 1888–1947 . University of British Columbia Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-7748-5821-2 .

the Gospel of Christ was central to the 'missionary' aspect of missionary nursing, the gospel of soap and water was central to 'nursing' aspect of their works.

^ Thomas K (2011).

Securing the City: Neoliberalism, Space, and Insecurity in Postwar Guatemala . Duke University Press. pp.

180– 181.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4958-7 .

Christian hygiene existed (and still exists) as one small but ever important part of this modernization project. Hygiene provides an incredibly mundane, deeply routinized, marker of Christian civility ...Identifying the rural poor as 'The Great Unwashed,' Haymaker published Christian pamphlets on health and hygiene,... of personal hygiene' (filled with soap, toothpaste, and floss), attempt to shape Christian Outreach and Ethnicity.

^ Bauman CM (2008).

Christian Identity and Dalit Religion in Hindu India, 1868–1947 . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 160.

ISBN 978-0-8028-6276-1 .

Along with the use of allopathic medicine, greater hygiene was one of the most frequently mobilized markers of the boundary between Christians and other communities of Chhattisgarh... The missionaries had made no secret of preaching 'soap; along with 'salvation'...

Baral KC (2005).

Between Ethnography and Fiction: Verrier Elwin and the Tribal Question in India . North Eastern Hill University Press. p. 151.

ISBN 978-81-250-2812-3 .

where slavery was in vogue Christianity advocated its end and personal hygiene was encouraged ^ Taylor JG (2011).

Cleanliness and Culture: Indonesian Histories . Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies. pp.

22– 23.

ISBN 978-90-04-25361-2 .

Cleanliness and Godliness: These examples indicate that real cleanliness was becoming the preserve of Europeans, and, it has to be added, of Christianity. Soap became an attribute of God — or rather the Protestant ^ Choi H (2009).

Gender and Mission Encounters in Korea: New Women, Old Ways: Seoul-California Series in Korean Studies . Vol. 1. University of California Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0-520-09869-5 .

In this way, Western forms of hygiene, health care and child rearing became an important part of creating the modern Christian in Korea.

^ Channa S (2009).

The Forger's Tale: The Search for Odeziaku . Indiana University Press. p. 284.

ISBN 978-81-7755-050-4 .

A major contribution of the Christian missionaries was better health care of the people through hygiene. Soap, tooth-powder and brushes came to be used increasingly in urban areas.

^ Thomas J (2015).

Evangelising the Nation: Religion and the Formation of Naga Political Identity . Routledge. p. 284.

ISBN 978-1-317-41398-1 .

cleanliness and hygiene became an important marker of being identified as a Christian ^ a b Z Wahrman M (2016).

The Hand Book: Surviving in a Germ-Filled World . University Press of New England. pp.

46– 48.

ISBN 978-1-61168-955-6 .

Water plays a role in other Christian rituals as well.... In the early days of Christianity, two to three centuries after Christ, the lavabo (Latin for "I wash myself"), a ritual handwashing vessel and bowl, was introduced as part of Church service.

^ Pedersen KS (1999).

"Is the Church of Ethiopia a Judaic Church?" (PDF) .

Warszawskie Studia Teologiczne .

12 (2): 203– 216. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2020-05-29 .

^ Liddell HG, Scott R.

"ὑγιεινός" .

A Greek-English Lexicon . Perseus.

^ Liddell HG, Scott R.

"ὑγιής" .

A Greek-English Lexicon . Perseus.

^ Liddell HG, Scott R.

"ὑγίεια" .

A Greek-English Lexicon . Perseus.

External links [ edit ] Wikipedia's health care articles can be viewed offline with the Medical Wikipedia app .

Look up hygiene in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Sanitary Science ".

Hygiene at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Hand hygiene at the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Water, Sanitation and Hygiene at the World Health Organization v t e Public health General Auxology Biological hazard Chief medical officer Cultural competence Deviance Environmental health Eugenics History of Liberal Euthenics Genomics Globalization and disease Harm reduction Health economics Health literacy Health policy Health system Health care reform Housing First Human right to water and sanitation Management of depression Public health law National public health institute Health politics Labor rights Maternal health Medical anthropology Medical sociology Mental health ( Ministers ) Occupational safety and health Pharmaceutical policy Pollution Air Water Soil Radiation Light Prisoners' rights Public health intervention Public health laboratory Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Security of person Sexual and reproductive health Social psychology Sociology of health and illness Unisex changing rooms Unisex public toilets Workers' right to access the toilet Preventive healthcare Behavior change Theories Drug checking Family planning Harm reduction Health promotion Human nutrition Healthy diet Preventive nutrition Hygiene Food safety Hand washing Infection control Oral hygiene Needle and syringe programmes Occupational safety and health Human factors and ergonomics Hygiene Controlled Drugs Injury prevention Medicine Nursing Patient safety Organization Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Safe sex Sanitation Emergency Fecal–oral transmission Open defecation Sanitary sewer Waterborne diseases Worker School hygiene Smoking cessation Supervised injection site Vaccination Vector control Population health Biostatistics Child mortality Community health Epidemiology Global health Health impact assessment Health system Infant mortality Open-source healthcare software Multimorbidity Public health informatics Social determinants of health Commercial determinants of health Health equity Race and health Social medicine Biological and epidemiological statistics Case–control study Randomized controlled trial Relative risk Statistical hypothesis testing Analysis of variance (ANOVA) Regression analysis ROC curve Student's t -test Z -test Statistical software Infectious and epidemic disease prevention Asymptomatic carrier Epidemics List Notifiable diseases List Public health surveillance Disease surveillance Quarantine Sexually transmitted infection Social distancing Tropical disease Vaccine trial WASH Food hygiene and safety management Food Additive Chemistry Engineering Microbiology Processing Safety Safety scandals Good agricultural practice Good manufacturing practice HACCP ISO 22000 Health behavioral sciences Diffusion of innovations Health belief model Health communication Health psychology Positive deviance PRECEDE–PROCEED model Social cognitive theory Social norms approach Theory of planned behavior Transtheoretical model Organizations, education and history Organizations Caribbean Caribbean Public Health Agency China Center for Disease Control and Prevention Europe Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Russia Rospotrebnadzor India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Canada Health Canada Public Health Agency U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health departments in the United States Council on Education for Public Health Public Health Service World Health Organization World Toilet Organization ( Full list ) Education Health education Higher education Bachelor of Science in Public Health Doctor of Public Health Professional degrees of public health Schools of public health History History of public health in the United Kingdom History of public health in the United States History of public health in Australia Sara Josephine Baker Samuel Jay Crumbine Carl Rogers Darnall Joseph Lister Margaret Sanger John Snow Typhoid Mary Radium Girls Germ theory of disease Social hygiene movement Category Commons WikiProject v t e Activities of daily living Used to refer to daily self-care activities Basic Personal hygiene Dressing Feeding oneself Voluntary urinary and bowel control Ambulation Sleeping Instrumental Housework Cleaning Meal preparation Managing money Shopping Technology use Telephone use Optional-instrumental Care (of self, children , the elderly ) Child rearing Emergency responses Safety procedures Driving Sexual activity Related articles Disability Personal care assistant Assisted living Care of residents v t e Concepts in infectious disease ( Outline ) Determinants Agent Biofilm Germ theory of disease Infectivity Infectious dose Pathogenesis Pathogenicity Attack rate Quorum sensing Virulence Endotoxin Exotoxin Case fatality rate factors Antimicrobial resistance Drug resistance Horizontal gene transfer Multidrug-resistant bacteria Host tropism Host Burn Comorbidity Diabetes Host–pathogen interaction Immune response Immunodeficiency Immunosuppression Immunopathology Cytokine storm Microbiome health Opportunistic infection Risk of infection Susceptible individual Age Gender Nutrition status Vaccination status Genetic predisposition Behavioral/lifestyle factors Smoking Pregnancy Stress levels Environment Access to water, sanitation, and hygiene Air quality Biodiversity loss Climate change Climate zones El Niño Tropical diseases Commerce Deforestation Ecology Humidity Injection drug use Natural disaster Flood Poultry and livestock Poverty Travel Urbanization Vector control War and conflict Transmission Basic concepts Asymptomatic carrier Chain of infection Fomite Host Incubation period Index case Infectious period Latent period Natural reservoir Opportunistic infection Silent/Subclinical infection Superinfection Transmission heterogeneity Super-spreader Viral load Window period Modes Endogenous Endogenous overgrowth Normal flora overgrowth Endogenous reactivation Microbial translocation Endogenous seeding Biofilm formation Exogenous Cross-species Spillover infection Vector Zoonosis Reverse zoonosis Human-to-human /Cross-infection Contagious disease Source Nosocomial/Hospital Iatrogenic/Medical care Generational difference Vertical/Congenital Prenatal Perinatal Neonatal Horizontal Breakthrough infection Environment- to-human Sapronosis Routes Respiratory Air Bioaerosol Aerosol-generating procedure Dental aerosol Respiratory droplet Linked to Vascular system Blood-borne disease Percutaneous inoculation Injection site Intravenous line Insect bite Animal bite Surgical intervention Postoperative wound Surgical site infection Vector-borne Mosquito Tick Gastrointestinal Food Contamination Breastmilk Water Feces Cutaneous Burn Fomite Soil Open wound Genitourinary Sex Trans-placental Prenatal Cervico-vaginal Perinatal Other Ocular (Eye) mucosal membrane Modelling Agent-based model Animal disease model Attack rate Basic reproduction number Compartmental models in epidemiology Critical community size Force of infection Herd immunity Infection rate Machine learning Multiplicity of infection Serial interval WAIFW matrix Occurrence in population Cluster Endemic Epidemic Curve Farr's laws Geographic distribution Holoendemic Hyperendemic Incidence Inequality Mesoendemic Outbreak Pandemic Prevalence Seasonality Social factors Sporadic Syndemic Twindemic Anatomical location Respiratory Ear-Nose-Throat/Upper respiratory tract Chest/Lower respiratory tract Gastrointestinal Intestinal Genitourinary Nervous system Skin Soft tissue Bone Joint Cardiovascular Systemic/Generalized Blood Tooth Mouth Fetus Eye Prevention and Control measures Pharmaceutical Antibiotic prophylactic Antifungal Anthelmintic Ascaricide Antimicrobial Antimicrobial stewardship Antiseptic Antiviral Asepsis Combination Drug safety Immunization Immunotherapy Monoclonal antibody therapy Inoculation Phage therapy Pre-exposure prophylaxis Post-exposure prophylaxis Repurposed drugs Vaccination efficacy/effectiveness booster hesitancy resistance Vaccine-preventable disease Ring vaccination Non- pharmaceutical Contact tracing Cordon sanitaire Disease surveillance Disinfection Flattening the curve Hygiene Food hygiene Hand washing Gloves Isolation Barrier nursing Lockdown Notification list Protective sequestration Public health Community health services Health communication Health education Outbreak response Quarantine Respiratory source control N95 respirator Surgical mask PPE Safe sex Sanitation Screening Social distancing Sterilization Transmission-based precautions Travel restrictions Universal precautions Vector control Wastewater surveillance Zoning Emerging infections Antigenic drift Antigenic shift Antimicrobial resistance surveillance EARS-Net Biosecurity CRISPR Disease X Emergent virus Evolutionary epidemiology Genetic epidemiology Global Health Initiatives Microbial phylogenetics One Health Model Genomic reassortment Re-emerging disease Reverse zoonosis Selection pressure Synthetic biology Viral phylodynamics Other Discovery Disease ecology Eradication Economics of Infectious Diseases Infectious disease (medical specialty) Infectious disease informatics Microbial bioterrorism Pandemic prevention Tropical disease Tropical medicine v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐bx2wt
Cached time: 20250817063548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.233 seconds
Real time usage: 2.559 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13694/1000000
Revision size: 96389/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 592020/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7080/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 576316/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.461/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23684204/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2133.258      1 -total
 51.34% 1095.248      1 Template:Reflist
 16.85%  359.460     67 Template:Cite_web
 13.39%  285.669     49 Template:Cite_book
  8.49%  181.102      9 Template:Multiref2
  8.17%  174.289     23 Template:Cite_journal
  7.92%  168.856     12 Template:Navbox
  6.36%  135.587      2 Template:Excerpt
  6.11%  130.431     23 Template:Transliteration
  6.06%  129.303      5 Template:Citation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:147020:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817063548 and revision id 1301522051. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hygiene&oldid=1301522051 " Categories : Hygiene Bathrooms Medical hygiene Sanitation Hidden categories: CS1 Mexican Spanish-language sources (es-mx) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2023 CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles needing additional references from January 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with text in Nahuatl languages Pages with plain IPA Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2023 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles with medical app sidebar Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 08:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hygiene 91 languages Add topic

