Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Names 2 Celebration in Taiwan Toggle Celebration in Taiwan subsection 2.1 National Day Military Parade 2.2 Full order of march past for National Day Parades until 1991 2.2.1 Ground column 2.2.2 Flypast 2.2.3 Mobile column 3 Celebrations outside the Republic of China Toggle Celebrations outside the Republic of China subsection 3.1 Mainland China and special administrative regions 3.2 Other countries 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents National Day of the Republic of China 15 languages Català Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Русский Suomi ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National holiday in Taiwan "Double Tenth" redirects here. For the massacre in Japanese-ruled Singapore, see Double Tenth incident . For the agreement between the nationalists and communists, see Double Tenth Agreement .

Not to be confused with National Day of the People's Republic of China .

National Day of the Republic of China A combination of two 十 ('ten') characters, often seen during the holiday Also called Double Tenth Day, Double Ten Day, Anniversary of the Xinhai Revolution , Taiwan National Day Observed by Republic of China (as National Day or Double Ten Day) People's Republic of China (as the Anniversary of the Xinhai Revolution) Type Historical, cultural , nationalist Celebrations festivities, including fireworks and concerts Date 10 October Next time 10 October 2025 ( 2025-10-10 ) Frequency annual First time 10 October 1911 Related to 1911 Revolution Chinese name Traditional Chinese 國慶日 [ 1 ] Simplified Chinese 国庆日 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Guóqìng Rì Bopomofo ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄑㄧㄥˋ ㄖˋ Southern Min Hokkien POJ Kok-khèng-ji̍t Double Ten Day [ 2 ] Traditional Chinese 雙十節 Simplified Chinese 双十节 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Shuāngshí Jié Bopomofo ㄕㄨㄤˉ ㄕˊ ㄐㄧㄝˊ Southern Min Hokkien POJ Siang-si̍p-chiat Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The National Day of the Republic of China , also referred to as Double Ten Day or Double Tenth Day , is a public holiday on 10 October, now held annually as national day in the Republic of China (ROC, commonly known as Taiwan). It commemorates the start of the Wuchang Uprising on 10 October 1911 which ultimately led to the establishment of the Republic of China on 1 January 1912, and the collapse of the imperial Qing dynasty , ending 2,133 years of imperial rule of China since the Qin dynasty .

[ 3 ] The day was once held as public holiday in mainland China during the Mainland Period of the ROC before 1949. The subsequent People's Republic of China continues to observe the Anniversary of the Xinhai Revolution at the same date but not as a public holiday , which emphasize more on its revolutionary characteristics as commemoration of a historical event rather than celebration to the founding of the Republic of China.

Following the consequence of the Chinese Civil War , the ROC government lost control of mainland China to the Chinese Communist Party and retreated to the island of Taiwan in December 1949. The National Day is now mainly celebrated in Taiwan Area , thus the name “Taiwan National Day” is also used by some groups, but it is also celebrated by many overseas Chinese communities .

Names [ edit ] Double Ten Day can be referred to variety of names such as the National Day of China or Chinese National Day [ 4 ] when the ROC was in power in mainland China and as the internationally recognized government of "China" until the 1970s. Another name Taiwan National Day , is also used but in dispute as the ROC was founded in 1912, contemporarily Taiwan was ruled by Japan .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The name "Taiwan National Day" has been criticized by former ROC president Ma Ying-jeou .

[ 7 ] Celebration in Taiwan [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Generalissimo and former president Chiang Kai-shek presiding over the 1966 Double Ten celebrations.

During the establishment of the Republic of China , Taiwan and Penghu were under Japanese rule , which began in 1895. In 1945, after surrender of the Empire of Japan in World War II , Taiwan and Penghu were placed under the control of the ROC.

In Taiwan, the official celebration begins with the raising of the flag of the Republic of China in front of the Presidential Office Building , along with a public singing of the National Anthem of the Republic of China . It is then followed by celebrations in front of the Presidential Office Building; from time to time, a military parade may occur. Festivities also include many aspects of traditional Chinese and/or Taiwanese culture, such as the lion dance and drum teams, and cultural features coming from Taiwanese aborigines are integrated into the display in recent years. Later in the day, the president of the Republic of China would address the country and fireworks displays are held throughout the major cities of the island. In 2009, all government sponsored festivities for the Double Ten Day were cancelled, and the money intended for the festivals (NT$70 million) were reallocated for reconstruction of the damage done by Typhoon Morakot .

In 2022 former President Ma Ying-jeou , who opposes the styling of the holiday as Taiwan National Day, publicly called for current President Tsai Ing-wen to stop using the name Taiwan National Day in material associated with the holiday. His view was criticized by Robert Tsao as obsolete.

[ 8 ] Because of the lack of direct relations between the origin of the holiday and Taiwan in modern Taiwan the holiday is widely believed to be slightly absurd but is still widely celebrated.

[ 9 ] National Day Military Parade [ edit ] National Day (Double Ten) celebration parades 1950 1965: Students holding Sun Yat-sen placards 1966: Republic of China Army M41 light tanks parade in front of the Presidential Office 2011: Marching cadets from the ROC Military Academy Traditionally, the Republic of China Armed Forces (ROCAF) have staged a military parade. During prior parades, troops and equipment march past a reviewing platform in front of the Presidential Office Building . Typically, foreign ambassadors , military officers, and other representatives and dignitaries are invited to view the parade. Following the National Anthem and the firing of a 21-gun salute , the parade commander, a general-ranked officer of any of the service branches of the ROCAF, would then be driven to the front of the grandstand to request permission from the President to commence the parade proper. Until 1975, the President also inspected the parade formations while riding a vehicle, as each battalion of the parade formations presented arms in the presence of the President and all the unit colours and guidons also dipped in their presence. After all the units in the ground column marched past the grandstand, they would reassemble at the center of the road for a holiday address delivered by the President to the ROCAF and the country, marking the close of the parade.

The parade has been held intermittently during the period of the Republic of China on Taiwan. The military parade on 10 October 1949, was the first public military parade held in Taiwan with Chen Cheng serving as the Grand Review Officer. The 1964 National Day parade was struck by tragedy when a low flying air force F-104 Starfighter fighter aircraft struck a Broadcasting Corporation of China tower, causing the plane's fuel tank to fall and kill three people including a woman and her baby in front of the Central Weather Bureau building in downtown Taipei . The other two remaining F-104 aircraft were ordered to look for the crashed aircraft and accidentally collided and crashed in Tucheng City , Taipei County (now New Taipei City ), killing both pilots. The parade was not held again until 1971 (the 60th anniversary), while the mobile column and flypast segments returned in 1975. When Chen Shui-bian became president, the parade was not held until 2007 and then it was entitled a "Celebration Drill" and not a traditional military parade. Since Ma Ying-jeou became president, one parade has been held on the centenary celebrations of the Double Tenth Day, and another on the 105th, the only one under Tsai Ing-wen's presidency.

The tradition of shouting " Long live the Republic of China!" ( 中華民國萬歲 ; Zhonghua Mingguo Wansui!

) at the end of the addresses by the president of the Republic of China was not held for the first time in 2016. It was also the very year that fire and police services joined the parade for the first time in history, breaking the tradition of an exclusively-military parade to include personnel from civil uniformed services.

List of Republic of China National Day Parades Parade Year Exercise Name Grand Review Officer Venue Parade Commander Number of Troops Remarks 1949 — Chen Cheng Taipei Unknown First military parade held in Taiwan under the control of the Republic of China .

1951 — Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Ai Ai ROC Fortieth Anniversary 1952 復華演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Tang Shou-chi 10,046 1953 — Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Zhou Yuhuan 19,000 1954 — Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Xu Rucheng Flyby aircraft was requisitioned for the defense of Quemoy during the First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1955 光華演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Cheng Wei-yuan 1956 光復演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Liu Dinghan 21,500 1957 中興演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Hu Xin 12,000 1960 鼎興演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Chu Yuan-Cong 1961 復興演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Cheng Wei-yuan ROC Fiftieth Anniversary (Golden Jubilee) 1962 復華演習 Taipei Cancelled on September 11, 1962 1963 復漢演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Yuan Guo-Zheng 15,370 1964 興漢演習 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei Hau Pei-tsun Two F-104 aircraft collided after an air formation, killing both pilots 1971 Chiang Kai-shek Taipei First parade after 6 years absence, marked the 60th Anniversary of the ROC, ground column only present 1975 大漢演習 Yen Chia-kan Taipei Zhang Jiajun Full remastered video of 1975 National Day parade 1978 漢威演習 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei Chiang Chung-ling Flypast cancelled due to rainy weather 1979 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei Ground column only present, air flypast and military mobile column cancelled Full video of 1979 National Day parade 1980 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei 1981 漢武演習 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei Hsu Li-nung 11,966 ROC Seventieth Anniversary (Part 1) (Part 2) (Part 3) (Part 4) (Part 5) (Part 6) 1982 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei 1986 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei ROC Seventy-Fifth Anniversary (Diamond Jubilee) 1987 僑泰演習 Chiang Ching-kuo Taipei It was the last military parade held during Chiang Ching-kuo's administration. It was held on 11 October, the day after the Double Ten Day celebrations due to Chiang's ailing condition.

(Also the first since the abolition of Martial Law in Taiwan earlier that July.) 1988 光武演習 Lee Teng-hui Taipei Chen Tingchong 13,166 ROC Seventy-Seventh Anniversary (Part 1) (Part 2) (Part 3) (Part 4) 1991 華統演習 Lee Teng-hui Taipei Ro Wenshan 12,566 ROC Eightieth Anniversary (Part 1) (Part 2) (Part 3) (Part 4) 2007 同慶操演 Chen Shui-bian Taipei Wu Sihuai 3,000 Exhibitions presented on national defense, non-traditional military parade 2011 Ma Ying-jeou Taipei 1,000+ The centennial event featured a skydiving show of 12 paratroopers of the Army Airborne Training Center above the plaza in front of the Presidential Office.

[ 10 ] Military parade involving 1,000+ personnel, 71 aircraft and 168 vehicles.

[ 11 ] On the part of the ground troops only the ROCAF Honor Guard Battalion and the ROCAF Composite Headquarters Band joined the parade on behalf of the armed forces.

2016 慶祥操演 Tsai Ing-wen Taipei 2,500+ 2017 Tsai Ing-wen Taipei 2021 Tsai Ing-wen Taipei 2022 Tsai Ing-wen Taipei 2023 Tsai Ing-wen Taipei [ 12 ] 2024 Lai Ching-te Taipei Full order of march past for National Day Parades until 1991 [ edit ] Combined ROCAF marching bands (2018) Until 1991, following the opening report by the Parade commander, usually a lieutenant general or vice admiral of the ROCAF, the massed military bands of the ROC Armed Forces, led by the Senior Drum Major, would take their positions in the parade, playing the ROC Armed Forces March, a medley of the official songs of the service branches of the armed forces. Then the parade would march past, in the following sequence, with minor variations over the years: Ground column [ edit ] Ground column (2015) ROC Armed Forces Joint Honor Guard Parade commander and staff Joint Division of Armed Forces Academies Republic of China Military Academy Republic of China Naval Academy Republic of China Air Force Academy National Defense University College of Political Warfare Instruction ROC Air Force Institute of Technology Chung-cheng Armed Forces Preparatory School Army Academy R.O.C.

Contingent of personnel from the service branches ROCA combined divisional formation Composite brigade of ROCN personnel (including Republic of China Marine Corps ) Composite group of ROCAF ground and air defense personnel Republic of China Military Police Republic of China Joint Logistics Command Reserve and militia formations of the Republic of China Armed Forces Reserve Female battalion of the College of Political Warfare Instruction Drum and Bugle Corps of military educational institutions Taiwan Police College (formed part in past parades of the 1970s and 1980s) Flypast [ edit ] Flypast over the Presidential Office (2018) The parade's flypast segment was for many years organized in like manner as in the Bastille Day military parade . First, while the honor guard departs from the presidential grandstand the training, fighter and transport aircraft of the ROC Air Force, the transport and anti-submarine aircraft of ROCN Naval Aviation and transport planes of ROCA Army Aviation fly past first, followed by the helicopters of all three service branches, together with those of the National Police Agency , National Fire Agency and Coast Guard Administration after the ground column segment is concluded.

Mobile column [ edit ] ROCMP motorcycle column (2018) The mobile column, for many years, served as a crowd favorite of National Day civil-military parades, since in this segment the ROC shows off to its people the advanced and modern military equipment and vehicles in service and those being introduced, many of them nationally produced, for use by the servicemen and women of the ROCAF, and since 2016, the state civil security institutions. As in every parade, the ROCMP's motorcycle column leads off the mobile column segment, followed by (as of 2016): ROCN mobile column Republic of China Marine Corps Amphibious Reconnaissance and Patrol Unit Amphibious Armor Group Coastal and air defense formations of the Republic of China Navy Republic of China Air Force mobile column Air defense guns and missiles Equipment and materiel, including air to air missiles Mobile column of ROCA formations and equipment (order as of 1991, 2007, 2011 and 2016 parades) Anti-tank weapons Signals Armored cavalry CBRN defense ROCA Corps of Engineers Motorized and mechanized infantry Armored formations Logistical and combat support Air defense and missiles (mobile missile and gun systems and truck-towed systems) Towed guns of the field artillery Self propelled artillery (MRLs and self-propelled guns) Disaster risk and response vehicles and equipment for calamity response operations National Police Agency Criminal Investigation Bureau vehicles and equipment NPA National Highway Police Mobile vehicles of the NPA's Special Police Corps National Fire Agency vehicles and equipment Coast Guard Administration small marine equipment and vehicles Alongside the military and civil security mobile column, in the parades of the 70s and 80s and in more recent parades, a civil mobile column is present, composed of vehicles from the automobile and truck companies, state-owned firms, and the private sector.

Celebrations outside the Republic of China [ edit ] Mainland China and special administrative regions [ edit ] Hong Kong 2017: Obelisk and Republic of China flags flying at Sun Yat Sen Commemorative Garden , Hong Kong 2012 As the Chinese Communist Party became the official government of mainland China in 1949, 10 October is now celebrated in the People's Republic of China as the anniversary of the Xinhai Revolution and the Wuchang Uprising .

The former British colony of Hong Kong celebrated the ROC National Day as a public holiday until the government of the United Kingdom cut its diplomatic relations with the ROC Government as London recognized Beijing in 1950, shortly after the PRC's founding and it was postponed.

[ 13 ] The former Portuguese colony of Macau had celebrated the ROC national day as a public holiday until the government of Portugal cut its relations as Lisbon recognizes Beijing in 1979. After the civil war in mainland China, the National Day was celebrated in regions inhabited by Chinese patriots who remained loyal to the Republic. Before the sovereignty of Hong Kong was transferred to the PRC in 1997 and Macau also transferred in 1999, many ROC supporters there would display patriotic and colourful flags (mainly the national flag of ROC ) to celebrate the National Day. Taiwan agencies in Hong Kong and Macau have annually held a public ceremony to celebrate the National Day of ROC with members of pro-ROC private groups.

[ 14 ] The day continues to be celebrated in Hong Kong and Macau after the transfer of sovereignty to the mainland, but the national flags publicly shown have been removed by Police of Hong Kong since July 1997 and by Police of Macau since December 1999.

[ 15 ] Flag-raising ceremony at Hung Lau , Tuen Mun, Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary base, is the most noticeable yearly event, organized by Johnny Mak . Since 2020, the event was celebrated as the PRC's Anniversary of the Xinhai Revolution rather than the ROC's Double Ten Day in line with the holidays in mainland China.

Chris Tang claimed in September 2021 that celebrations in Hong Kong for Double Ten Day could risk breaching the national security law .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The event in Macau is commemorated under the name of the Xinhai Revolution Memorial Day.

Other countries [ edit ] National Day banners in overseas Chinatowns Chinatown, Montreal (2011) Chinatown, Montreal (2011) Chinatown, San Francisco (2000) Chinatown, Los Angeles (2024) Overseas Chinese played a key role in the birth of the ROC since the nation's founding father Sun Yat-sen , a medical doctor by training, received financial support mainly from the overseas Chinese communities abroad to overthrow the imperial Qing dynasty and establish the second republic in Asia in 1912. Outside Taiwan, the National Day is also celebrated by many Overseas Chinese communities. Sizable National Day parades occur yearly in the Chinatowns of San Francisco and Chicago .

See also [ edit ] History of the Republic of China National Day of the People's Republic of China 10 October 1943 uprising against the Japanese occupation of British Borneo Hong Kong 1956 riots Double Tenth Agreement Hong Kong–Taiwan relations References [ edit ] ^ 紀念日及節日實施辦法 (Jìniànrì jí jiérì shíshī bànfǎ) ^ 國民中小學九年一貫語文科課程綱要英語科 (Guómín zhōng xiǎoxué jiǔ nián yīguàn yǔwén kē kèchéng gāngyào yīngyǔ kē) , p149, 22 ^ Atwill, David; Atwill, Yurong (2021).

Sources in Chinese History: Diverse Perspectives from 1644 to the Present . Routledge.

ISBN 9780429560347 .

^ "The Month in Free China" . November 1967.

^ Cheung, Eric (10 October 2022).

" 'No room for compromise' on Taiwan's sovereignty, President Tsai says in National Day speech" .

CNN . Retrieved 25 March 2023 .

^ "中華民國2021國慶" .

rocbirthday.tw . Archived from the original on 10 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Ma rejects National Day invite over 'Taiwan' - Taipei Times" . 2 October 2023.

^ Pan, Jason.

"Robert Tsao pans Ma Ying-jeou ahead of National Day" .

taipeitimes.com . Taipei Times . Retrieved 8 October 2022 .

^ Wingfield-Hayes, Rupert (10 October 2022).

"Defiant Taiwan's identity is moving away from China" .

bbc.com . BBC . Retrieved 10 October 2022 .

^ "Skydiving show wows crowds on National Day" .

Focus Taiwan news . 10 October 2011 . Retrieved 2 October 2024 .

^ Sui, Cindy (10 October 2011).

"Legacy debate as Republic of China marks 100 years" .

BBC News . Retrieved 2 October 2024 .

^ "HKFP Lens: Taiwan marks 112th National Day with military flypast, parades" .

Hong Kong Free Press . 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2024 .

^ Far Eastern Economic Review , 1968, page 450 ^ "Sinorama" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 October 2010 .

^ 香港移交後之爭議事件 ^ "Celebrating Taiwan holiday in Hong Kong risks secession charge: security chief" .

South China Morning Post . 23 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 .

^ "HK sectors mark 110th anniversary of Xinhai Revolution" .

External links [ edit ] Media related to National Day of the Republic of China at Wikimedia Commons Republic of China Centenary Foundation Archived 13 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in Chinese) v t e Public holidays in Taiwan Founding Day of the Republic of China Lunar New Year's Eve Lunar New Year Festival (first 3 days of the period) Peace Memorial Day Children's Day Tomb Sweeping Day Labor Day Dragon Boat Festival Confucius' Birthday Mid-Autumn Festival National Day Retrocession Day Constitution Day Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Day_of_the_Republic_of_China&oldid=1297781326 " Categories : October observances Public holidays in Taiwan 1911 Revolution Military parades Parades in Taiwan Public holidays in China Republic days Autumn in Taiwan Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Use dmy dates from November 2020 Articles containing Chinese-language text Infobox holiday with missing field Infobox holiday fixed day (2) Articles needing additional references from October 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Inconsistent wikidata for Commons category Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Chinese-language sources (zh) This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 13:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Day of the Republic of China 15 languages Add topic

