Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Etymology 2.2 The structure of the benzene ring 3 Characteristics of aromatic (aryl) compounds 4 Importance of aromatic compounds 5 Types of aromatic compounds Toggle Types of aromatic compounds subsection 5.1 Neutral homocyclics 5.2 Heterocyclics 5.3 Polycyclics 5.4 Substituted aromatics 5.5 Atypical aromatic compounds 5.5.1 Y-aromaticity 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Aromaticity 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oromoo Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemical property "Aromatic" redirects here. For meanings related to odor, see aroma compound . For the lack of romantic attraction, see aromantic .

Two different resonance forms of benzene (top) combine to produce an average structure (bottom) In organic chemistry , aromaticity is a chemical property describing the way in which a conjugated ring of unsaturated bonds , lone pairs , or empty orbitals exhibits a stabilization stronger than would be expected from conjugation alone.  The earliest use of the term was in an article by August Wilhelm Hofmann in 1855.

[ 1 ] There is no general relationship between aromaticity as a chemical property and the olfactory properties of such compounds.

Aromaticity can also be considered a manifestation of cyclic delocalization and of resonance .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] This is usually considered to be because electrons are free to cycle around circular arrangements of atoms that are alternately single- and double- bonded to one another. This commonly seen model of aromatic rings, namely the idea that benzene was formed from a six-membered carbon ring with alternating single and double bonds (cyclohexatriene), was developed by Kekulé (see History section below). Each bond may be seen as a hybrid of a single bond and a double bond, every bond in the ring identical to every other. The model for benzene consists of two resonance forms, which corresponds to the double and single bonds superimposing to give rise to six one-and-a-half bonds.  Benzene is a more stable molecule than would be expected without accounting for charge delocalization.

Theory [ edit ] Modern depiction of benzene As is standard for resonance diagrams , a double-headed arrow is used to indicate that the two structures are not distinct entities, but merely hypothetical possibilities. Neither is an accurate representation of the actual compound, which is best represented by a hybrid (average) of these structures, which can be seen at right.  A C=C bond is shorter than a C−C bond, but benzene is perfectly hexagonal—all six carbon-carbon bonds have the same length , intermediate between that of a single and that of a double bond .

A better representation is that of the circular π bond (Armstrong's inner cycle ), in which the electron density is evenly distributed through a π-bond above and below the ring. This model more correctly represents the location of electron density within the aromatic ring.

The single bonds are formed with electrons in line between the carbon nuclei — these are called σ-bonds . Double bonds consist of a σ-bond and a π-bond. The π-bonds are formed from overlap of atomic p-orbitals above and below the plane of the ring. The following diagram shows the positions of these p-orbitals: Since they are out of the plane of the atoms, these orbitals can interact with each other freely, and become delocalized. This means that, instead of being tied to one atom of carbon, each electron is shared by all six in the ring. Thus, there are not enough electrons to form double bonds on all the carbon atoms, but the "extra" electrons strengthen all of the bonds on the ring equally. The resulting molecular orbital has π symmetry.

History [ edit ] Etymology [ edit ] The first known use of the word "aromatic" as a chemical term — namely, to apply to compounds that contain the phenyl radical — occurs in an article by August Wilhelm Hofmann in 1855.

[ 1 ] If this is indeed the earliest introduction of the term, it is curious that Hofmann says nothing about why he introduced an adjective indicating olfactory character to apply to a group of chemical substances only some of which have notable aromas . Also, many of the most odoriferous organic substances known are terpenes , which are not aromatic in the chemical sense. But terpenes and benzenoid substances do have a chemical characteristic in common, namely higher unsaturation indices than many aliphatic compounds , and Hofmann may not have been making a distinction between the two categories.

The structure of the benzene ring [ edit ] Historic benzene formulae as proposed by Kekulé.

[ 5 ] In the 19th century, chemists found it puzzling that benzene could be so unreactive toward addition reactions, given its presumed high degree of unsaturation.  The cyclohexatriene structure for benzene was first proposed by August Kekulé in 1865. Over the next few decades, most chemists readily accepted this structure, since it accounted for most of the known isomeric relationships of aromatic chemistry.

Between 1897 and 1906, J. J. Thomson , the discoverer of the electron, proposed three equivalent electrons between each carbon atom in benzene.

An explanation for the exceptional stability of benzene is conventionally attributed to Sir Robert Robinson , who was apparently the first (in 1925) [ 6 ] to coin the term aromatic sextet as a group of six electrons that resists disruption.

In fact, this concept can be traced further back, via Ernest Crocker in 1922, [ 7 ] to Henry Edward Armstrong ,  who in 1890 wrote "the (six) centric affinities act within a cycle ... benzene may be represented by a double ring ( sic ) ... and when an additive compound is formed, the inner cycle of affinity suffers disruption, the contiguous carbon-atoms to which nothing has been attached of necessity acquire the ethylenic condition".

[ 8 ] [ verification needed ] Here, Armstrong is describing at least four modern concepts. First, his "affinity" is better known nowadays as the electron , which was to be discovered only seven years later by J. J. Thomson.  Second, he is describing electrophilic aromatic substitution ,  proceeding (third) through a Wheland intermediate , in which  (fourth) the conjugation of the ring is broken. He introduced the symbol C centered on the ring as a shorthand for the inner cycle , thus anticipating Erich Clar 's notation. It is argued that he also anticipated the nature of wave mechanics , since he recognized that his affinities had direction, not merely being point particles, and collectively having a distribution that could be altered by introducing substituents onto the benzene ring ( much as the distribution of the electric charge in a body is altered by bringing it near to another body ).

The quantum mechanical origins of this stability, or aromaticity,  were first modelled by Hückel in 1931. He was the first to separate the bonding electrons into sigma and pi electrons.

Characteristics of aromatic (aryl) compounds [ edit ] An aromatic (or aryl ) compound contains a set of covalently bound atoms with specific characteristics: A delocalized conjugated π system, most commonly an arrangement of alternating single and double bonds .

Coplanar structure, with all the contributing atoms in the same plane.

Contributing atoms arranged in one or more rings.

A number of π delocalized electrons that is even, but not a multiple of 4 . That  is, 4n + 2 number of π electrons, where n=0, 1, 2, 3, and so on.  This is known as Hückel's Rule .

Whereas benzene is aromatic (6 electrons, from 3 double bonds), cyclobutadiene is not, since the number of π delocalized electrons is 4, which of course is a multiple of 4.  The cyclobutadienide (2−) ion, however, is aromatic (6 electrons). An atom in an aromatic system can have other electrons that are not part of the system, and are therefore ignored for the 4n + 2 rule.  In furan , the oxygen atom is sp 2 hybridized. One lone pair is in the π system and the other in the plane of the ring (analogous to C-H bond on the other positions). There are 6 π electrons, so furan is aromatic.

Aromatic molecules typically display enhanced chemical stability, compared to similar non-aromatic molecules. A molecule that can be aromatic will tend to alter its electronic or conformational structure to be in this situation.  This extra stability changes the chemistry of the molecule. Aromatic compounds undergo electrophilic aromatic substitution and nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions, but not electrophilic addition reactions as happens with carbon-carbon double bonds.

Many of the earliest-known examples of aromatic compounds, such as benzene and toluene, have distinctive pleasant smells. This property led to the term "aromatic" for this class of compounds, and hence the term "aromaticity" for the eventually discovered electronic property.

The circulating π electrons in an aromatic molecule produce ring currents that oppose the applied magnetic field in NMR .

[ 9 ] The NMR signal of protons in the plane of an aromatic ring are shifted substantially further down-field than those on non-aromatic sp 2 carbons.  This is an important way of detecting aromaticity.  By the same mechanism, the signals of protons located near the ring axis are shifted up-field.

Aromatic molecules are able to interact with each other in so-called π-π stacking : The π systems form two parallel rings overlap in a "face-to-face" orientation. Aromatic molecules are also able to interact with each other in an "edge-to-face" orientation: The slight positive charge of the substituents on the ring atoms of one molecule are attracted to the slight negative charge of the aromatic system on another molecule.

Planar monocyclic molecules containing 4n π electrons are called antiaromatic and are, in general, destabilized.  Molecules that could be antiaromatic will tend to alter their electronic or conformational structure to avoid this situation, thereby becoming non-aromatic.  For example, cyclooctatetraene (COT) distorts itself out of planarity, breaking π overlap between adjacent double bonds. Relatively recently, cyclobutadiene was discovered to adopt an asymmetric, rectangular configuration in which single and double bonds indeed alternate; there is no resonance and the single bonds are markedly longer than the double bonds, reducing unfavorable p-orbital overlap. This reduction of symmetry lifts the degeneracy of the two formerly non-bonding molecular orbitals, which by Hund's rule forces the two unpaired electrons into a new, weakly bonding orbital (and also creates a weakly antibonding orbital). Hence, cyclobutadiene is non-aromatic; the strain of the asymmetric configuration outweighs the anti-aromatic destabilization that would afflict the symmetric, square configuration.

Importance of aromatic compounds [ edit ] Aromatic compounds play key roles in the biochemistry of all living things.  The four aromatic amino acids histidine , phenylalanine , tryptophan , and tyrosine each serve as one of the 20 basic building-blocks of proteins.  Further, all 5 nucleotides ( adenine , thymine , cytosine , guanine , and uracil ) that make up the sequence of the genetic code in DNA and RNA are aromatic purines or pyrimidines .  The molecule heme contains an aromatic system with 22 π electrons.

Chlorophyll also has a similar aromatic system.

Aromatic compounds are important in industry.  Key aromatic hydrocarbons of commercial interest are benzene , toluene , ortho -xylene and para -xylene .  About 35 million tonnes are produced worldwide every year.  They are extracted from complex mixtures obtained by the refining of oil or by distillation of coal tar, and are used to produce a range of important chemicals and polymers, including styrene , phenol , aniline , polyester and nylon .

Types of aromatic compounds [ edit ] The overwhelming majority of aromatic compounds are compounds of carbon, but they need not be hydrocarbons.

Neutral homocyclics [ edit ] Benzene , as well as most other annulenes ( cyclodecapentaene excepted) with the formula C n H n where n ≥ 4  and is an even number, such as cyclotetradecaheptaene .

Heterocyclics [ edit ] In heterocyclic aromatics ( heteroaromats ), one or more of the atoms in the aromatic ring is of an element other than carbon. This can lessen the ring's aromaticity, and thus (as in the case of furan ) increase its reactivity. Other examples include pyridine , pyrazine , imidazole , pyrazole , oxazole , thiazole , thiophene , and their benzannulated analogs ( benzimidazole , for example).

Polycyclics [ edit ] Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are molecules containing two or more simple aromatic rings fused together by sharing two neighboring carbon atoms (see also simple aromatic rings ). Examples are naphthalene , anthracene , and phenanthrene .

Substituted aromatics [ edit ] Many chemical compounds are aromatic rings with other functional groups attached.  Examples include trinitrotoluene (TNT), acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), paracetamol , and the nucleotides of DNA .

Atypical aromatic compounds [ edit ] Aromaticity is found in ions as well: the cyclopropenyl cation (2e system), the cyclopentadienyl anion (6e system), the tropylium ion (6e), and the cyclooctatetraene dianion (10e). Aromatic properties have been attributed to non-benzenoid compounds such as tropone . Aromatic properties are tested to the limit in a class of compounds called cyclophanes .

A special case of aromaticity is found in homoaromaticity where conjugation is interrupted by a single sp 3 hybridized carbon atom.

When carbon in benzene is replaced by other elements in borabenzene , silabenzene , germanabenzene , stannabenzene , phosphorine or pyrylium salts the aromaticity is still retained. Aromaticity also occurs in compounds that are not carbon-based at all.  Inorganic 6-membered-ring compounds analogous to benzene have been synthesized.

Hexasilabenzene (Si 6 H 6 ) and borazine (B 3 N 3 H 6 ) are structurally analogous to benzene, with the carbon atoms replaced by another element or elements.  In borazine, the boron and nitrogen atoms alternate around the ring. Quite recently, the aromaticity of planar Si 5 6- rings occurring in the Zintl phase Li 12 Si 7 was experimentally evidenced by Li solid state NMR.

[ 10 ] Metal aromaticity is believed to exist in certain metal clusters of aluminium.

[ citation needed ] Möbius aromaticity occurs when a cyclic system of molecular orbitals, formed from  p π atomic orbitals and populated in a closed shell by 4n (n is an integer) electrons, is given a single half-twist to correspond to a Möbius strip . A π system with 4n electrons in a flat (non-twisted) ring would be anti-aromatic, and therefore highly unstable, due to the symmetry of the combinations of p atomic orbitals. By twisting the ring, the symmetry of the system changes and becomes allowed (see also Möbius–Hückel concept for details). Because the twist can be left-handed or right-handed , the resulting  Möbius aromatics are dissymmetric or chiral . 
As of 2012, there is no proof that a Möbius aromatic molecule was synthesized.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Aromatics with two half-twists corresponding to the paradromic topologies were first suggested by Johann Listing .

[ 13 ] In carbo-benzene the ring bonds are extended with alkyne and allene groups.

Y-aromaticity [ edit ] Y-aromaticity is a concept which was developed to explain the extraordinary stability and high basicity of the guanidinium cation. Guanidinium does not have a ring structure but has six π-electrons which are delocalized over the molecule. However, this concept is controversial and some authors have stressed different effects.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Aromatic hydrocarbon Aromatic amine BTX (chemistry) PAH SARA Simple aromatic ring Pi interaction Avoided crossing References [ edit ] ^ a b A. W. Hofmann (1855). "On Insolinic Acid".

Proceedings of the Royal Society .

8 : 1– 3.

doi : 10.1098/rspl.1856.0002 .

^ Schleyer, Paul von Ragué (2001). "Introduction: Aromaticity".

Chemical Reviews .

101 (5): 1115– 8.

doi : 10.1021/cr0103221 .

PMID 11749368 .

^ A. T. Balaban, P. v. R. Schleyer and H. S. Rzepa (2005). "Crocker, Not Armit and Robinson, Begat the Six Aromatic Electrons".

Chemical Reviews .

105 (10): 3436– 3447.

doi : 10.1021/cr0300946 .

PMID 16218557 .

^ Schleyer, Paul von Ragué (2005).

"Introduction: Delocalization Pi and Sigma" .

Chemical Reviews .

105 (10): 3433– 3435.

doi : 10.1021/cr030095y .

^ August Kekulé (1872). "Ueber einige Condensationsproducte des Aldehyds".

Liebigs Ann. Chem .

162 (1): 77– 124.

doi : 10.1002/jlac.18721620110 .

^ Armit, James Wilson; Robinson, Robert (1925). "CCXI.?Polynuclear heterocyclic aromatic types. Part II. Some anhydronium bases".

Journal of the Chemical Society, Transactions .

127 : 1604– 1618.

doi : 10.1039/CT9252701604 .

^ Ernest C. Crocker (1922). "Application Of The Octet Theory To Single-Ring Aromatic Compounds".

J. Am. Chem. Soc.

44 (8): 1618– 1630.

Bibcode : 1922JAChS..44.1618C .

doi : 10.1021/ja01429a002 .

^ Henry Edward Armstrong (1890). "The structure of cycloid hydrocarbon".

Proceedings of the Chemical Society (London) .

6 (85): 95– 106.

doi : 10.1039/PL8900600095 .

^ Merino, Gabriel; Heine, Thomas; Seifert, Gotthard (2004). "The Induced Magnetic Field in Cyclic Molecules".

Chemistry – A European Journal .

10 (17): 4367.

doi : 10.1002/chem.200400457 .

PMID 15352120 .

^ Alexander Kuhn, Puravankara Sreeraj, Rainer Pöttgen, Hans-Dieter Wiemhöfer, Martin Wilkening,Paul Heitjans (2011). "Li NMR Spectroscopy on Crystalline Li12Si7: Experimental Evidence for the Aromaticity of the Planar Cyclopentadienyl-Analogous Si56− Rings".

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed .

50 (50): 12099– 12102.

doi : 10.1002/anie.201105081 .

PMID 22025292 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ D. Ajami, O. Oeckler, A. Simon, R. Herges (2003). "Synthesis of a Möbius aromatic hydrocarbon".

Nature .

426 (6968): 819– 21.

Bibcode : 2003Natur.426..819A .

doi : 10.1038/nature02224 .

PMID 14685233 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Claire Castro, Zhongfang Chen, Chaitanya S. Wannere, Haijun Jiao, William L. Karney, Michael Mauksch, Ralph Puchta, Nico J. R. van Eikema Hommes, Paul von R. Schleyer (2005). "Investigation of a Putative Möbius Aromatic Hydrocarbon. The Effect of Benzannelation on Möbius [4 n]Annulene Aromaticity".

J. Am. Chem. Soc.

127 (8): 2425– 2432.

Bibcode : 2005JAChS.127.2425C .

doi : 10.1021/ja0458165 .

PMID 15724997 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Rzepa, Henry S. (2005). "A Double-Twist Möbius-Aromatic Conformation of [14]Annulene".

Organic Letters .

7 (21): 4637– 9.

doi : 10.1021/ol0518333 .

PMID 16209498 .

^ Alberto Gobbi, Gemot Frenking (1993). "Y-Conjugated compounds: the equilibrium geometries and electronic structures of guanidine, guanidinium cation, urea, and 1,1-diaminoethylene".

Journal of the American Chemical Society .

115 (6): 2362– 2372.

Bibcode : 1993JAChS.115.2362G .

doi : 10.1021/ja00059a035 .

^ Kenneth B. Wiberg (1990). "Resonance interactions in acyclic systems. 2. Y-Conjugated anions and cations".

Journal of the American Chemical Society .

112 (11): 4177– 4182.

Bibcode : 1990JAChS.112.4177W .

doi : 10.1021/ja00167a011 .

^ R. Caminiti, A. Pieretti, L. Bencivenni, F. Ramondo, N. Sanna (1996). "Amidine N−C(N)−N Skeleton: Its Structure in Isolated and Hydrogen-Bonded Guanidines from ab Initio Calculations".

The Journal of Physical Chemistry .

100 (26): 10928– 10935.

doi : 10.1021/jp960311p .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) v t e Chemical bonds Intramolecular (strong) Covalent Electron deficiency 3c–2e 4c–2e 8c–2e Hypervalence 3c–4e Agostic Bent Coordinate (dipolar) Pi backbond Metal–ligand multiple bond Charge-shift Hapticity Conjugation Hyperconjugation Aromaticity homo bicyclo Metallic Metal aromaticity Ionic Intermolecular (weak) Van der Waals forces London dispersion Hydrogen Low-barrier Resonance-assisted Symmetric Dihydrogen bonds C–H···O interaction Noncovalent other Mechanical Halogen Chalcogen Metallophilic ( aurophilic ) Intercalation Stacking Cation–pi Anion–pi Salt bridge Bond cleavage Heterolysis Homolysis Electron counting rules Aromaticity Hückel's rule Baird's rule Möbius spherical Polyhedral skeletal electron pair theory Jemmis mno rules v t e Concepts in organic chemistry Aromaticity Covalent bonding Functional groups Nomenclature Organic compounds Organic reactions Organic synthesis Publications Spectroscopy Stereochemistry List of organic compounds v t e Topics in organic reactions Addition reaction Elimination reaction Polymerization Reagents Rearrangement reaction Redox reaction Regioselectivity Stereoselectivity Stereospecificity Substitution reaction A value Alpha effect Annulene Anomeric effect Antiaromaticity Aromatic ring current Aromaticity Baird's rule Baker–Nathan effect Baldwin's rules Bema Hapothle Beta-silicon effect Bicycloaromaticity Bredt's rule Bürgi–Dunitz angle Catalytic resonance theory Charge remote fragmentation Charge-transfer complex Clar's rule Conformational isomerism Conjugated system Conrotatory and disrotatory Curtin–Hammett principle Dynamic binding (chemistry) Edwards equation Effective molarity Electromeric effect Electron-rich Electron-withdrawing group Electronic effect Electrophile Evelyn effect Flippin–Lodge angle Free-energy relationship Grunwald–Winstein equation Hammett acidity function Hammett equation George S. Hammond Hammond's postulate Homoaromaticity Hückel's rule Hyperconjugation Inductive effect Kinetic isotope effect LFER solvent coefficients (data page) Marcus theory Markovnikov's rule Möbius aromaticity Möbius–Hückel concept More O'Ferrall–Jencks plot Negative hyperconjugation Neighbouring group participation 2-Norbornyl cation Nucleophile Kennedy J. P. Orton Passive binding Phosphaethynolate Polar effect Polyfluorene Ring strain Σ-aromaticity Spherical aromaticity Spiroaromaticity Steric effects Superaromaticity Swain–Lupton equation Taft equation Thorpe–Ingold effect Vinylogy Walsh diagram Woodward–Hoffmann rules Woodward's rules Y-aromaticity Yukawa–Tsuno equation Zaitsev's rule Σ-bishomoaromaticity List of organic reactions Carbon-carbon bond forming reactions Acetoacetic ester synthesis Acyloin condensation Aldol condensation Aldol reaction Alkane metathesis Alkyne metathesis Alkyne trimerisation Alkynylation Allan–Robinson reaction Arndt–Eistert reaction Auwers synthesis Aza-Baylis–Hillman reaction Barbier reaction Barton–Kellogg reaction Baylis–Hillman reaction Benary reaction Bergman cyclization Biginelli reaction Bingel reaction Blaise ketone synthesis Blaise reaction Blanc chloromethylation Bodroux–Chichibabin aldehyde synthesis Bouveault aldehyde synthesis Bucherer–Bergs reaction Buchner ring expansion Cadiot–Chodkiewicz coupling Carbonyl allylation Carbonyl olefin metathesis Castro–Stephens coupling Chan rearrangement Chan–Lam coupling Claisen condensation Claisen rearrangement Claisen-Schmidt condensation Combes quinoline synthesis Corey–Fuchs reaction Corey–House synthesis Coupling reaction Cross-coupling reaction Cross dehydrogenative coupling Cross-coupling partner Dakin–West reaction Darzens reaction Diels–Alder reaction Doebner reaction Wulff–Dötz reaction Ene reaction Enyne metathesis Ethenolysis Favorskii reaction Ferrier carbocyclization Friedel–Crafts reaction Fujimoto–Belleau reaction Fujiwara–Moritani reaction Fukuyama coupling Gabriel–Colman rearrangement Gattermann reaction Glaser coupling Grignard reaction Grignard reagent Hammick reaction Heck reaction Henry reaction Heterogeneous metal catalyzed cross-coupling High dilution principle Hiyama coupling Homologation reaction Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons reaction Hydrocyanation Hydrovinylation Hydroxymethylation Ivanov reaction Johnson–Corey–Chaykovsky reaction Julia olefination Julia–Kocienski olefination Kauffmann olefination Knoevenagel condensation Knorr pyrrole synthesis Kolbe–Schmitt reaction Kowalski ester homologation Kulinkovich reaction Kumada coupling Liebeskind–Srogl coupling Malonic ester synthesis Mannich reaction McMurry reaction Meerwein arylation Methylenation Michael reaction Minisci reaction Mizoroki-Heck vs. Reductive Heck Nef isocyanide reaction Nef synthesis Negishi coupling Nierenstein reaction Nitro-Mannich reaction Nozaki–Hiyama–Kishi reaction Olefin conversion technology Olefin metathesis Palladium–NHC complex Passerini reaction Peterson olefination Pfitzinger reaction Piancatelli rearrangement Pinacol coupling reaction Prins reaction Quelet reaction Ramberg–Bäcklund reaction Rauhut–Currier reaction Reformatsky reaction Reimer–Tiemann reaction Rieche formylation Ring-closing metathesis Robinson annulation Sakurai reaction Seyferth–Gilbert homologation Shapiro reaction Sonogashira coupling Stetter reaction Stille reaction Stollé synthesis Stork enamine alkylation Suzuki reaction Takai olefination Thermal rearrangement of aromatic hydrocarbons Thorpe reaction Ugi reaction Ullmann reaction Wagner-Jauregg reaction Weinreb ketone synthesis Wittig reaction Wurtz reaction Wurtz–Fittig reaction Zincke–Suhl reaction Homologation reactions Arndt–Eistert reaction Hooker reaction Kiliani–Fischer synthesis Kowalski ester homologation Methoxymethylenetriphenylphosphorane Seyferth–Gilbert homologation Wittig reaction Olefination reactions Bamford–Stevens reaction Barton–Kellogg reaction Boord olefin synthesis Chugaev elimination Cope reaction Corey–Winter olefin synthesis Dehydrohalogenation Elimination reaction Grieco elimination Hofmann elimination Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons reaction Hydrazone iodination Julia olefination Julia–Kocienski olefination Kauffmann olefination McMurry reaction Peterson olefination Ramberg–Bäcklund reaction Shapiro reaction Takai olefination Wittig reaction Carbon-heteroatom bond forming reactions Azo coupling Bartoli indole synthesis Boudouard reaction Cadogan–Sundberg indole synthesis Diazonium compound Esterification Grignard reagent Haloform reaction Hegedus indole synthesis Hurd–Mori 1,2,3-thiadiazole synthesis Kharasch–Sosnovsky reaction Knorr pyrrole synthesis Leimgruber–Batcho indole synthesis Mukaiyama hydration Nenitzescu indole synthesis Oxymercuration reaction Reed reaction Schotten–Baumann reaction Ullmann condensation Williamson ether synthesis Yamaguchi esterification Degradation reactions Barbier–Wieland degradation Bergmann degradation Edman degradation Emde degradation Gallagher–Hollander degradation Hofmann rearrangement Hooker reaction Isosaccharinic acid Marker degradation Ruff degradation Strecker degradation Von Braun amide degradation Weerman degradation Wohl degradation Organic redox reactions Acyloin condensation Adkins–Peterson reaction Akabori amino-acid reaction Alcohol oxidation Algar–Flynn–Oyamada reaction Amide reduction Andrussow process Angeli–Rimini reaction Aromatization Autoxidation Baeyer–Villiger oxidation Barton–McCombie deoxygenation Bechamp reduction Benkeser reaction Bergmann degradation Birch reduction Bohn–Schmidt reaction Bosch reaction Bouveault–Blanc reduction Boyland–Sims oxidation Cannizzaro reaction Carbonyl reduction Clemmensen reduction Collins oxidation Corey–Itsuno reduction Corey–Kim oxidation Corey–Winter olefin synthesis Criegee oxidation Dakin oxidation Davis oxidation Deoxygenation Dess–Martin oxidation DNA oxidation Elbs persulfate oxidation Emde degradation Eschweiler–Clarke reaction Étard reaction Fischer–Tropsch process Fleming–Tamao oxidation Fukuyama reduction Ganem oxidation Glycol cleavage Griesbaum coozonolysis Grundmann aldehyde synthesis Haloform reaction Hydrogenation Hydrogenolysis Hydroxylation Jones oxidation Kiliani–Fischer synthesis Kolbe electrolysis Kornblum oxidation Kornblum–DeLaMare rearrangement Leuckart reaction Ley oxidation Lindgren oxidation Lipid peroxidation Lombardo methylenation Luche reduction Markó–Lam deoxygenation McFadyen–Stevens reaction Meerwein–Ponndorf–Verley reduction Methionine sulfoxide Miyaura borylation Mozingo reduction Noyori asymmetric hydrogenation Omega oxidation Oppenauer oxidation Oxygen rebound mechanism Ozonolysis Parikh–Doering oxidation Pinnick oxidation Prévost reaction Reduction of nitro compounds Reductive amination Riley oxidation Rosenmund reduction Rubottom oxidation Sabatier reaction Sarett oxidation Selenoxide elimination Shapiro reaction Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation Epoxidation of allylic alcohols Sharpless epoxidation Sharpless oxyamination Stahl oxidation Staudinger reaction Stephen aldehyde synthesis Swern oxidation Transfer hydrogenation Wacker process Wharton reaction Whiting reaction Wohl–Aue reaction Wolff–Kishner reduction Wolffenstein–Böters reaction Zinin reaction Rearrangement reactions 1,2-rearrangement 1,2-Wittig rearrangement 2,3-sigmatropic rearrangement 2,3-Wittig rearrangement Achmatowicz reaction Alkyne zipper reaction Allen–Millar–Trippett rearrangement Allylic rearrangement Alpha-ketol rearrangement Amadori rearrangement Arndt–Eistert reaction Aza-Cope rearrangement Baker–Venkataraman rearrangement Bamberger rearrangement Banert cascade Beckmann rearrangement Benzilic acid rearrangement Bergman cyclization Bergmann degradation Boekelheide reaction Brook rearrangement Buchner ring expansion Carroll rearrangement Chan rearrangement Claisen rearrangement Cope rearrangement Corey–Fuchs reaction Cornforth rearrangement Criegee rearrangement Curtius rearrangement Demjanov rearrangement Di-π-methane rearrangement Dimroth rearrangement Divinylcyclopropane-cycloheptadiene rearrangement Dowd–Beckwith ring-expansion reaction Electrocyclic reaction Ene reaction Enyne metathesis Favorskii reaction Favorskii rearrangement Ferrier carbocyclization Ferrier rearrangement Fischer–Hepp rearrangement Fries rearrangement Fritsch–Buttenberg–Wiechell rearrangement Gabriel–Colman rearrangement Group transfer reaction Halogen dance rearrangement Hayashi rearrangement Hofmann rearrangement Hofmann–Martius rearrangement Ireland–Claisen rearrangement Jacobsen rearrangement Kornblum–DeLaMare rearrangement Kowalski ester homologation Lobry de Bruyn–Van Ekenstein transformation Lossen rearrangement McFadyen–Stevens reaction McLafferty rearrangement Meyer–Schuster rearrangement Mislow–Evans rearrangement Mumm rearrangement Myers allene synthesis Nazarov cyclization reaction Neber rearrangement Newman–Kwart rearrangement Overman rearrangement Oxy-Cope rearrangement Pericyclic reaction Piancatelli rearrangement Pinacol rearrangement Pummerer rearrangement Ramberg–Bäcklund reaction Ring expansion and contraction Ring-closing metathesis Rupe reaction Schmidt reaction Semipinacol rearrangement Seyferth–Gilbert homologation Sigmatropic reaction Skattebøl rearrangement Smiles rearrangement Sommelet–Hauser rearrangement Stevens rearrangement Stieglitz rearrangement Thermal rearrangement of aromatic hydrocarbons Tiffeneau–Demjanov rearrangement Vinylcyclopropane rearrangement Wagner–Meerwein rearrangement Wallach rearrangement Weerman degradation Westphalen–Lettré rearrangement Willgerodt rearrangement Wolff rearrangement Ring forming reactions 1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition Annulation Azide-alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition Baeyer–Emmerling indole synthesis Bartoli indole synthesis Bergman cyclization Biginelli reaction Bischler–Möhlau indole synthesis Bischler–Napieralski reaction Blum–Ittah aziridine synthesis Bobbitt reaction Bohlmann–Rahtz pyridine synthesis Borsche–Drechsel cyclization Bucherer carbazole synthesis Bucherer–Bergs reaction Cadogan–Sundberg indole synthesis Camps quinoline synthesis Chichibabin pyridine synthesis Cook–Heilbron thiazole synthesis Cycloaddition Darzens reaction Davis–Beirut reaction De Kimpe aziridine synthesis Debus–Radziszewski imidazole synthesis Dieckmann condensation Diels–Alder reaction Feist–Benary synthesis Ferrario–Ackermann reaction Fiesselmann thiophene synthesis Fischer indole synthesis Fischer oxazole synthesis Friedländer synthesis Gewald reaction Graham reaction Hantzsch pyridine synthesis Hegedus indole synthesis Hemetsberger indole synthesis Hofmann–Löffler reaction Hurd–Mori 1,2,3-thiadiazole synthesis Iodolactonization Isay reaction Jacobsen epoxidation Johnson–Corey–Chaykovsky reaction Knorr pyrrole synthesis Knorr quinoline synthesis Kröhnke pyridine synthesis Kulinkovich reaction Larock indole synthesis Madelung synthesis Nazarov cyclization reaction Nenitzescu indole synthesis Niementowski quinazoline synthesis Niementowski quinoline synthesis Paal–Knorr synthesis Paternò–Büchi reaction Pechmann condensation Petrenko-Kritschenko piperidone synthesis Pictet–Spengler reaction Pomeranz–Fritsch reaction Prilezhaev reaction Pschorr cyclization Reissert indole synthesis Ring-closing metathesis Robinson annulation Sharpless epoxidation Simmons–Smith reaction Skraup reaction Urech hydantoin synthesis Van Leusen reaction Wenker synthesis Cycloaddition 1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition 4+4 Photocycloaddition (4+3) cycloaddition 6+4 Cycloaddition Alkyne trimerisation Aza-Diels–Alder reaction Azide-alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition Bradsher cycloaddition Cheletropic reaction Conia-ene reaction Cyclopropanation Diazoalkane 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition Diels–Alder reaction Enone–alkene cycloadditions Hexadehydro Diels–Alder reaction Intramolecular Diels–Alder cycloaddition Inverse electron-demand Diels–Alder reaction Ketene cycloaddition McCormack reaction Metal-centered cycloaddition reactions Nitrone-olefin (3+2) cycloaddition Oxo-Diels–Alder reaction Ozonolysis Pauson–Khand reaction Povarov reaction Prato reaction Retro-Diels–Alder reaction Staudinger synthesis Trimethylenemethane cycloaddition Vinylcyclopropane (5+2) cycloaddition Wagner-Jauregg reaction Heterocycle forming reactions Algar–Flynn–Oyamada reaction Allan–Robinson reaction Auwers synthesis Bamberger triazine synthesis Banert cascade Barton–Zard reaction Bernthsen acridine synthesis Bischler–Napieralski reaction Bobbitt reaction Boger pyridine synthesis Borsche–Drechsel cyclization Bucherer carbazole synthesis Bucherer–Bergs reaction Chichibabin pyridine synthesis Cook–Heilbron thiazole synthesis Diazoalkane 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition Einhorn–Brunner reaction Erlenmeyer–Plöchl azlactone and amino-acid synthesis Feist–Benary synthesis Fischer oxazole synthesis Gabriel–Colman rearrangement Gewald reaction Hantzsch ester Hantzsch pyridine synthesis Herz reaction Knorr pyrrole synthesis Kröhnke pyridine synthesis Lectka enantioselective beta-lactam synthesis Lehmstedt–Tanasescu reaction Niementowski quinazoline synthesis Nitrone-olefin (3+2) cycloaddition Paal–Knorr synthesis Pellizzari reaction Pictet–Spengler reaction Pomeranz–Fritsch reaction Prilezhaev reaction Robinson–Gabriel synthesis Stollé synthesis Urech hydantoin synthesis Wenker synthesis Wohl–Aue reaction Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aromaticity&oldid=1296977509 " Categories : Aromatic compounds Physical organic chemistry Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2022 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 12:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aromaticity 42 languages Add topic

