Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 1 Corinthians 13 1.2 Aquinas 2 Teaching by denomination Toggle Teaching by denomination subsection 2.1 Catholic Church 2.2 Moravian Church 2.3 Anglican Communion 3 Moral theology 4 Comparison of cardinal and theological virtues 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Theological virtues 27 languages Brezhoneg Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Саха тыла Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian ethics Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Theological virtues are virtues associated in Christian theology and philosophy with salvation resulting from the grace of God .

[ 1 ] Virtues are traits or qualities which dispose one to conduct oneself in a morally good manner. Traditionally the theological virtues have been named faith , hope , and charity ( love ). They are coupled with the four natural or cardinal virtues , and opposed to the seven deadly sins .

The medieval Catholic philosopher Thomas Aquinas explained that these virtues are called theological virtues "first, because their object is God, inasmuch as they direct us aright to God: secondly, because they are infused in us by God alone: thirdly, because these virtues are not made known to us, save by Divine revelation, contained in Holy Writ".

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] 1 Corinthians 13 [ edit ] The first mention in Christian literature of the three theological virtues is in St. Paul's first letter to the Thessalonians 1:3, "...calling to mind your work of faith and labor of love and endurance in hope..." [ 3 ] In 1 Thessalonians 5:8, he refers to this triad of virtues again, "But since we are of the day, let us be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love and the helmet that is hope for salvation." [ 4 ] In 1 Corinthians 13 , Paul places the greater emphasis on Charity (Love). "So faith, hope, love remain, these three; but the greatest of these is love." First, because it informs the other two: "It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things." According to Augustine of Hippo , from a temporal perspective, love lasts, while "Hope isn't hope if its object is seen," and faith gives way to possession.

[ 5 ] This view is shared by Gregory of Nyssa .

[ 5 ] Aquinas [ edit ] Aquinas found an interconnection of practical wisdom ( prudentia ) and moral virtue (e.g. courage without prudence risks becoming mere foolhardiness). This is frequently termed "the Unity of the Virtues." [ 6 ] Aquinas stated that theological virtues are so called "because they have God for their object, both in so far as by them we are properly directed to Him, and because they are infused into our souls by God alone, as also, finally, because we come to know of them only by Divine revelation in the Sacred Scriptures".

[ 2 ] In his treatment of the virtues, Aquinas viewed the theological virtues as being the product of habitual grace. According to Aquinas, this grace, through the theological virtues, allows humanity to become agents in meritorious action that is beyond their own natural ability. In this way it is supernatural.

[ 1 ] Aquinas says "Faith has the character of a virtue, not because of the things it believes, for faith is of things that appear not, but because it adheres to the testimony of one in whom truth is infallibly found".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Aquinas further connected the theological virtues with the cardinal virtues. He views the supernatural inclinations of the theological virtues, caused by habitual grace, to find their fulfillment in being acted upon in the cardinal virtues.

[ clarification needed ] [ 1 ] Teaching by denomination [ edit ] Catholic Church [ edit ] The Catechism of the Catholic Church teaches that faith, hope, and love (charity) "dispose Christians to live in a relationship with the Holy Trinity. They have God for their origin, their motive, and their object – God known by faith, hoped in, and loved for His own sake." [ 9 ] Moravian Church [ edit ] Among essential beliefs, the Moravian Church teaches that "God creates; God redeems; God blesses. And we respond in faith, in love, and in hope." As such, Moravian Christians teach to judge themselves "by how deep our faith is, how expansive our love is, and how life affirming our hope is." [ 10 ] Anglican Communion [ edit ] Churches of the Anglican Communion also follow Augustine and Aquinas. "Faith is a matter of knowledge of God which perfects the intellect... Hope is a matter of the perfection of the will... Love is a matter of perfection itself as love is the perfection of all powers." [ 11 ] Richard Hooker said regarding faith, that its "principal object is that eternal verity which hath discovered the treasures of hidden wisdom in Christ"; of hope that its "highest object is that everlasting goodness which in Christ doth quicken the dead"; of charity, that its "final object is that incomprehensible beauty which shineth in the countenance of Christ the Son of the Living God".

[ 12 ] Moral theology [ edit ] The three Virtues in Bom Jesus , Braga A person receives the theological virtues by their being "infused"—through Divine grace —into the person.

[ 13 ] The theological virtues are so named because their object is the divine being ( theos ).

Faith is the infused virtue, by which the intellect, by a movement of the will, assents to the supernatural truths of Revelation, not on the motive of intrinsic evidence, but on the sole ground of the infallible authority of God revealing.

[ 13 ] According to Hugh Pope "[W]hat God says is supremely credible, though not necessarily supremely intelligible for us." [ 8 ] The First Vatican Council (III, iii;) stated that "faith is a supernatural virtue by which we with the inspiration and assistance of God's grace, believe those things to be true which He has revealed... although the assent of faith is in no sense blind, yet no one can assent to the Gospel teaching in the way necessary for salvation without the illumination of the Holy Spirit..." [ 8 ] It is a gratuitous gift of God.

Hope is defined as a Divinely infused virtue, which acts upon the will, by which one trusts, with confidence grounded on the Divine assistance, to attain life everlasting.

[ 13 ] Its opposite is the sin of despair.

[ 2 ] Charity is a Divinely infused virtue, inclining the human will to cherish God for his own sake above all things, and man for the sake of God. To love God is to wish Him all honour and glory and every good, and to endeavour, as far as one can, to obtain it for Him.

John 14:23 notes a unique feature of reciprocity that makes charity a veritable friendship of man with God. "Whoever loves me will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him." [ 14 ] Lack of love may give place to hatred , wrath , or indifference.

Comparison of cardinal and theological virtues [ edit ] The moral virtues are acquired by practice and habit. Catholic moral theology holds that the theological virtues differ from the cardinal virtues in that they cannot be obtained by human effort, but are infused by God into a person. The Episcopal Church shares this view. "As distinct from the cardinal virtues which we can develop, the theological virtues are the perfection of human powers given by the grace of God." [ 11 ] Like the cardinal virtues, an individual who exercises these virtues strengthens and increases them, i.e., they are more disposed to practice them.

[ 15 ] Following Augustine , Aquinas also recognized a separate but related type of moral virtue which is also infused by God. The distinction lies both in their source and end. The moral virtue of temperance recognizes food as a good that sustains life, but guards against the sin of gluttony . The infused virtue of temperance disposes the individual to practice fasting and abstinence. The infused moral virtues are connected to the theological virtue of Charity.

[ 15 ] [ 13 ] Pope Benedict XVI wrote three encyclicals about the theological virtues: Deus caritas est (about love), Spe salvi (about hope), and Lumen fidei (about faith: this encyclical was written both by Pope Benedict XVI and by Pope Francis ).

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Christian ethics – Branch of theology that defines virtuous and sinful behavior from a Christian perspective Seven deadly sins – Set of vices in Christian theology Seven virtues – Seven virtues in Christian tradition References [ edit ] ^ a b c Rziha, John Michael (2009).

Perfecting Human Actions: St. Thomas Aquinas on Human Participation in Eternal Law . CUA Press. pp.

143– 149.

ISBN 9780813216720 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ a b c Aquinas, Thomas.

"First part of the second part; Question 62; Article one;" (PDF) .

Summa Theologica .

^ 1 Thessalonians 1:3 and the associated note .

^ 1 Thessalonians 5:8 .

^ a b Kovacs, Judith L. (25 October 2005).

1 Corinthians . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 227.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2577-3 .

^ Annas, Julia (1993).

The Morality of Happiness . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. pp.

73– 84.

^ Aquinas, Thomas (1259).

De Veritate . xiv.8.

^ a b c Pope, Hugh (1909).

"Faith" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church, paragraph 1840" .

vatican.va . Retrieved 2022-10-18 .

^ "In Essentials, Unity: Understanding the essential things" .

Moravian Church . 24 August 2018 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 .

^ a b "Theological Virtues" .

An Episcopal Dictionary of the Church .

^ Hooker, Richard (1597).

Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity . I.xi.

as quoted in Kirk, Kenneth E. (1920).

Some Principles of Moral Theology . London, England: Longmans, Green and Co. Ltd.

p. 42, note 6 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Waldron, M.A. (1912). " Virtue ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Sollier, Joseph (1910).

"Love (Theological Virtue)" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b Drefcinski, Shane.

"A Very Short Primer on St. Thomas Aquinas' Account of the Various Virtues" . Archived from the original on 2021-06-21.

^ Speciale, Alessandro (4 July 2013).

"The light of faith: origin, history and horizon of the christianism" .

La Stampa . Turin. Archived from the original on 2015-02-11 . Retrieved 19 October 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hoeberichts, Jan (2003).

Paradise Restored: The Social Ethics of Francis of Assisi, A Commentary on Francis's "Salutation of the Virtues" . Franciscan Press.

ISBN 978-0-8199-1008-0 .

Slater, Thomas (1925).

"Book 5: On the Theological Virtues" .

A manual of moral theology for English-speaking countries . Burns Oates & Washbourne Limited.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category:Faith, Hope and Charity .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to First Epistle to the Corinthians .

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theological_virtues&oldid=1297916031 " Categories : Christian ethics Christian terminology Virtue Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 Commons link is locally defined Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 09:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theological virtues 27 languages Add topic

