Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 The Gentleman's Magazine 3 Death 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Edward Cave 29 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Ripoarisch Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English printer, editor and publisher For Sir Edward Cave, Baronet, see Cave baronets .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Edward Cave Born 27 February 1691 Died 10 January 1754 Edward Cave, engraving by Edward Scriven after a painting by Francis Kyte c.

1740 The Gentleman's Magazine , May 1759, "By SYLVANUS URBAN, Gent." Edward Cave (27 February 1691 – 10 January 1754) was an English printer, editor and publisher. He coined the term " magazine " for a periodical, founding The Gentleman's Magazine in 1731, and was the first publisher to successfully fashion a wide-ranging publication.

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] The son of a cobbler, Cave was born in Newton near Rugby, Warwickshire , and attended Rugby School , but was expelled after being accused of stealing from the headmaster Henry Holyoake . He worked at a variety of jobs, including timber merchant, reporter and printer.

The Gentleman's Magazine [ edit ] Cave conceived the idea of a periodical that would cover every topic the educated public was interested in, from commerce to poetry, and tried to convince several London printers and booksellers to take up the idea. When no one showed any interest, he took on the task himself.

The Gentleman's Magazine was launched in 1731 and soon became the most influential and most imitated periodical of its time. It has been credited with giving the name magazine to its genre of periodical writing and editorial content. It originated as a repository of articles culled from other publications, mainly books and pamphlets. The magazine's motto was E pluribus unum, which later became the tradition motto of the United States.

Samuel Johnson joined the magazine in 1738, after which it started publishing reports and original writing.

[ 2 ] Cave too often contributed pieces to the Magazine under the pseudonym of Sylvanus Urban .

[ 3 ] Cave was an astute businessman. He devoted all his energy to the magazine, and rarely left its offices at St John's Gate, Clerkenwell . He made use of many contributors, most famously Samuel Johnson , who was always grateful to Cave for having provided his principal employment for many years. The magazine also made Cave wealthy.

He also obtained a licence from Lewis Paul for 250 spindles for his patent roller-spinning machine, a precursor of the water frame .  In 1742 he bought Marvel's Mill at Northampton and converted this to a cotton mill , probably the first water-powered spinning mill in the world.  This was apparently profitable, but only modestly so. It closed in 1761, or soon after.

Death [ edit ] Cave suffered from gout . He is buried at St. James Church , Clerkenwell .

References [ edit ] ^ "The History of Magazines" . Magazines.com. 16 September 2016.

^ "The Gentleman's Magazine | 18th-Century, Literary, Reviews | Britannica" .

Britannica . Retrieved 30 January 2025 .

^ "Edward Cave | Collections Online" .

British Museum .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2023 . Retrieved 30 January 2025 .

"Cave, Edward" .

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Edward Cave at Wikimedia Commons Works by or about Edward Cave at Wikisource Online page images of Gentlemen's Magazine Covering v. 1 (1731) to v. 20 (1750).

Daily Life in Georgian England as Reported in the Gentleman's Magazine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edward_Cave&oldid=1305491546 " Categories : 1691 births 1754 deaths British magazine publishers (people) People from Rugby, Warwickshire People educated at Rugby School English editors 18th-century English businesspeople 18th-century British journalists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Use British English from May 2012 Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 10:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edward Cave 29 languages Add topic

