Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Power and influence 2 Audience-based view 3 Family law 4 Canon law 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Legitimation 16 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia Jawa Кыргызча Lietuvių Norsk bokmål Português Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process by which something becomes accepted within a society Legitimation , legitimization ( US ), or legitimisation ( UK ) is the act of providing legitimacy .  Legitimation in the social sciences refers to the process whereby an act, process, or ideology becomes legitimate by its attachment to norms and values within a given society . It is the process of making something acceptable and normative to a group or audience .

Legitimate power is the right to exercise control over others by virtue of the authority of one's superior organizational position or status.

Power and influence [ edit ] The legitimation of power can be understood using Max Weber 's traditional bases of power.  In a bureaucracy , individuals gain legitimate power through positions that are widely recognized as granting authority. There is no inherent right to wield power.  For example, a president can exercise power and authority because the position is fully legitimated by society as a whole. 
In another example, if an individual attempts to convince others that something is "right," they can invoke generally accepted arguments that support their agenda .

Advocacy groups must legitimate their courses of action based on invoking specific social norms and values. Invoking these norms and values allows the group to proceed in a rational and coherent manner with the expectation that their subsequent behavior is legitimated by the norms and values which guide their organizations.

Audience-based view [ edit ] Sociologists and organizational ecologists have shown that legitimation originates from consensus among certain agents (an audience) on which features and behaviors of an actor (a candidate) should be viewed as appropriate and desirable within a widespread system of social codes.

[ 1 ] An audience-based theory of legitimation posits that various social audiences develop expectations about what organizations can or should do and accordingly evaluate organizational action. Candidate organizations that pass the code test are legitimated in the social environment. One of the consequences is that they enjoy greater survival.

[ 2 ] Early elaborations of this idea include attempts to understand the variations of codes across different audiences; [ 3 ] the impact of code violation on organizational performance; [ 4 ] the role of  the network connecting social actors and their audiences in shaping the formation and operation of social codes.

[ 5 ] Family law [ edit ] Main article: Legitimacy (family law) Legitimation can also be used as a legal term where a father of a child born out of wedlock becomes the child's legal father.  Prior to legitimation, the child is said to be illegitimate.  Once a child has been legitimated, he or she is entitled to such benefits as ordained by law as he or she would if that man had been married to the child's mother at the time of the child's birth. (Some benefits are still withheld under various systems, such as the British peerage .) The father is responsible for providing support to the child and the child is entitled to inherit from the father.

While legitimation can be as simple as a statement by the father, in some jurisdictions the father must officially recognise the child. This option is typically also available to non-biological fathers ("social fathers").

Canon law [ edit ] Legitimation is a term in Roman Catholic canon law to remove the canonical irregularity of illegitimacy for candidates for the priesthood.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Delegitimization Legitimacy (political) Legitimation crisis Machiavellianism Rationalization (psychology) Structural abuse Symbolic violence References [ edit ] ^ Zuckerman, E. W. (1999) “The categorical imperative: Securities analysts and the legitimacy discount.” American Journal of Sociology , 104: 1398-1438.

^ Hannan, M. T., L. Pólos, and G. R. Carroll (2007) Logics of Organization Theory: Audiences, Codes, and Ecologies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

^ Pontikes, E. (2012) "Two Sides of the Same Coin: How Ambiguous Classification Affects Multiple Audiences' Evaluations," Administrative Science Quarterly, 57(1) 81-118.

^ Monin Philippe, Duran Rodolphe, Rao Hayagreeva (2007). Code and conduct in French cuisine: Impact of code changes on external evaluations. Strategic Management Journal, 28 (5).

^ Cattani, G., Ferriani, S., Negro, G & F. Perretti (2008) “The Structure of Consensus: Network Ties, Legitimation and Exit Rates of U.S. Feature Film Producer Organizations”, Administrative Science Quarterly, 2008, 53(2): 145-182.

[1] ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Legitimation" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legitimation&oldid=1296855974 " Categories : Family law Legitimacy law Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 18:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legitimation 16 languages Add topic

