Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Demographics 3 Notable PNG-Australians 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Papua New Guinean Australians Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Papua New Guinean Australians Total population 2021 Census : 29,995 (by birth) [ 1 ] 22,664 (by ancestry) [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations Queensland 14,500 New South Wales 5,428 Victoria 2,534 Western Australia 1,763 Torres Strait Islands 365 (by ancestry), 148 (by birth) [ 3 ] Languages Australian English · Papua New Guinean English · Tok Pisin · Hiri Motu · Motu · Other Papuan languages Religion Christianity (Predominantly Roman Catholicism ) · Other Related ethnic groups Papuans , Aboriginal Australian Papua New Guinean Australians ( Tok Pisin : pipol bilong Papua Niugini long Ostrelia ) are the citizens and residents of Australia (including the Torres Strait Islands , where 6.5% of all people claimed Papua New Guinean ancestry) [ 3 ] who were born in Papua New Guinea (PNG) or have Papua New Guinean ancestry.

Due to the country's proximity, the vast majority of Papua New Guinean Australians live in Queensland , particularly in Far North Queensland and the Torres Strait Islands .

Cairns , the largest city in Far North Queensland, has the highest number of Papua New Guineans than anywhere outside Papua New Guinea itself.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] A handful of people from Papua New Guinea, crew members of boats and mission-sponsored villagers, visited Australia in the 1870s. In the early 1880s, more than 3000 Papuan workers were recruited to work in the sugarcane industry in Queensland. A majority of these labourers later returned to Papua New Guinea, but a minority remained in Australia.

[ 5 ] From 1914 to 1975, Papua New Guinea was administered by Australia, divided into the Territory of Papua and the Territory of New Guinea (a League of Nations mandate ). Despite being administered by Australia, the indigenous peoples of the island were nonetheless subject to the White Australia policy . As a result, only limited numbers of Papuans were allowed to enter the rest of Australia, notably to work in the Queensland pearling industry.

[ 6 ] The number of Papua New Guineans in Australia is considered relatively small, given the countries are neighbours and PNG's status as a former Australian territory. Other Pacific island countries have much larger populations in Australia.

Demographics [ edit ] Percentage of people in the Torres Strait Islands with Papua New Guinean ancestry, as of the 2021 census .

<5% 5–10% 10–15% 15–20% >20% At the time of the 2021 Australian census , there were 22,664 people of Papua New Guinean descent in Australia and 29,995 Papua New Guinea-born people residing in the country. The gap between the two figures reflects the fact that many of those born in PNG were the children of Australian expatriates; only 8,752 (less than one-third) of Australian residents born in PNG reported that they were of Papua New Guinean ancestry.

[ 7 ] Notable PNG-Australians [ edit ] Further information: Category:Australian people of Papua New Guinean descent and Category:Papua New Guinean emigrants to Australia See also [ edit ] Portal:Australia Papuan people Australia–Papua New Guinea relations References [ edit ] ^ "Birthplace | Australia | Community profile" .

profile.id.com.au .

^ "Ancestry | Australia | Community profile" .

profile.id.com.au . Archived from the original on 21 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 October 2022 .

^ a b "2016 Torres Strait Islands, Census All persons QuickStats | Australian Bureau of Statistics" . Archived from the original on 18 September 2020 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Regions we visit" .

^ "Community Information Summary - Papua New Guinea-born" (PDF) .

Department of Home Affairs . 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2024 .

^ "History of immigration from Papua New Guinea" . Museum Victoria . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ Wolters, Ted (17 March 2016).

"Australia-PNG relations: Decades of missed opportunities" .

The Interpreter .

Lowy Institute . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

v t e Papua New Guinean diaspora Australia Canada Fiji Indonesia New Zealand Solomon Islands United Kingdom United States Vanuatu v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Papua_New_Guinean_Australians&oldid=1303804324 " Categories : Oceanian diaspora in Australia Australian people of Papua New Guinean descent Papua New Guinean diaspora Hidden categories: Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Tok Pisin-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 04:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Papua New Guinean Australians Add languages Add topic

