Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Social background, family and disciples Toggle Social background, family and disciples subsection 2.1 "Magical" birth 2.2 Parents 2.3 Family 2.4 Ancestors 3 Masters 4 Lifestyle 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Religious works 5.1.1 Tantraloka 5.1.2 Tantrasara 5.2 Devotional hymns 5.3 Philosophical works 5.4 Poetical and dramatic works 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Abhinavagupta 34 languages العربية বাংলা Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Lietuvių മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Mirandés नेपाली Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian philosopher and writer (c.950–1016) Abhinavagupta Personal life Born Shankara c. 950 CE Kashmir Died c. 1016 CE Mangam , Kashmir Notable work(s) Tantrāloka etc Known for Doctrine of Vibration ( spanda ) Religious life Religion Hinduism Creed Kashmir Shaivism Religious career Influenced Śambhunātha , Lakṣmaṇagupta , Bhūtirāja Part of a series on Eastern philosophy China Confucianism Classical Confucius Mencius Xun Zi Dong Zhongshu Zheng Xuan Wang Yun Neo-Confucianism Han Yu Zhou Dunyi Zhang Zai Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Shao Yong Zhu Xi Lu Jiuyuan Wang Shouren Liu Zongzhou Li Zhi Wang Fuzhi Huang Zongxi Gu Yanwu Dai Zhen New Confucianism Kang Youwei Tan Sitong Liang Shuming Xiong Shili Feng Youlan Mou Zongsan Du Weiming Buddhism Han Buddhism Tientai Zhiyi Huayan school Fazang Guifeng Zongmi East Asian Mādhyamaka Jizang Kumārajīva Yogācāra Xuanzang Chinese Chan Bodhidharma Huineng Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Sakya Pandita Nyingma Longchenpa Gelug Tsongkhapa Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Daoism Classical Laozi Zhuangzi Lie Yukou Neo-Daoism Wang Bi Ruan Ji Guo Xiang Ge Hong Cheng Xuanying Hundred Schools of Thought Legalism Guan Zhong Han Feizi Shang Yang Li Si Mohism Mozi Military and Strategy Sun Tzu Wu Qi Modern Hong Xiuquan Hong Rengan Yan Fu Zhang Taiyan Sun Yat-sen Lu Xun Dai Jitao Li Dazhao Chen Duxiu Ai Siqi Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhang Chunqiao Teng Wensheng Wang Huning Yi Junqing Zhao Tingyang Wang Hui Qin Hui Li Zehou India Āstika (orthodox) Vedic philosophy Agastya Aruni Ashtavakra Atri Vashistha Yajnavalkya Mimamsa Jaimini Vedanta Advaita Badarayana Gaudapada Adi Shankara Dvaita Madhvacharya Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Sri Vaishnavism Ramanuja Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Nyaya Gotama Navya-Nyāya Gangesha Upadhyaya Vaisheshika Kanada Nāstika (heterodox) Ājīvika Charvaka Kashmir Shaivism Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijna Tantra Tamil Valluvam Valluvar Other Chanakya General topics Ahimsa Atomism Atman Ātman (Hinduism) Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Artha Anekantavada Brahman Dharma Indian logic Karma Kama Maya Moksha Nondualism Samadhi Pramana Yoga Jainism Haribhadra Umaswati Buddhism The Buddha Traditions Madhyamika Nagarjuna Yogacara Vasubandhu Dharmakirti Indian logic Dignāga Topics Dukkha Anatta Anicca Maitrī Nirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Emptiness Japan Traditions Japanese Buddhism Japanese Zen Sōtō school Dogen Rinzai school Eisai Shingon Kukai Japanese Confucianism Tokugawa Mitsukuni Fujiwara Seika Hayashi Razan Nakae Tōju Itō Jinsai Ogyū Sorai Kokugaku Motoori Norinaga Modern Thought Statism Fukuzawa Yukichi Tokutomi Soho Kita Ikki Kyoto School Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki liberalism and Marxism Masao Maruyama Kojin Karatani Hiroki Azuma Chizuko Ueno Korea Traditions Korean Buddhism Wonhyo Uisang Hwaeom Uicheon Cheontae Jinul Seon Korean Confucianism Persons Chŏng Tojŏn Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk Yi Ŏnjŏk Yi Hwang Yi I Yi Ik Pak Chiwŏn Chŏng Yagyong Kim Chŏnghŭi Choe Han-gi Topics Silhak , Seohak Donghak Choe Je-u Modern Thought Persons Jaegwon Kim Topics Minjung theology Juche Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Shaivism Deities Parameshvara (Supreme being) Shiva Sadasiva Bhairava Rudra Virabhadra Shakti Parvati Sati Durga Kali Ganesha Kartikeya Forms of Shiva Others Scriptures and texts Vedas Agama - Tantras Shivasutras Tirumurai Vachanas Svetasvatara Philosophy Three Components Pati Pashu Pasam Three bondages Anava Karma Maya other aspects 36 Tattvas Yoga Satkaryavada Abhasavada Svatantrya Aham Practices Vibhuti Rudraksha Panchakshara Bilva Maha Shivaratri Yamas - Niyamas Guru - Linga - Jangam Schools Ati marga Pashupata Kalamukha Kapalika Mantra marga Saiddhantika Siddhantism Non - Saiddhantika Kashmir Shaivism Pratyabhijna Vama Dakshina Kaula : Trika - Yamala - Kubjika - Netra Others Nath Inchegeri Veerashaivism / Lingayats Siddharism Sroutaism Aghori Indonesian Scholars Lakulisha Abhinavagupta Vasugupta Utpaladeva Nayanars Manikkavacakar Meykandar Nirartha Basava Sharana Srikantha Appayya Navnath Related Nandi Tantrism Bhakti Jyotirlinga Shiva Temples Hinduism portal v t e Abhinavagupta ( Devanāgarī अभिनवगुप्तः; c. 950 – 1016 CE [ 1 ] [ 2 ] : 27 ) was a philosopher , mystic and aesthetician from Kashmir .

[ 3 ] He was also considered an influential musician , poet , dramatist , exegete , theologian , and logician [ 4 ] [ 5 ] – a polymathic personality who exercised strong influences on Indian culture .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Abhinavagupta was born in a Kānyakubja Brāhmin family of scholars and mystics whose ancestors immigrated from Kannauj on invitation by the great king of Kashmir, Lalitaditya Muktapida .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] He studied all the schools of philosophy and art of his time under the guidance of as many as fifteen (or more) teachers and gurus .

[ 2 ] : 35 In his long life he completed over 35 works, the largest and most famous of which is Tantrāloka , an encyclopedic treatise on all the philosophical and practical aspects of Kaula and Trika (known today as Kashmir Shaivism ). Another one of his very important contributions was in the field of philosophy of aesthetics with his famous Abhinavabhāratī commentary of Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharata Muni .

[ 11 ] Life [ edit ] "Abhinavagupta" was not his real name, rather a title he earned from his Guru, meaning "competence and authoritativeness".

[ 2 ] : 20 [ 12 ] In his analysis, Jayaratha (1150–1200 AD) [ 2 ] : 92 – who was Abhinavagupta's most important commentator – also reveals three more meanings: "being ever vigilant", "being present everywhere" and "protected by praises".

[ 13 ] : 4 Raniero Gnoli, the only Sanskrit scholar who completed a translation of Tantrāloka in a European language, mentions that "Abhinava" also means "new", [ 14 ] as a reference to the ever-new creative force of his mystical experience.

From Jayaratha, we learn that Abhinavagupta was in possession of all the six qualities required for the recipients of the tremendous level of śaktipāta , as described in the sacred texts (Śrīpūrvaśāstra): [ 15 ] an unflinching faith in God, realisation of mantras , control over objective principles (referring to the 36 tattvas ), successful conclusion of all the activities undertaken, poetic creativity and spontaneous knowledge of all disciplines.

[ 2 ] : 21 Abhinavagupta's creation is well equilibrated between the branches of the triad ( Trika ): will ( icchā ), knowledge ( jñāna ), action ( kriyā ); his works also include devotional songs, academical/philosophical works [ 2 ] : 20 and works describing ritual/yogic practices.

[ 16 ] As an author, he is considered a systematiser of the philosophical thought. He reconstructed, rationalised and orchestrated the philosophical knowledge into a more coherent form, [ 17 ] assessing all the available sources of his time, not unlike a modern scientific researcher.

Various contemporary scholars have characterised Abhinavagupta as a "brilliant scholar and saint", [ 18 ] "the pinnacle of the development of Kaśmir Śaivism" [ 18 ] and "in possession of yogic realization".

[ 2 ] : 20 Social background, family and disciples [ edit ] "Magical" birth [ edit ] The term by which Abhinavagupta himself defines his origin is "yoginībhū", 'born of a yoginī '.

[ 2 ] : 20 [ 19 ] In Kashmir Shaivism and especially in Kaula it is considered that a progeny of parents "established in the divine essence of Bhairava ", [ 20 ] is endowed with exceptional spiritual and intellectual prowess. Such a child is supposed to be "the depository of knowledge", who "even as a child in the womb, has the form of Shiva ", [ 13 ] to enumerate but a few of the classical attributes of his kind.

Parents [ edit ] Abhinavagupta was born in a Kanyakubja Brahmin family in Kashmir.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] His mother, Vimalā ( Vimalakalā ) died when Abhinavagupta was just two years old; [ 23 ] [ 2 ] : 31 as a consequence of losing his mother, of whom he was reportedly very attached, [ 15 ] he grew more distant from worldly life and focused all the more on spiritual endeavour.

The father, Narasiṃhgupt, after his wife's death favoured an ascetic lifestyle, while raising his three children. He had a cultivated mind and a heart "outstandingly adorned with devotion to Mahesvara (Shiva)" [ 23 ] (in Abhinavagupta's own words). He was Abhinavagupta's first teacher, instructing him in grammar , logic and literature .

[ 2 ] : 30 Family [ edit ] Abhinavagupta had a brother and a sister. His brother, Manoratha, was a well-versed devotee of Shiva.

[ 2 ] : 22 His sister, Ambā (probable name, according to Navjivan Rastogi), devoted herself to worship after the death of her husband in late life.

His cousin Karṇa demonstrated even from his youth that he grasped the essence of Śaivism and was detached of the world. His wife was presumably Abhinavagupta's older sister Ambā, [ 2 ] : 24 who looked with reverence upon her illustrious brother. Ambā and Karṇa had a son, Yogeśvaridatta, who was precociously talented in yoga [ 2 ] : 23 Abhinavagupta also mentions his disciple Rāmadeva as faithfully devoted to scriptural study and serving his master.

[ 2 ] : 24 Another cousin was Kṣema, possibly the same as Abhinavagupta's illustrious disciple Kṣemarāja. Mandra, a childhood friend of Karṇa, was their host in a suburban residence; he was not only rich and in possession of a pleasing personality, but also equally learned.

[ 2 ] : 25 And last but not least, Vatasikā, Mandra's aunt, who got a special mention from Abhinavagupta for caring for him with exceptional dedication and concern; to express his gratitude, Abhinavagupta declared that Vatasikā deserved the credit for the successful completion of his work.

[ 2 ] : 26 The emerging picture here is that Abhinavagupta lived in a nurturing and protected environment, where his creative energies got all the support they required. Everyone around him was filled with spiritual fervor and had taken Abhinavagupta as their spiritual master. Such a supporting group of family and friends was equally necessary as his personal qualities of genius, to complete a work of the magnitude of Tantrāloka .

Ancestors [ edit ] By Abhinavagupta's own account, his most remote known ancestor was called Atrigupta, born in antarved Kānyakubja in Madhyadesha , i.e. the Middle Country. From Madhyadeśa he travelled to Kashmir at the request of king Lalitāditya , [ 2 ] : 28 [ 13 ] : 3 around year 740 CE.

[ 24 ] Masters [ edit ] Abhinavagupta is famous for his voracious thirst for knowledge. To study he took many teachers (as many as fifteen), [ 2 ] : 33 both mystical philosophers and scholars. He approached Vaiṣṇavas , Buddhists , Śiddhānta Śaivists , and the Trika scholars.

Among the most prominent of his teachers, he enumerates four, two of whom were Vāmanātha, who instructed him in dualistic Śaivism, [ 2 ] : 54 and Bhūtirāja in the dualist/nondualist school. Besides being the teacher of the famous Abhinavagupta, Bhūtirāja was also the father of two eminent scholars.

[ 2 ] : 34 Lakṣmaṇagupta, a direct disciple of Utpaladeva , in the lineage of Trayambaka, was highly respected by Abhinavagupta and taught him all the schools of monistic thought: Krama, Trika , and Pratyabhijña (except Kula ).

[ 2 ] : 54 Śambhunātha taught him the fourth school (Ardha-trayambaka). This school is in fact Kaula, and it was emanated from Trayambaka's daughter.

For Abhinavagupta, Śambhunātha was the most admired guru. Describing the greatness of his master, he compared Śambhunātha to the Sun, in his power to dispel ignorance from the heart, and, in another place, with "the Moon shining over the ocean of Trika knowledge." [ 13 ] : 7 Abhinavagupta received Kaula initiation through Śambhunātha's wife (acting as a dūtī or conduit ). The energy of this initiation is transmitted and sublimated into the heart and finally into consciousness. Such a method is difficult but very rapid and is reserved for those who shed their mental limitations and are pure. It was Śambhunātha who requested he write Tantrāloka . As guru, he had a profound influence in the structure of Tantrāloka [ 25 ] and in the life of its creator, Abhinavagupta.

[ 2 ] : 44–54 As many as twelve more of his principal teachers are enumerated by name but without details.

[ 2 ] : 35, 54 It is believed that Abhinavagupta had more secondary teachers. Moreover, during his life he had accumulated a large number of texts from which he quoted in his magnum opus, in his desire to create a syncretic, all-inclusive system, where the contrasts of different scriptures could be resolved by integration into a superior perspective.

Lifestyle [ edit ] Abhinavagupta remained unmarried all his life, [ 2 ] : 32 and as an adept of Kaula , at least initially maintained brahmacharya and supposedly used the vital force of his energy (ojas) to deepen his understanding of the spiritual nervous system he outlined in his works—a system involving ritual union between Purusha (as Shiva) and Shakti. Such union is essentially non-physical and universal, and thus Abhinavagupta conceived himself as always in communion with Shiva-Shakti. In the context of his life and teachings, Abhinavagupta parallels Shiva as both ascetic and enjoyer.

Abhinavagupta studied assiduously at least until the age of thirty or thirty-five.

[ 24 ] To accomplish that he travelled, mostly inside Kashmir.

[ 13 ] : 6 By his own testimony, he had attained spiritual liberation through his Kaula practice, under the guidance of his most admired master, Śambhunātha.

[ 2 ] : 44–54 He lived in his home (functioning as an ashram ) with his family members and disciples, [ 26 ] and he did not become a wandering monk, nor did he take on the regular duties of his family, but lived out his life as a writer and a teacher.

[ 13 ] : 7 Abhinavagupta's personality was described as a living realisation of his vision.

[ 4 ] In an epoch pen-painting, Abhinavagupta is depicted seated in Virasana, surrounded by devoted disciples and family, performing a kind of trance-inducing music on a veena while dictating verses of Tantrāloka to one of his attendees--behind him two dūtī (women yogi ) waiting on him. A legend about the moment of his death (placed somewhere between 1015 and 1025, depending on the source), says that he took with him 1,200 disciples and marched off to a cave, today this cave is known by (Abhinavagupta Cave) located at hill called Bairam at Beerwah , reciting his poem Bhairava-stava , a devotional work. They were never to be seen again, supposedly translating together into the spiritual world.

[ 27 ] Works [ edit ] The trident ( triśūlābja-maṇḍala ), symbol and yantra of Parama Shiva, representing the triadic energies of parā , parā-aparā and aparā śakti Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Abhinavagupta's works fall into multiple sections: manuals of religious ritual, devotional songs, philosophical works and philosophy of aesthetics. Here are enumerated most of his works.

[ 11 ] Bold type faced titles represent the most important ones.

Religious works [ edit ] Tantraloka [ edit ] Main article: Tantraloka His most important work was Tantrāloka ("Elucidation of Tantra"), a synthesis of the entire Trika system.

[ 2 ] : 20 The esoteric chapter 29 on the Kaula ritual was translated in English together with Jayaratha' s commentary by John R. Dupuche.

[ 13 ] : 4 A complex study on the context, authors, contents and references of Tantrāloka was published by Navjivan Rastogi, Prof. of the Lucknow University.

[ 2 ] The first complete English translation of Tantrāloka was published by the Indologist Mark S. G. Dyczkowski in 2023 after 45 years of work. The last recognized master of the oral tradition of Kashmir Shaivism, Swami Lakshman Joo , gave a condensed version of the key philosophical chapters of Tantrāloka in his book, Kashmir Shaivism – The Secret Supreme .

[ 28 ] Another important text was the commentary on Parātrīśikā, Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa , detailing the signification of the phonematic energies and their two sequential ordering systems, Mātṛkā and Mālinī. This was the last major translation project of Jaideva Singh .

[ 29 ] Tantrasara [ edit ] Main article: Tantrasara Tantrasāra ("Essence of Tantra") is a summarised version, in prose, of Tantrāloka , which was once more summarised in Tantroccaya , and finally presented in a very short summary form under the name of Tantravaṭadhānikā – the "Seed of Tantra".

Pūrvapañcikā was a commentary of Pūrvatantra , alias Mālinīvijaya Tantra, lost to this day.

Mālinīvijayā-varttika ("Commentary on Mālinīvijaya") is a versified commentary on Mālinīvijaya Tantra' s first verse.

Kramakeli , "Krama's Play" was a commentary of Kramastotra , now lost.

Bhagavadgītārtha-saṃgraha which translates "Commentary on Bhagavad Gita " has now an English translation by Boris Marjanovic.

[ 30 ] Other religious works are: Parātrīśikā-laghuvṛtti , "A Short Commentary on Parātrīśikā", Paryantapañcāśīkā ("Fifty Verses on the Ultimate Reality"), Rahasyapañcadaśikā ("Fifteen Verses on the Mystical Doctrine"), Laghvī prakriyā ("Short Ceremony"), Devīstotravivaraṇa ("Commentary on the Hymn to Devi") and Paramārthasāra ("Essence of the Supreme Reality").

Devotional hymns [ edit ] Abhinavagupta has composed a number of devotional poems, most of which have been translated into French by Lilian Silburn : [ 31 ] Bodhapañcadaśikā – "Fifteen Verses on Consciousness"; Paramārthacarcā – "Discussion on the Supreme Reality"; Anubhavanivedana – "Tribute of the Inner Experience"; Anuttarāṣṭikā – "Eight Verses on Anuttara"; Krama-stotra – an hymn, different from the fundamental text of the Krama school; Bhairava-stava – "Hymn to Bhairava "; Dehasthadevatācakra-stotra – "Hymn to the Wheel of Divinities that Live in the Body"; Paramārthadvādaśikā – "Twelve Verses on the Supreme Reality" and Mahopadeśa-viṃśatikā – "Twenty Verses on the Great Teaching".

Another poem Śivaśaktyavinābhāva-stotra – "Hymn on the Inseparability of Shiva and Shakti " was lost.

Philosophical works [ edit ] One of the most important works of Abhinavagupta is Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vimarśini ("Commentary to the Verses on the Recognition of the Lord") and Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivṛti-vimarśini ("Commentary on the explanation of Īśvarapratyabhijñā "). This treatise is fundamental in the transmission of the Pratyabhijña school (the branch of Kashmir Shaivism based on direct recognition of the Lord) to our days. Another commentary on a Pratyabhijña work – Śivadṛṣtyā-locana ("Light on Śivadṛṣṭi") – is now lost. Another lost commentary is Padārthapraveśa-nirṇaya-ṭīkā and Prakīrṇkavivaraṇa ("Comment on the Notebook") referring to the third chapter of Vākyapadīya of Bhartrihari . Two more philosophical texts of Abhinavagupta are Kathāmukha-tilaka ("Ornament of the Face of Discourses") and Bhedavāda-vidāraṇa ("Confrontation of the Dualist Thesis").

Poetical and dramatic works [ edit ] Main article: Abhinavabharati Abhinavagupta s most important work on the philosophy of art is Abhinavabhāratī – a long and complex commentary on Natya Shastra of Bharata Muni . This work has been one of the most important factors contributing to Abhinavagupta's fame up until present day. His most important contribution was that to the theory of rasa (aesthetic savour).

Other poetical works include: Ghaṭa-karpara-kulaka-vivṛti , a commentary on "Ghaṭakarpara" of Kalidasa ; Kāvyakauṭukavivaraṇa , a "Commentary to the Wonder of Poetry" (a work of Bhaṭṭa Tauta), now lost; and Dhvanyālokalocana , "Illustration of Dhvanyāloka", which is a famous work of Anandavardhana .

References [ edit ] ^ Triadic Heart of Shiva, Paul E. Muller-Ortega, page 12 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa Rastogi, Navjivan (1987).

Introduction to the Tantraloka: A Study in Structure . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass .

ISBN 9788120801806 .

^ "Abhinavagupta – the Philosopher" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2012 .

^ a b Re-accessing Abhinavagupta, Navjivan Rastogi, page 4 ^ Key to the Vedas, Nathalia Mikhailova, page 169 ^ The Pratyabhijñā Philosophy, Ganesh Vasudeo Tagare, page 12 ^ Companion to Tantra, S.C. Banerji, page 89 ^ Proceedings and Transactions of the ... All-India Oriental Conference . Bihar and Orissa Research Society. 1964. p. 48.

^ Journal asiatique, Volumes 244-245 . Société asiatique. 1956. p. 238.

^ D.D. Kosambi (1974).

Indian Society Historical Probings, in, Memory of D. D. Kosambi . People's Publishing House. p. 185.

^ a b Luce dei Tantra, Tantrāloka, Abhinavagupta, Raniero Gnoli, page LXXVII ^ The Krama Tantricism of Kashmir; Navjivan Rastogi, page 157 ^ a b c d e f g John R. Dupuche.

The Kula Ritual as Elaborated in Chapter 29 of the Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta .

^ Luce dei Tantra, Tantrāloka, Abhinavagupta, Raniero Gnoli, 1999, page 3 ^ a b Abhinavagupta, Ganesh Tryambak Deshpande, page 19 ^ Re-accessing Abhinavagupta, Navjivan Rastogi, page 8 ^ Re-accessing Abhinavagupta, Navjivan Rastogi, page 10 ^ a b Īśvara Pratyabhijñā Kārikā of Utpaladeva, Verses on the Recognition of the Lord; B. N. Pandit, page XXXIII ^ Luce dei Tantra, Tantrāloka, Abhinavagupta, Raniero Gnoli, page 3 ^ Re-accessing Abhinavagupta, Navjivan Rastogi, page 2 ^ Proceedings and Transactions of the ... All-India Oriental Conference . Bihar and Orissa Research Society. 1964. p. 48.

^ Andrew O. Fort; Patricia Y. Mumme (1 January 1996).

Living Liberation in Hindu Thought . SUNY Press. p. 188.

ISBN 9780791427057 .

^ a b Luce dei Tantra, Tantrāloka, Abhinavagupta, Raniero Gnoli, page 4 ^ a b Triadic Mysticism, Paul E. Murphy, page 12 ^ The Triadic Heart of Śiva, Kaula Tantricism of Abhinavagupta in the Non-Dual Shaivism of Kashmir; Paul Eduardo Muller-Ortega, page 1 ^ Īśvara Pratyabhijñā Kārikā of Utpaladeva, Verses on the Recognition of the Lord; B. N. Pandit, page XXXIV ^ Triadic Mysticism, Paul E. Murphy, page 13 ^ Kashmir Shaivism – The Secret Supreme , ed, John Hughes, SUNY press, 1985.

^ Para-trisika-Vivarana, Jaideva Singh ^ Abhinavagupta's Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita, Boris Marjanovic ^ Hymnes de Abhinavagupta: Traduits et commentés, Lilian Silburn External links [ edit ] Bibliography of Abhinavagupta's works, Item 582 Archived 13 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Karl Potter, University of Washington Muktabodha Online Library – containing many of Abhinavagupta's works in Sanskrit including Tantrāloka GRETIL: a collection of Abhinavagupta's works in original , also containing other Kashmir Shaivism texts Four biographical articles on Abhinavagupta by Swami Lakshman Joo , Prof. K. N. Dhar, R. K. Jalali and Geetika Kaw Kher Another Bibliography of Abhinavagupta by "The New Yoga" Aspects of Abhinavagupta's Theory of Scripture by David Peter Lawrence Hymns of Abhinavagupta v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abhinavagupta&oldid=1291313333 " Categories : 1020 deaths 11th-century Indian philosophers 11th-century Indian writers Hindu philosophers and theologians Idealists Indian male writers Indian religious writers Kashmiri Shaivites Kashmir Shaivism Kashmiri writers Scholars from Jammu and Kashmir Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from June 2020 Webarchive template wayback links Year of birth unknown Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 12:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abhinavagupta 34 languages Add topic

