Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Philosophical work 4 Personal life 5 Written works Toggle Written works subsection 5.1 Popular writing 5.2 Scholarly work 5.2.1 Books 5.3 Essays 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Churchland 15 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Suomi Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Paul M. Churchland ) Canadian philosopher Paul Churchland Born Paul Montgomery Churchland ( 1942-10-21 ) October 21, 1942 (age 82) Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada Spouse Patricia Churchland Education Alma mater University of Pittsburgh Doctoral advisor Wilfrid Sellars Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Institutions University of Pittsburgh Main interests Neurophilosophy , philosophy of science , philosophy of mind , artificial intelligence , epistemology Notable ideas Eliminative materialism , word–world relations [ 1 ] Paul Montgomery Churchland (born October 21, 1942) is a Canadian philosopher known for his studies in neurophilosophy and the philosophy of mind . After earning a Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh under Wilfrid Sellars (1969), Churchland rose to the rank of full professor at the University of Manitoba before accepting the Valtz Family Endowed Chair in Philosophy at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and joint appointments in that institution's Institute for Neural Computation and on its Cognitive Science Faculty.

As of February 2017, Churchland is recognised as Professor Emeritus at the UCSD , and is a member of the Board of Trustees of the Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies of Moscow State University . Churchland is the husband of philosopher Patricia Churchland , with whom he collaborates closely.

Early life and education [ edit ] Paul Montgomery Churchland [ 2 ] was born in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada, on October 21, 1942.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Growing up in Vancouver, Churchland's father was a high school science teacher and his mother took in sewing. As a boy, he was obsessed with science fiction; he was particularly struck by the ideas in Robert A. Heinlein 's Orphans of the Sky . Churchland liked building things in his father's woodworking and metal shop in their basement, and expected to become an aerodynamical engineer.

[ 5 ] At the University of British Columbia , Churchland began with classes in math and physics, intending to pursue engineering. Conversations with fellow students in the summer before his sophomore year inspired him to begin taking philosophy classes.

[ 5 ] He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in 1964 [ 3 ] [ 4 ] He earned his Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh in 1969, [ 6 ] his dissertation entitled "Persons and P-Predicates" written with Wilfrid Sellars as his advisor.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Career [ edit ] In 1969, Churchland took a position at the University of Manitoba , [ 3 ] where he would teach for fifteen years, becoming a full professor in 1979.

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] He spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , [ 4 ] and joined the faculty at the University of California, San Diego in 1984.

[ 3 ] There, he served as Department Chair from 1986–1990.

[ 7 ] As of this February 2017, Churchland is recognised as Professor Emeritus at the University of California, San Diego , [ 8 ] where he earlier held the Valtz Family Endowed Chair in Philosophy (through 2011), [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and continues to appear as a philosophy faculty member on the UCSD Interdisciplinary Ph.D. Program in Cognitive Science [ 11 ] and with the affiliated faculty of the UCSD Institute for Neural Computation .

[ 12 ] As of February 2017, he is also a member of the Board of Trustees of the Center for Consciousness Studies of the Philosophy Department, Moscow State University .

[ 13 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Churchland's work is in the school of analytic philosophy in western philosophy , with interests in epistemology and the philosophy of science , and specific principal interests in the philosophy of mind and in neurophilosophy and artificial intelligence . His work has been described as being influenced by the work of W. V. O. Quine , Thomas Kuhn , Russell Hanson, Wilfrid Sellars , and Paul Feyerabend .

[ 14 ] Along with his wife, Churchland is a major proponent of eliminative materialism , [ 15 ] the belief that everyday, common-sense, 'folk' psychology , which seeks to explain human behavior in terms of the beliefs and desires of agents, is actually a deeply flawed theory that must be eliminated in favor of a mature cognitive neuroscience.

[ 6 ] where by folk psychology is meant everyday mental concepts such as beliefs, feelings, and desires, which are viewed as theoretical constructs without coherent definition, and thus destined to be obviated by a scientific understanding of human nature. From the perspective of Zawidzki , Churchland's concept of eliminativism is suggested as early as his book Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind (1979), with its most explicit formulation appearing in a Journal of Philosophy essay, "Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes" (1981).

[ 6 ] Churchland believes that beliefs are not ontologically real; that is, that a future, fully matured neuroscience is likely to have no need for "beliefs" (see propositional attitudes ), in the same manner that modern science discarded such notions as legends or witchcraft. According to Churchland, such concepts will not merely be reduced to more finely grained explanation and retained as useful proximate levels of description, but will be strictly eliminated as wholly lacking in correspondence to precise objective phenomena, such as activation patterns across neural networks . He points out that the history of science has seen many posits that were considered as real entities: such as phlogiston ; caloric; the luminiferous ether ; and vital forces that were thus eliminated.

[ citation needed ] Moreover, in The Engine of Reason, The Seat of the Soul , Churchland suggests that consciousness might be explained in terms of a recurrent neural network with its hub in the intralaminar nucleus of the thalamus , and feedback connections to all parts of the cortex. He acknowledges that this proposal will likely be found in error with regard to the neurological details, but states his belief that it is on the right track in its use of recurrent neural networks to account for consciousness. This has been described as a reductionist rather than eliminativist account of consciousness.

[ citation needed ] Personal life [ edit ] Churchland is the husband of philosopher Patricia Churchland , and it has been noted that, "Their work is so similar that they are sometimes discussed, in journals and books, as one person." [ 16 ] The Churchlands are the parents of two children, Mark Churchland and Anne Churchland , both of whom are neuroscientists.

[ 17 ] Written works [ edit ] Popular writing [ edit ] Churchland, Patricia Smith; Churchland, Paul (1990). "Could a Machine Think?".

Scientific American .

262 (1, January): 32– 37.

Bibcode : 1990SciAm.262a..32C .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0190-32 .

PMID 2294584 .

[Subtitle:] Classical AI is unlikely to yield conscious machines; systems that mimic the brain might.

[ subscription required ] Scholarly work [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Professor Churchland has authored several books in philosophy, which have been translated into many languages.

[ 3 ] His works are as follows: Churchland, Paul (1986) [1979].

Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind . Cambridge Studies in Philosophy (1st paperback ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press . pp. 157 pp.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511625435 .

ISBN 0-521-33827-1 .

ISSN 0950-6306 .

—— (1984).

Matter and Consciousness . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press .

—— (1985).

Images of Science: Scientific Realism versus Constructive Empiricism . Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press .

—— (1989).

A Neurocomputational Perspective: The Nature of Mind and the Structure of Science . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press .

ISBN 0-262-53106-2 .

—— (1995).

The Engine of Reason, The Seat of the Soul: A Philosophical Journey into the Brain . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press .

ISBN 0-262-53142-9 .

——; Churchland, Patricia Smith (1998).

On the Contrary: Critical Essays, 1987-1997 . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press .

ISBN 0-262-53165-8 .

—— (2007).

Neurophilosophy at Work . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-86472-5 .

Churchland, Paul (2012).

Plato's Camera: How the Physical Brain Captures a Landscape of Abstract Universals . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0-262-01686-5 .

His book Matter and Consciousness has been frequently and extensively reprinted.

[ 18 ] Both Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind and A Neurocomputational Perspective have been reprinted.

[ 19 ] Essays [ edit ] Professor Churchland has written a number of published articles, some of which have been translated into other languages, including several that have had a substantial impact in philosophy. Essays which have been reprinted include: Churchland, Paul (1981). "Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes".

Journal of Philosophy .

78 (2, February): 67– 90.

doi : 10.2307/2025900 .

JSTOR 2025900 .

See also the PDF version at K. A. Akins' web pages at Simon Fraser University .

—— (1981). "Functionalism, Qualia, and Intentionality".

Philosophical Topics .

12 : 121– 145.

doi : 10.5840/philtopics198112146 .

—— (1985). "Reduction, Qualia and Direct Introspection of Brain States".

Journal of Philosophy .

82 (1): 8– 28.

doi : 10.2307/2026509 .

JSTOR 2026509 .

—— (1986). "Some Reductive Strategies in Cognitive Neurobiology".

Mind .

95 .

—— (1988). "Folk Psychology and the Explanation of Human Behavior".

Proceedings of the Aristotelean Society . Supp. Vol. LXII.

—— (1990). "On the Nature of Theories: A Neurocomputational Perspective".

Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science .

XIV .

—— (1991). "Intertheoretic Reduction: A Neuroscientist's Field Guide".

Seminars in Neuroscience .

2 .

—— (1995). "The Neural Representation of Social Reality".

Mind and Morals .

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers List of Canadian philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Paul Churchland, "Conceptual progress and word/world relations: In search of the essence of natural kinds", Canadian Journal of Philosophy 15 (1):1–17 (1985).

^ a b George, J.; Lugar, L. (2011) [2007].

"Guide to the Wilfrid S. Sellars Papers, 1899-1990 ASP.1991.01" .

University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ a b c d e f Keeley, Brian L. (2006). "Introduction: Becoming Paul M. Churchland (1942–) [Ch. 1]". In Keeley, Brian L. (ed.).

Paul Churchland (PDF) . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 31, esp. 1-2.

ISBN 0-521-53715-0 . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

[Quote:] PMC was born a Canadian and earned a B.A. from the University of British Columbia, and in 1969, he was awarded a Ph.D. in Philosophy from the University of Pittsburgh. There, he wrote a dissertation under the direction of Wilfrid Sellars. He spent the first 15 years of his career at the University of Manitoba, taking advantage of its relative isolation to further develop his own approach to the ideas to which he was exposed during his graduate education. ... His second book, Matter and Consciousness (1984, revised and updated 1988; translated into five languages), has become one of the most popular textbooks in the philosophy of mind.

Note, this link presents only an excerpt of the chapter, the first 10 pages.

^ a b c d Shook, John R. (2005).

The Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers . A&C Black. p. 492.

ISBN 978-1-84371-037-0 .

^ a b MacFarquhar, Larissa (2007-02-12).

"Two Heads; Annals of Science" .

The New Yorker . Vol. 82, no. 49. p. 58.

ISSN 0028-792X .

ProQuest 233125894 . Retrieved 2021-05-01 .

^ a b c d Zawidzki, Tadeusz (May 2004). "Churchland, Paul".

Dictionary of Philosophy of Mind . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ Harrell, Maralee (2016).

What Is the Argument?: An Introduction to Philosophical Argument and Analysis . MIT Press. p. 296.

ISBN 978-0-262-52927-3 .

^ UCSD Staff (11 February 2017).

"UC San Diego, Philosophy Department, Faculty" . University of California–San Diego . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ Arneson, Richard J. (11 February 2017).

"UCSD Philosophy: Richard J. Arneson" . University of California–San Diego . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ As of February 2017, the UCSD Philosophy webpage reports Richard J. Arneson as the Valtz Chair, and Arneson reports his having assumed that position in July, 2011.

^ UCSD Staff (11 February 2017).

"UCSD Cognitive Science: IDP Faculty" . University of California–San Diego . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ UCSD Staff (11 February 2017).

"Institute for Neural Computation: Affiliated Faculty" . University of California–San Diego . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ MCfCS Staff (11 February 2017).

"The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies: People" .

HardProblem.ru . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ Keeley, Brian L. (2006).

"Introduction: Becoming Paul M. Churchland (1942–)" (PDF) . In Keeley, Brian L. (ed.).

Paul Churchland . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 0-521-53715-0 .

^ Ramsey, William (2013) [2003].

"Eliminative Materialism" (revision of 16 April 2013, based on 8 May 2003 original) . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

In more recent history, eliminative materialism has received attention from a broader range of writers, including many concerned not only with the metaphysics of the mind, but also the process of theory change, the status of semantic properties, the nature of psychological explanation and recent developments in cognitive science. Much of this attention has been fostered by the husband-wife team of Paul and Patricia Churchland, whose writings have forced many philosophers and cognitive scientists to take eliminativism more seriously.

^ MacFarquhar, Larissa (February 12, 2007).

"Two Heads: A marriage devoted to the mind-body problem" .

The New Yorker : 58– 69.

PMID 17323512 . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

^ MacFarquhar, Larissa (2014-07-21).

"Why Should Philosophers Care About Neuroscience?" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2019-06-06 .

^ See, for instance: (1) "Eliminative Materialism" in Introducing Philosophy (R.C. Solomon, Pages 449 - 453); (2) "Behaviorism, Materialism, and Functionalism" in Reason and Responsibility: Readings in Some Basic Problems of Philosophy, Seventh Edition (Edited by J. Feinberg, Wadsworth Press); and (3) "Eliminative Materialism" in Introductory Readings in Philosophy (Edited by J. Pojman, Wadsworth Press).

^ See (1) "The Mind-Body Problem" in Philosophy of Mind (Polish), by the Alethia Foundation (1995); and (2) "Knowing Qualia: A Reply to Jackson" in The Nature of Consciousness: The Philosophical Debates edited by N. Block, O. Flanagan and G. Guzeldere (MIT Press - 1997).

Further reading [ edit ] Churchland, Paul M. (2014) [1995]. "Neural Networks and Common Sense". In Baumgartner, Peter; Payr, Sabine (eds.).

Speaking Minds: Interviews with Twenty Eminent Cognitive Scientists (interview) . Princeton Legacy Library. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press . pp.

33– 46.

ISBN 978-1-4008-6396-9 . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

McCauley, Robert, ed. (1996).

The Churchlands and their Critics . Philosophers and their Critics. Cambridge, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-18969-5 . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

The volume includes critical chapters from editor McCauley, Patricia Kitcher , Andy Clark , William G. Lycan , William Bechtel , Jerry Fodor and Ernie Lapore, Antonio R. Damasio and Hanna Damasio , John Marshall and Jennifer Gurd, and Owen Flanagan . These are then followed by a 94 pp. essay in response, by Paul Churchland and Patricia Churchland (hence the Churchlands are both the subject of and in part authors of this volume).

Zawidzki, Tadeusz (May 2004). "Churchland, Paul".

Dictionary of Philosophy of Mind . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

[ full citation needed ] Keeley, Brian L. (2006). "Introduction: Becoming Paul M. Churchland (1942–) [Ch. 1]". In Keeley, Brian L. (ed.).

Paul Churchland (PDF) . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 31, esp. 1-2.

ISBN 0-521-53715-0 . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

Ramsey, William (2013) [2003].

"Eliminative Materialism" (revision of 16 April 2013, based on 8 May 2003 original) . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Paul Churchland .

Churchland's UCSD homepage Center for Consciousness Studies of the Philosophy Department, Moscow State University "From the Engine of Reason to the Seat of the Soul," The Science Network interview with the Churchlands Moscow Center For Consciousness Studies interview with Churchland v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Churchland&oldid=1298249208 " Categories : 1942 births Living people 20th-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers 20th-century Canadian philosophers 21st-century Canadian philosophers Canadian epistemologists Materialists Canadian philosophers of mind University of California, San Diego faculty 21st-century American philosophers University of Pittsburgh alumni Academic staff of the University of Toronto Academics from Vancouver Presidents of the American Philosophical Association Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 CS1: long volume value All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from February 2017 This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 09:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Churchland 15 languages Add topic

