Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ecology and terminology 2 History 3 Fishing 4 Outcomes 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Akaroa Marine Reserve 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°52′57″S 172°57′54″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.882367°S 172.965131°E ﻿ / -43.882367; 172.965131 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marine reserve and overlapping fisheries co-management tool in Akaroa Harbour, New Zealand Akaroa Marine Reserve IUCN category Ia ( strict nature reserve ) The entrance of Akaroa Harbour in 2010. The reserve is in an area on the left-hand side of the entrance Location New Zealand Nearest city Christchurch Coordinates 43°52′57″S 172°57′54″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.882367°S 172.965131°E ﻿ / -43.882367; 172.965131 Area 512 ha Established 2014 The Akaroa Marine Reserve is a marine reserve covering an area of 512.15 hectares (1,265.6 acres) [ 1 ] at the entrance to the Akaroa Harbour in New Zealand. It was approved in 2013 after a lengthy campaign, and established in 2014.

[ 2 ] The history and outcomes of this marine reserve overlap with the Akaroa Taiāpure and the concept of kaitiakitanga .

Ecology and terminology [ edit ] The harbour as a whole has considerable natural values and fauna of the inner and outer harbour differs. There are pressures on the ecology from human activity such as settlements on the edge of the harbour and there is land and water-based industrial activity.

[ 3 ] The marine reserve is a no-take zone.

The taiāpure is a local fishing co-management tool for the harbour, which has customarily been of special significance to the hapū as a source of food for spiritual and cultural reasons. The taiāpure was established over 90 percent of the harbour in February 2006. It allows Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu (tribal council) and other fisheries stakeholders to have a say in how the harbour is managed. All fishing can continue in taiāpure according to rules and regulations.

The taiāpure complements the reserve (the remaining 10% of the harbour), as does Pōhatu Marine Reserve just outside the harbour entrance, in Pōhatu / Flea Bay, plus Lyttelton Harbour 's Port Levy Mātaitai Reserve and Rāpaki Mātaitai Reserve. A mātaitai is a permanent reserve created in areas of traditional importance to Māori for customary food gathering.

The two marine reserves are total no take areas, whereas the taiāpure and mātaitai are fishing enabling and not about the protection of marine life. Indeed, the tangata tiaki (marine guardian) has the power to override fishing regulations, and moreover, the taking of kelp by one pāua farmer is enshrined in the taiāpure legislation. The Akaroa Taiāpure Management Committee is a non-elected group largely made up of Ngāi Tahu representatives and a range of fisheries interest groups, including recreational, commercial, marine farmers and marine tourism operators.

[ 4 ] This committee has no control over the number of recreational anglers, hence no control over the total number of fish and shellfish taken.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, people with local knowledge knew that fish stocks were nowhere near as plentiful as they once were.

[ 6 ] People who fished the harbour had witnessed the loss of the luxury of being able to fish freely.

[ 7 ] The rūnanga (committee of senior decision-makers of an iwi (tribal group) or hapū (family, district groups or community)) knew that pollution and over-fishing had diminished the area of available mahinga kai (traditional food gathering areas) within the harbour.

[ 7 ] Pollution, includes sewage, farm and sub-division run-off as well as algal blooms.

[ 8 ] Forest and Bird carried out exploratory dives in the Akaroa Harbour in 1990. The Akaroa Harbour Marine Protection Society formally proposed the establishment of a 560-hectare (1,400-acre) marine reserve in 1996.

[ 9 ] The proposal was so divisive it led to a two-decade battle that pitted a small group of vocal and determined local residents and divers against recreational anglers, rūnanga , commercial fishers and one aquaculturalist.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The local residents wanted a no-take area in the eastern waters of the outer harbour to acts as a breeding pool and as place for dolphins to feed. Recreational anglers argued “that’s where we fish in a northeasterly”. Te Runanga o Ngāi Tahu claimed strong ties to the area, naming it Te Whata o Kökiro (meaning the food store-house of Kokiro).

[ 12 ] When the marine reserve idea was first mooted, commercial fishing was a part of Akaroa’s economy and commercial fishers strongly opposed it. During the long battle, fish stock declined, and so did commercial fishing.

The original proposal called for a reserve within the harbour. Fishers counteracted that proposal by applying for and getting a smaller 215 hectares (530 acres) hectares reserve to be located outside of the harbour, at sheltered bay named Pōhatu / Flea Bay.

[ 13 ] While eco-tourism operators were pleased to have something to show to tourists, local iwi continued to express concerns that marine reserves hindered their traditional rights to harvest from the sea. Meanwhile, the local residents group continued to advocate for a reserve within the harbour.

[ 13 ] Eventually, a compromise was reached. The rūnagna applied to establish a taiāpure (fisheries co-management by local people) over 90% of the harbour, and supported a marine reserve over 10%, but not before both were further held up by a pāua (abalone) farmer negotiating for the right for him to harvest seaweed be enshrined in the taiāpure.

[ 14 ] The Fisheries Act 1996 Part 9 Section 174-175 provides for the establishment of taiäpure/fisheries co-management by local people who care about and have strong ties to an area.  In January 2004, the Mäori Land Court tribunal made a recommendation to the Minister of Fisheries that a taiäpure be granted over the whole of Akaroa Harbour bar one small area subject to the, at that time, proposed Akaroa Marine Reserve. Judge Wainwright saw no reason why the two could not live together. However, this recommendation was successfully appealed by the local pāua farmer and kelp harvester, who claimed a taiāpure would compromise his business. The High Court sent the case back to the tribunal to gather further evidence about whether the whole of Akaroa Harbour does or does not come within the concept of “littoral coastal waters” of “special cultural significance” to the rünanga.

The pāua farmer eventually reached an understanding with Ngāi Tahu, ending years of argument. He has been granted the rights to harvest Macrocystis pyrifera (giant bladder kelp), which he uses to feed the pāua at the Akaroa Paua Farm and also to make garden fertiliser and kelp pepper [ 15 ] In contrast, the East Otago Taiāpure explicitly prohibits the harvesting of kelp.

[ 16 ] That ban does not extend to unattached beach-cast kelp. There are environmental concerns in Akaroa Harbour regarding the ecological disruption caused by kelp harvesting to wild pāua and other kaimoana (sea food).

[ 17 ] Entrance of Akaroa Harbour in 2001. Today, the reserve is on the left-hand side of the entrance, and pāua farm on the right The taiāpure was established in February 2006 ; 19 years ago ( 2006-02 ) , but the marine reserve took eight more years.

Conservation Minister Kate Wilkinson declined the application for the reserve in 2010 on the grounds that it would adversely affect recreational fishing. The decision was challenged in the High Court and was quashed in a 2012 ruling. In terms of actual numbers the two separate consultation processes for the application had attracted more support than opposition.

[ 18 ] In April 2013 Conservation Minister Nick Smith announced the approval of the reserve but at the reduced size of 465 hectares (1,150 acres). Smith believed the battle had gone on for too long.

[ 19 ] The size was reduced to take into account the concerns about customary and recreational fishing.

[ 20 ] Subsequently, the size was finalised as 512 hectares (1,270 acres).

[ 21 ] Environment Minister Amy Adams expressed an aspiration for the next step to be integrating the local management of taiāpure and reserve so the two mechanisms work together.

[ 2 ] Fishing [ edit ] New Zealand fishing rules place reduced bag limits on many fish species and prohibit shellfish gathering in specific areas.

[ 4 ] Tangata tiaki (marine guardians) are appointed for Ōnuku Runanga rōhe moana (defined customary fishing area) by the Minister of Primary Industries .

[ 4 ] The tangata tiaki (also known as kaitiaki) receive training in bylaws, what quantities of various species can be taken, dates or seasons recommended for harvest, size limits and methods of harvest.

[ 8 ] Fishers can get a kaitiaki permit from the tangata tiaki granting permission to take over and above the catch limit, and under the legal size. This permit, colloquially called a “chit”, is given for tangihanga (funeral), hui (gathering) and other occasions. In addition to upping catch limits, the kaitiaki has the power to override other fishing regulations. For example, under the recreational fishing rules, no person may take pāua using scuba (underwater breathing apparatus) and there is a ban on set netting in the harbour to protect endangered Hector’s dolphins , however, the tangata tiaki can permit the use of scuba gear and set nets, as well as allow fishing in closed areas, such as in the marine reserves.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Outcomes [ edit ] One hopes that marine reserves establish a scientific baseline for evaluating the success of a taiāpure. How is this progressing?

In 2018, the Department of Conservation , trialled a baited underwater video study.

[ 24 ] This initial trial provided a snapshot of the fish communities both within and outside the Akaroa and Pōhatu marine reserves. A total of 28 fish species were identified, demonstrating that the baited underwater video technique is an effective method for examining the size and relative abundance of these species.

The study found notable differences in the relative abundances and sizes of blue cod and blue moki in both marine reserves when compared to three taiāpure control areas. However, since there is no baseline data for Akaroa Marine Reserve, it would be hasty to link these spatial variations to their protection status. Nonetheless, the results indicated an increase in the abundance and size of blue cod and moki at Pōhatu reserve compared to earlier studies, and that is likely due to the protection from direct fishing pressure.

[ 24 ] In 2021, a three-year initiative called Iongairo was launched to supply data that aids in the management of customary fishing zones and enhances understanding of marine reserves in Te Pātaka o Rākaihautū/Banks Peninsula.

[ 25 ] Iongairo focused on identifying and evaluating important habitats—including rock, sand, and mud—and key species such as pāua, mussels, and various types of seaweed. Additionally, it examined the effects of human activities on the environment.

[ 26 ] Methods included baited underwater cameras, towed and dropped cameras, along with sediment grabs. The outcome is an interactive online map showcasing the seafloor.

[ 27 ] As of March 2025, no data on fish, shell fish and kelp stocks had yet been published.

See also [ edit ] Marine reserves of New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ "Akaroa Marine Reserve: Places to go in Banks Peninsula" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

^ a b Rachel Young (8 June 2014).

"NZ's newest marine reserve opens at Akaroa" .

The Press . Retrieved 29 August 2019 .

^ Fenwick, Graham (May 2004).

Marine ecology of Akaroa Harbour: rocky shores and subtidal soft bottoms (PDF) . Christchurch, N.Z.: NIWA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 February 2013 . Retrieved 14 April 2013 .

^ a b c "Amateur Regulations Akaroa Taiāpure" .

Fisheries New Zealand . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ Thompson, Suky (3 September 2010). "Lost opportunity for conservation".

The Press .

Christchurch , N.Z. p. 15.

^ Turner, Anna (20 April 2013). "Love of Akaroa driving force behind reserve". Christchurch, N.Z.: The Press.

^ a b Rei, Simon (13 June 2006).

" 'Submission by Wairewa Runanga on Akaroa Harbour (Dan Rogers) Marine Reserve Application" .

Option4 . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

^ a b Rewi, Adrienne (March 2009).

"Restoring their food baskets" .

Te Karaka (42): 29.

ISSN 1173-6011 .

^ "Akaroa Marine Reserve Banks Peninsula" (PDF) . Akaroa Harbour Marine Protection Society. January 1996. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2013 . Retrieved 14 April 2013 .

^ Young, Rachal (9 June 2014).

"Marine reserve 'dream' arrives" .

Stuff News . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ MacDuff, Keiller (13 April 2013).

"Akaroa Marine Reserve turns 10 as stalemate for further marine protection continues" .

The Press . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ Maori Place Names Around Akaroa , Akaroa: Akaroa Museum, 1994, p. 22, Wikidata Q132159546 ^ a b Nick Taylor and Brigid Buckenham (February 2003).

Social impacts of marine reserves in New Zealand SCIENCE FOR CONSERVATION 217 (PDF) .

Department of Conservation .

ISBN 0478223765 .

ISSN 1173-2946 . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ Crean, Mike (20 July 2005).

"Harbour to get Taiapure, Reserve" . The Press.

^ "Aquaculture in New Zealand publisher Investment New Zealand" (PDF) .

Aquaculture in New Zealand : 14. 2006.

ISBN 0478294107 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 .

^ "East Otago Taiāpure: Pāua, set net and kelp prohibition/ rāhui" .

Fisheries New Zealand . 2 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ "Delays dog Akaroa customary fishing plan". The Press. 1 September 2025.

^ "Akaroa Harbour Marine Reserve" .

Department of Conservation . Archived from the original on 23 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ "Editorial: A long battle" .

Stuff News . 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ "beehive.govt.nz – Akaroa marine reserve approved" . The Beehive (New Zealand Government). 14 April 2013 . Retrieved 15 April 2013 .

^ "Data Table – Protected Areas – LINZ Data Service (recorded area 512.15 ha)" .

Land Information New Zealand . Retrieved 29 August 2019 .

^ "How to apply for a fisheries special permit" .

Ministry for Primary Industries . 7 August 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ "Mahinga Kai" .

Te Runanga o Ngāi Tahu . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ a b "Biological monitoring of marine protected areas at Banks Peninsula using baited underwater video (BUV)" .

Department of Conservation . 2018 . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "Beneath the surface – Banks Peninsula seabed mapping" .

Environment Canterbury . 17 December 2021.

^ "Iongairo: Partnership makes waves in mapping the seafloor" .

Environment Canterbury . 31 January 2023.

^ "Iongairo: mapping subtidal habitats of Te Pātaka o Rākaihautū (Banks Peninsula)" .

Arcgis . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Akaroa Harbour Marine Reserve archive at the Department of Conservation Map of the reserve 7087426 ( x j a h ) Akaroa Marine Reserve on OpenStreetMap https://www.mpi.govt.nz/dmsdocument/3434/direct a brochure (with maps) summarising of the recreational fishing rules for the Akaroa Taiāpure (effective from: February 2023. Subject to change without notice) https://www.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?appid=48f40587c12142fba6f007d6a9b36024 Iongairo: mapping subtidal habitats of Te Pātaka o Rākaihautū (Banks Peninsula) Media related to Kaitiakitanga at Wikimedia Commons Kaitiakitanga – guardianship and conservation in Te Ara – the Encyclopedia of New Zealand v t e Christchurch , New Zealand Seat : Christchurch Central Populated places Northern suburbs Belfast Bishopdale Bottle Lake Bridgend Brooklands Casebrook Chaneys Coutts Island Edgeware Harewood Kainga Mairehau McLeans Island Northcote Northwood Papanui Redwood Shirley Spencerville Styx Eastern suburbs Aranui Avondale Bexley Burwood Dallington Marshland New Brighton North New Brighton Parklands Prestons South New Brighton Southshore Waimairi Beach Wainoni Central suburbs Addington Avonside Barrington Bryndwr Central City Bromley Fendalton Hillmorton Hoon Hay Linwood Merivale Middleton Phillipstown Riccarton Richmond Spreydon St Albans Strowan Sydenham Upper Riccarton Woolston Western suburbs Avonhead Broomfield Burnside Hei Hei Hornby Ilam Islington Paparua Russley Sockburn Templeton Yaldhurst Southern suburbs Aidanfield Beckenham Cashmere Clifton Cracroft Ferrymead Halswell Heathcote Valley Hillsborough Huntsbury Kennedys Bush Lansdowne Moncks Bay Mount Pleasant Murray Aynsley Hill Oaklands Opawa Redcliffs Richmond Hill Scarborough Somerfield St Martins Sumner Taylors Mistake Waltham Westmorland Wigram Geographic features Avon River / Ōtākaro Avon-Heathcote Estuary / Ihutai Lyttelton Harbour Ōpāwaho / Heathcote River Port Hills Tauhinukorokio / Mount Pleasant Facilities and attractions Akaroa Marine Reserve Cathedral Square Christchurch Adventure Park Christchurch Gondola Ferrymead Regional Park Hagley Park International Antarctic Centre Margaret Mahy Playground Tūranga Government City Council Mayor Regional Council v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Akaroa_Marine_Reserve&oldid=1293327776 " Categories : Marine reserves of New Zealand Banks Peninsula Protected areas of the Canterbury Region 2013 establishments in New Zealand Protected areas established in 2013 Akaroa Māori words and phrases Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Use New Zealand English from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Māori-language text Commons category link is locally defined Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 03:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Akaroa Marine Reserve 1 language Add topic

