Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 Prokaryotes 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Correct name 7 languages Bosanski Deutsch Español Français Nederlands Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Only scientific name to be used (from a particular scientific point of view) In botany, the correct name according to the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN) is the one and only botanical name that is to be used for a particular taxon , when that taxon has a particular circumscription , position and rank .

[ 1 ] Determining whether a name is correct is a complex procedure.

[ 2 ] The name must be validly published , a process which is defined in no less than 16 Articles of the ICN.

[ 3 ] It must also be " legitimate ", which imposes some further requirements.

[ 4 ] If there are two or more legitimate names for the same taxon (with the same circumscription, position and rank), then the correct name is the one which has priority , i.e. it was published earliest, [ 5 ] although names may be conserved if they have been very widely used. Validly published names other than the correct name are called synonyms .

[ 6 ] Since taxonomists may disagree as to the circumscription, position or rank of a taxon, there can be more than one correct name for a particular plant. These may also be called synonyms.

The correct name has only one correct spelling, which will generally be the original spelling (although certain limited corrections are allowed). Other spellings are called orthographical variants .

[ 7 ] The zoological equivalent of "correct name" is " valid name ".

Example [ edit ] Linnaeus' Adenanthera falcataria has many other names Different taxonomic placements may well lead to different correct names. For example, the earliest name for the fastest growing tree in the world is Adenanthera falcataria L.

The "L." stands for "Linnaeus" who first validly published the name.

Adenanthera falcataria is thus one of the correct names for this plant. There are other correct names, based on different taxonomic treatments.

It can be placed in the genus Albizia , as Fosberg first did. When placed in this genus, the first choice of correct name is the new genus name followed by the earlier species epithet, giving Albizia falcataria .

[ 8 ] This name cannot be used if there is already a species in the genus with this epithet, so that an illegitimate duplicate would be created.

[ 9 ] As this is not the case, the correct name for the plant in this genus is Albizia falcataria (L.) Fosberg. "Fosberg" is the authority for the transfer to the new genus; "L(innaeus)" the authority for the 'base name' ( basionym ) from which the new name is derived.

It can also be placed in the genus Paraserianthes . Its correct name in that position is Paraserianthes falcataria (L.) I.C.Nielsen.

Within the genus Paraserianthes , it is placed in section Falcataria . If the section is raised in rank to become the genus Falcataria , the correct name cannot be Falcataria falcataria , as might be expected, since under the botanical code (but not the zoological code) names with the same word as both the genus and the specific epithet ( tautonyms ) are forbidden.

[ 10 ] An alternative basionym must be sought or a new name created. The correct name is Falcataria falcata (L.) Greuter & R.Rankin.

[ 11 ] The four names Adenanthera falcataria , Albizia falcataria , Paraserianthes falcataria and Falcataria falcata can each be correct given different taxonomic opinions that put the plant in each of these four genera. Which is the 'right' genus is a problem for taxonomy, not nomenclature. Thus this tree species will have a different correct botanical name for different people. Different taxonomists may publish revisions or monographs picking a different accepted name dependent on their own circumscription of this taxon, for which the other correct names become (homotypic) synonyms ; note however that there is only one correct name for a given circumscription.

[ 12 ] Prokaryotes [ edit ] The Prokaryotic Code inherits many concepts, including that of a "correct name", from the ICN. As with the botanical concept, different taxonomists may have different concepts of a genus, leading to different "correct names". The List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) tries to be consistent with its approach to selecting correct names. The LPSN notes that although later combinations tend to be based on better phylogenomic data, just taking "the last valid combination" is not sufficient because of possible inconsistencies in concepts.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] (specific to botany) Botanical name Botanical nomenclature International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants International Plant Names Index International Association for Plant Taxonomy Author citation (botany) (more general) Scientific classification Binomial nomenclature Hybrid name (botany) Nomenclature Codes International Code of Zoological Nomenclature References [ edit ] ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Glossary ^ Turland, N. (2013).

The Code Decoded: A user's guide to the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants . Vol. Regnum Vegetabile Volume 155. Koeltz Scientific Books.

ISBN 978-3-87429-433-1 .

^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Article 6.2 ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Articles 6.3 and 6.4 ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Principle III ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Article 7.2 ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Articles 60–61 ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Article 11.4 ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Article 53 ^ McNeill et al. 2012 , Article 23.4 ^ " Falcataria falcata (L.) Greuter & R.Rankin" .

Plants of the World Online .

Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew . Retrieved 25 March 2022 .

^ Barrie et al. 2018 , Article 6.6 ^ "FAQ: Why and how does LPSN assign the status "correct name"?" .

lpsn.dsmz.de .

Bibliography [ edit ] Barkworth, M. (2004), Botanical Nomenclature (Nomenclature, Names, and Taxonomy) , University of Utah, archived from the original on 2011-07-20 , retrieved 2011-02-20 McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H. & Turland, N.J., eds. (2012), International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011 , vol. Regnum Vegetabile 154, A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG, ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6 Barrie, F. R.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D. L.; Herendeen, P. S.; Knapp, S.; Kusber, W.-H.; Li, D.-Z.; Marhold, K.; May, T. W.; McNeill, J.; Monro, A. M.; Prado, J.; Price, M. J. & Smith, G. F., eds. (2018), International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Shenzhen Code) adopted by the Nineteenth International Botanical Congress Shenzhen, China, July 2017 , vol. Regnum Vegetabile 159, Koeltz Botanical Books, doi : 10.12705/Code.2018 , hdl : 10141/622572 v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Correct_name&oldid=1303244338 " Category : Botanical nomenclature Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 21:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Correct name 7 languages Add topic

