Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organs produced by the germ layers 2 Mechanism of organ formation 3 Plant organogenesis 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Organogenesis 25 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phase of embryonic development Organogenesis is the phase of embryonic development that starts at the end of gastrulation and continues until birth . During organogenesis, the three germ layers formed from gastrulation (the ectoderm , endoderm , and mesoderm ) form the internal organs of the organism.

[ 1 ] The endoderm of vertebrates produces tissue within the lungs , thyroid , and pancreas . The mesoderm aids in the production of cardiac muscle , skeletal muscle , smooth muscle , tissues within the kidneys , and red blood cells . The ectoderm produces tissues within the epidermis and aids in the formation of neurons within the brain, and melanocytes .

The cells of each of the three germ layers undergo differentiation , a process where less-specialized cells become more-specialized through the expression of a specific set of genes. Cell differentiation is driven by cell signaling cascades.

[ 2 ] Differentiation is influenced by extracellular signals such as growth factors that are exchanged to adjacent cells which is called juxtracrine signaling or to neighboring cells over short distances which is called paracrine signaling .

[ 3 ] Intracellular signals – a cell signaling itself ( autocrine signaling ) – also play a role in organ formation. These signaling pathways allow for cell rearrangement and ensure that organs form at specific sites within the organism.

[ 1 ] The organogenesis process can be studied using embryos and organoids.

[ 4 ] Organs produced by the germ layers [ edit ] Neural precursor cells fold and elongate to form the neural tube. Mesoderm cells condense to form a rod which will send out signals to redirect the ectoderm cells above. This fold along the neural tube sets up the vertebrate central nervous system.

The endoderm is the inner most germ layer of the embryo which gives rise to gastrointestinal and respiratory organs by forming epithelial linings and organs such as the liver, lungs, and pancreas.

[ 5 ] The mesoderm or middle germ layer of the embryo will form the blood, heart, kidney, muscles, and connective tissues.

[ 5 ] The ectoderm or outermost germ layer of the developing embryo forms epidermis, the brain, and the nervous system.

[ 5 ] Mechanism of organ formation [ edit ] While each germ layer forms specific organs, in the 1820s, embryologist Heinz Christian Pander discovered that the germ layers cannot form their respective organs without the cellular interactions from other tissues.

[ 1 ] In humans, internal organs begin to develop within 3–8 weeks after fertilization. The germ layers form organs by three processes: folds, splits, and condensation.

[ 6 ] Folds form in the germinal sheet of cells and usually form an enclosed tube which you can see in the development of vertebrates neural tube. Splits or pockets may form in the germinal sheet of cells forming vesicles or elongations. The lungs and glands of the organism may develop this way.

[ 6 ] A primary step in organogenesis for chordates is the development of the notochord , which induces the formation of the neural plate , and ultimately the neural tube in vertebrate development. The development of the neural tube will give rise to the brain and spinal cord.

[ 1 ] Vertebrates develop a neural crest that differentiates into many structures, including bones, muscles, and components of the central nervous system . Differentiation of the ectoderm into the neural crest, neural tube, and surface ectoderm is sometimes referred to as neurulation and the embryo in this phase is the neurula. The coelom of the body forms from a split of the mesoderm along the somite axis [ 1 ] Plant organogenesis [ edit ] Organogenesis in plants occurs continuously and only stops when the plant dies. In the shoot , the shoot apical meristems regularly produce new lateral organs ( leaves , flowers , or fruits) and lateral branches. In the root , new lateral roots form from weakly differentiated internal tissue (e.g. the xylem -pole pericycle in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana ).

In vitro and in response to specific cocktails of hormones (mainly auxins and cytokinins ), most plant tissues can de-differentiate and form a mass of dividing totipotent stem cells called a callus . Organogenesis can then occur from those cells. The type of organ that is formed depends on the relative concentrations of the hormones in the medium. Plant organogenesis can be induced in tissue culture and used to regenerate plants.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Ectoderm Embryogenesis Endoderm Eye development Gastrulation Germ layer Germ line development Gonadogenesis Heart development Histogenesis Limb development List of human cell types derived from the germ layers Mesoderm Morphogenesis Organoid References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Gilbert, S. F.; Barresi, M. J. F. (2017-05-01). "Developmental Biology, 11Th Edition 2016".

American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A .

173 (5): 1430.

doi : 10.1002/ajmg.a.38166 .

ISSN 1552-4833 .

^ Rankin, Scott (2018).

"Timing is everything: Reiterative Wnt, BMP and RA signaling regulate developmental competence during endoderm organogenesis" .

Developmental Biology .

434 (1): 121– 132.

doi : 10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.11.018 .

PMC 5785443 .

PMID 29217200 – via NCBI.

^ Edlund, Helena (July 2002). "Organogenesis: Pancreatic organogenesis — developmental mechanisms and implications for therapy".

Nature Reviews Genetics .

3 (7): 524– 532.

doi : 10.1038/nrg841 .

ISSN 1471-0064 .

PMID 12094230 .

S2CID 2436869 .

^ Ader, Marius; Tanaka, Elly M (2014). "Modeling human development in 3D culture".

Current Opinion in Cell Biology .

31 : 23– 28.

doi : 10.1016/j.ceb.2014.06.013 .

PMID 25033469 .

^ a b c Kiecker, Clemens; Bates, Thomas; Bell, Esther (2016-03-01).

"Molecular specification of germ layers in vertebrate embryos" .

Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences .

73 (5): 923– 947.

doi : 10.1007/s00018-015-2092-y .

ISSN 1420-682X .

PMC 4744249 .

PMID 26667903 .

^ a b "Animal development – Embryonic induction" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-04-04 .

^ "Plant and Soil Sciences eLibrary" .

passel.unl.edu . Retrieved 2018-04-04 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of organogenesis at Wiktionary v t e Human embryonic development in the first three weeks Week 1 Fertilization Oocyte activation Zygote Cleavage Blastomere Morula Cavitation Blastocoel Blastocyst Inner cell mass Trophoblast Week 2 ( Bilaminar ) Hypoblast Epiblast Week 3 ( Trilaminar ) Germ layers Archenteron / Primitive streak Primitive pit Primitive node / Blastopore Primitive groove Gastrula Gastrulation Regional specification Ectoderm Surface ectoderm Neuroectoderm Somatopleuric mesenchyme Neurulation Neural crest Endoderm Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme Mesoderm Axial mesoderm Paraxial Somite Somitomere Intermediate Lateral plate Intraembryonic coelom Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme Somatopleuric mesenchyme Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Organogenesis&oldid=1285822357 " Categories : Developmental biology Embryology Organogenesis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 01:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Organogenesis 25 languages Add topic

