Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Western composers Toggle Western composers subsection 1.1 Medieval Era 1.2 Renaissance Era 1.2.1 Maddalena Casulana 1.2.2 Caterina Assandra 1.3 Baroque Era 1.3.1 Francesca Caccini 1.3.2 Barbara Strozzi 1.3.3 Élisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre 1.4 Classical Era 1.5 Romantic Era 1.5.1 Maria Szymanowska 1.5.2 Fanny Mendelssohn 1.5.3 Clara Schumann 1.6 Modern Era 1.6.1 Katherine Hoover 1.6.2 Joan Tower 1.6.3 Ellen Taaffe Zwilich 1.6.4 LIbby Larsen 1.6.5 Jennifer Higdon 1.6.6 Others 2 Songwriters Toggle Songwriters subsection 2.1 19th century-early 20th century 2.2 Jazz 2.3 Popular music in the 1960s 2.4 Singer-songwriters 2.5 Musical theatre 2.6 Black women 3 Instrumental performers Toggle Instrumental performers subsection 3.1 Popular music 3.1.1 Performers and bandleaders 3.1.2 Bands 3.1.2.1 1930s–1960s 3.1.2.2 1970s–1980s 3.1.2.3 Punk 3.1.2.4 Heavy metal 3.1.2.5 Grunge 3.1.3 1990s–2000s 3.1.4 2000s–2010s 3.2 Jazz 3.3 Classical music 3.3.1 Orchestra 3.3.2 Soloists 4 Singers Toggle Singers subsection 4.1 Popular music 4.2 Blues 4.3 Country music 4.4 Jazz 4.5 Classical music 4.5.1 Black women 4.5.2 Classical singers 4.6 World music 5 Eastern music Toggle Eastern music subsection 5.1 Arabic music 5.2 Chinese music 5.3 Indian music 5.4 Iranian music 5.5 Japanese music 5.6 Jewish music 6 Music scholars and educators Toggle Music scholars and educators subsection 6.1 Musicologists and music historians 6.2 Ethnomusicologists 6.3 Music educators 7 Conducting 8 Music critics Toggle Music critics subsection 8.1 Popular music 8.2 Classical music 9 Other musical professions Toggle Other musical professions subsection 9.1 Record producing and sound engineering 9.2 DJs and turntablists 10 Movements, organizations, events and genres Toggle Movements, organizations, events and genres subsection 10.1 Women's music 10.2 Organizations 10.2.1 International Alliance for Women in Music 10.2.2 Women in Music (WIM-NY) 10.2.3 Women in Music Canada 10.2.4 Now Girls Rule 10.3 Riot Grrrl 10.4 Festivals 11 Issues and approaches Toggle Issues and approaches subsection 11.1 Glass ceiling 11.2 Racism, sexism and discrimination 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Citations 14.2 Literary sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Women in music 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Igbo മലയാളം Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the newsletter, see Women in Music (periodical) .

This article may incorporate text from a large language model .

Such text potentially includes hallucinated information or fictitious references .

Copyright violations or claims lacking verification must be removed . Please see the associated project page for additional guidance.

( August 2025 ) Part of a series on Women in society Society Women's history ( legal rights ) Woman Animal advocacy Business Female entrepreneurs Gender representation on corporate boards of directors Combat Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic development Explorers and travelers Education Feminism Womyn Government Conservatives in the US Heads of state or government Legislators Queen regnant List Health Journalism Law Law enforcement Military Mother Nobel Prize laureates Piracy Positions of power Reproductive rights Sex segregation Feminist In Islam Venture capital Violence and abuse Voting rights Workforce Exchange of women Science Technology Computing Engineering Geology Medicine dentistry in the United States Organizations Science Science, technology, engineering and mathematics Space Telegraphy Arts Humanities Architecture Arts Art history field Women's cinema Dance Film "Chick flicks" Fine arts Literature Science fiction Philosophy Feminist philosophy Photographers Music Jazz Punk rock In Shakespeare's works Religion Theological figures Baháʼí Faith Bible Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Opus Dei Hinduism Islam Imams Mahr Segregation Women's testimony Judaism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism Popular culture Comics Portrayal in American comics Film industry Music Fictional pirates Speculative fiction Video games Gender representation in video games Women in the video game industry Sports Auto racing Baseball Basketball Boxing Cricket Curling Cycling Fastpitch softball Football / soccer Golf Gymnastics Ice hockey Lacrosse Mixed martial arts Netball Paralympic Games Rodeo Roller derby Rowing Surfing Swimming Tennis Track and field Volleyball Winter sports See also: List of sports By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Croatia Cuba Cyprus ( North ) Denmark DR Congo Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia FS Micronesia Fiji Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland Italy India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Ivory Coast Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Maldives Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Korea Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Spain Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sudan Suriname Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen v t e Kassia , one of the earliest known women composers Women in music have occupied many roles in the art over the centuries and have been responsible for a multitude of contributions, shaping movements, genres, and trends as singers , songwriters , composers , instrumental performers , and educators , and in behind-the-scenes roles. At the same time, however, many roles in music have been closed to or not encouraged for women. There has been growing awareness of this since perhaps the 1960s, and doors have been opening.

Women's music refers to music created by and directed towards women. It may explore political and social topics, influencing and impacting creativity, activism, and culture.

Western composers [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Further information: Women in classical music See also: List of female composers by birth date Nineteenth-century composer and pianist Clara Schumann Few works by women composers are part of standard classical music repertoire. In the Concise Oxford History of Music , for example, Clara Schumann is one of the only women composers mentioned.

[ 1 ] Medieval Era [ edit ] "O frondens virga" From Hildegarde von Bingen's Ordo Virtutum Problems playing this file? See media help .

During the Medieval Era, most art music was created for liturgical (or otherwise religious) purposes. Due to views about the roles of women held by religious leaders, few women composed this type of music, with exceptions such as Hildegard von Bingen .

[ 2 ] Von Bingen (1098–1179), a German Benedictine abbess , was a composer, writer, and philosopher.

[ 3 ] One of her works as a writer and composer, the Ordo Virtutum (Order of the Virtues), is an early example of liturgical drama and an early morality play .

[ 4 ] Seventy-seven of her sequences, each with its own original poetic text, survive, [ 5 ] one of the largest repertoires among medieval composers.

[ citation needed ] She also composed many liturgical songs that were collected into a cycle called the Symphonia armoniae celestium revelationum (Symphony of the harmony of heavenly revelations).

The songs from the Symphonia are set to her own text and range from antiphons , hymns , and sequences to responsories .

[ 6 ] Her music is described as monophonic , [ 7 ] using melodies that pushed the boundaries of traditional Gregorian chant .

Renaissance Era [ edit ] Two Renaissance women in music stand out as particularly of note: Maddalena Casulana and Caterina Assandra, both Italian.

Maddalena Casulana [ edit ] Painting by Artemisia Gentileschi , representing Saint Cecilia , patron saint of music—which has become identified since 2010 with Italian  composer Maddalena Casulana , considered the first woman composer to have her music printed and published [ a ] Maddalena Casulana (1544–1590) was an Italian composer, lutenist , and singer.

[ 8 ] In Venice , her book of madrigals for four voices, Il primo libro di madrigali ( The first book of madrigals ), was the first printed and published work by a woman in Western music history.

[ 9 ] In the dedication, she wrote about her feelings as a woman composer: "[I] want to show the world, as much as I can in this profession of music, the vain error of men that they alone possess the gifts of intellect and artistry, and that such gifts are never given to women." [ citation needed ] Other composers of the time, such as Philippe de Monte , thought highly of her.

[ citation needed ] Caterina Assandra [ edit ] Caterina Assandra (1590–1618) was an Italian composer and Benedictine nun . She was also an organist and published various works, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] composing motets and organ pieces. Her motet O Salutaris Hostia ( O Saving Victim ), included in Motetti ( Motets ) op. 2, was one of the first pieces to include the violone .

Baroque Era [ edit ] Baroque women musicians of note include Francesca Cacchini and Barbara Strozzi (Italian) and Élisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre (French).

Francesca Caccini [ edit ] The Lute Player, by Orazio Gentileschi , presumed to be a portrait of  Italian composer Francesca Caccini Francesca Caccini (1587–1641) was an Italian composer, singer, lutenist , poet, and music teacher. When she sang at the wedding of Henry IV of France and Maria de Medici in 1600, Henry praised her as the best singer in France. In her native country, she worked in the Medici court as a teacher, chamber singer, rehearsal coach, and composer of both chamber and stage music.

Barbara Strozzi [ edit ] Barbara Strozzi (1619–1677) was an Italian Baroque composer and singer. Renowned for her poetic ability and compositional talent, [ 12 ] Strozzi was said to be "the most prolific composer—man or woman—of printed secular vocal music in Venice in the middle of the century." [ 12 ] Élisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre [ edit ] Élisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre (1665–1729) was a French composer, musician, and harpsichordist . Born into a family of musicians and master instrument-makers, she was a child prodigy and performed on the harpsichord before King Louis XIV . She became a musician in the Royal Court and taught, composed, and gave concerts at home and throughout Paris.

[ 13 ] One of the few well-known women composers of her time, she composed in a wide variety of musical forms.

[ 14 ] Her talent and achievements were acknowledged by Titon du Tillet , who accorded her a place on his Mount Parnassus —a monument to the glory of French poets and musicians under the reign of Louis XIV—when she was only 26 years old.

Classical Era [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Classical Era produced quite a number of Western women in music in various countries, including Maria Teresa Agnesi (Italy), Princess Anna Amalia (Prussia), Elisabeth Olin (Sweden), Henriette Adélaïde Villard de Beaumesnil (France), Marianne von Martínez (Austria), and Harriet Abrams and Jane Mary Guest (England). Several also played instruments—such as Princess Anna Amalia, Henriette Adélaïde Villard de Beaumesnil, and Jane Mary Guest—or sang, such as Elisabeth Olin and Harriett Abrams. Maria Teresa Agnesi and Marianne von Martínez did both in addition to composing.

Swedish opera singer and composer Elisabeth Olin in the 1780s Princess Anna Amalia , a Prussian composer and score curator known for her chamber works—including trios, marches, cantatas, songs, and fugues French composer and opera singer Henriette Adélaïde Villard de Beaumesnil Maria Teresa Agnesi (1720–1795) was an Italian composer, harpsichordist , and singer.

[ citation needed ] Her career was made possible by the Austrian Lombardy, which was around women's rights .

[ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] Princess Anna Amalia (1723–1787) was a Prussian composer. She learned to play the harpsichord , flute , and violin at a young age. She became the abbess of Quedlinburg in 1755.

[ 15 ] She achieved fame as a composer and is known for her smaller chamber works, including trios, marches , cantatas , songs, and fugues . She was also a curator and collector of music scores, preserving over 600 volumes of works by composers Johann Sebastian Bach , George Frideric Handel , Georg Philipp Telemann , Karl Heinrich Graun , and Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach .

[ 16 ] Elisabeth Olin (1740–1828) was a Swedish opera singer and composer. She became a vocalist in regular public concerts at the Riddarhuset ( House of Nobility ) in Stockholm . She was the prima donna of the Swedish opera for a decade. In 1773, she became the first woman to be granted the title Hovsångare (court singer), and in 1782 she was inducted as the first women member into the Royal Swedish Academy of Music .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Henriette Adélaïde Villard de Beaumesnil (1748–1813) was a French composer and opera singer . She began working in minor comedy roles at age seven and debuted as a soloist at the Paris Opera in 1766.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] She was the second woman to have a composition performed at the Paris Opéra.

[ 21 ] Marianne von Martínez (1744–1812) was an Austrian composer, singer and pianist.

Metastasio noticed her precocious talents and came to oversee her musical education, which included keyboard lessons from Haydn , singing lessons with Porpora , and composition lessons with Johann Adolph Hasse and imperial court composer Giuseppe Bonno . She played for the imperial court, where she gained attention for her voice and keyboard playing, [ 22 ] and was frequently asked to perform before Empress Maria Theresa .

[ 23 ] Harriett Abrams (1758–1821) was an English composer and soprano . As a singer, she was praised for her performances of George Frideric Handel 's work.

[ citation needed ] She studied singing, music theory , and composition with composer Thomas Arne before making her opera début in 1775 at the Theatre Royal in London. She became a principal singer at London concerts and provincial festivals, appearing regularly from 1780 to 1790.

[ 24 ] Jane Mary Guest (1762–1846) was an English composer and pianist. A pupil of Johann Christian Bach and initially composing in the galante style, [ 25 ] She composed keyboard sonatas , other keyboard works, and vocal works with keyboard accompaniment.

[ 26 ] She was the piano teacher of Princess Amelia of the UK and Princess Charlotte of Wales .

[ 27 ] Romantic Era [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the Romantic Era, the Polish Maria Szymanowska and Germans Fanny Mendelssohn and Clara Schumann won much renown.

Painting of German composer Fanny Mendelssohn, by Moritz Daniel Oppenheim , 1842 Maria Szymanowska [ edit ] Maria Szymanowska (1789–1831) was a well-known Polish composer and pianist. She maintained connections with other notable artists, including Gioacchino Rossini , Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , and Adam Mickiewicz .

Fanny Mendelssohn [ edit ] Fanny Mendelssohn (1805–1847) was one of the best-known women composers of the 1800s. She showed prodigious musical ability and began to compose as a child. Even though family visitors were equally impressed by Fanny and her brother Felix Mendelssohn , Fanny was limited by the attitudes of the time. Her father was tolerant, rather than supportive, of her activities. He wrote to her in 1820, telling her that "music will perhaps become his [i.e., Felix's] profession, while for you it can and must be only an ornament." [ 28 ] Felix also cautioned her against publishing under her own name, commenting about her: From my knowledge of Fanny I should say that she has neither inclination nor vocation for [musical] authorship. She is too much all that a woman ought to be for this. She regulates her house, and neither thinks of the public nor of the musical world, nor even of music at all, until her first duties are fulfilled. Publishing would only disturb her in these, and I cannot say that I approve of it.

[ 29 ] Clara Schumann [ edit ] Clara Schumann (1819–1896) was a German composer and concert pianist who had a 61-year concert career. From an early age, she had a one-hour lesson in piano, violin, singing, theory, harmony, composition, and counterpoint. In 1830, at age 11, she had become a skilled soloist, and she left on a concert tour of European cities. In the late 1830s, she performed to sell-out crowds and glowing reviews.

Frédéric Chopin described her playing to Franz Liszt , who came to hear one of her concerts and subsequently "praised her extravagantly" in a letter published in the Parisian Revue et Gazette Musicale .

[ 30 ] She was named a Königliche und Kaiserliche Kammervirtuosin ( Royal and Imperial Chamber Virtuoso ), Austria 's highest musical honor.

[ 30 ] She was also instrumental in changing the kind of programs expected of concert pianists. In her early career, she played what was then customary, mainly bravura pieces designed to showcase her technique, often in the form of arrangements or variations on popular themes from operas, written by virtuosos such as Thalberg , Herz , or Henselt . As it was also customary to play one's own compositions, she included at least one of her own works in every program, works such as her "Variations on a Theme by Bellini" (Op. 8) and her popular "Scherzo" (Op. 10). Her works include songs, piano pieces, a piano concerto, a piano trio , choral pieces, and three Romances for violin and piano.

Modern Era [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Katherine Hoover [ edit ] French composer Lili Boulanger American composer Jennifer Higdon , whose compositions have won a Pulitzer Prize for Music and multiple Grammy Awards Katherine Hoover (1937–2018) studied music at the University of Rochester and the Eastman School of Music, where she earned a Performance Certificate in Flute and a Bachelor's of Music in Music Theory in 1959.

[ 31 ] She started publishing compositions in 1965, with her Duet for Two Violins . Hoover was the winner of the National Flute Association 's Newly Published Music Competition twice, first in 1987 with Medieval Suite and again in 1991 with Kokopelli for solo flute. These pieces use many extended techniques for flute, such as pitch bending. Many of her works have been recorded by other renowned musicians and performed in Carnegie Hall .

[ 32 ] : 252–253 Joan Tower [ edit ] Joan Tower (born 1938) wrote the 1976 piece Black Topaz , which features many tonal melodies and harmonies.

[ 33 ] : 134 She received her Doctor of Musical Arts degree in composition from Columbia University in 1978. She was commissioned in 1979 by the American Composers Orchestra , resulting in her first orchestral work, Sequoia , which has been performed worldwide. From 1985 to 1988 Tower was the composer-in-residence at the St. Louis Symphony . In 1990 she was the first woman to win the Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition , which included a $150,000 prize. Since then, Tower has been the composer-in-residence at numerous music festivals, including the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival and the Tanglewood Contemporary Music Festival. Tower has been a professor of music at Bard College in New York since 1982 and is considered one of the most influential woman composers of the 20th century.

[ 32 ] : 278–280 Ellen Taaffe Zwilich [ edit ] Ellen Taaffe Zwilich (born 1939) was the first woman to receive a doctorate in composition from Juilliard . The same year, she won a gold medal at the International Composition Competition in Italy. In 1983 Zwilich made history again, becoming the first woman to win the Pulitzer Prize for Music for Symphony No. 1.

She received many commissions, and her piece Millennium has been performed by dozens of orchestras since its premiere in 2000. She became the Francis Eppes Professor of Music at Florida State University in 1999.

[ 32 ] : 288–290 Zwilich is known for her "eclectic millennial voice" in her compositions, utilizing a clear design and rich timbres. Though her music, which was influenced by the Second Viennese School , was originally dissonant, her style became more emotional after the death of her husband.

[ 33 ] : 179 LIbby Larsen [ edit ] Libby Larsen (born 1950) earned a Master of Music in 1975  and a PhD in 1978 from the University of Minnesota . In 1973 she co-founded the Minnesota Composers Forum (later the American Composers Forum ), [ 34 ] and was the composer-in-residence at the Minnesota Orchestra from 1983 to 1987. A composer of over 220 works, including orchestra, dance, opera, choral, theater, chamber, and solo repertoire, her pieces have been performed across the United States and Europe. Larsen is a strong supporter of contemporary music and female musicians. She won a Grammy Award for her CD The Art of Arleen Auger in 1994 and a Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 2000. She also published a book, The Concert Hall That Fell Asleep and Woke Up as a Car Radio in 2007.

[ 33 ] : 242–253 [ 32 ] : 256–258 Jennifer Higdon [ edit ] Jennifer Higdon (born 1962) earned an MA and PhD from the University of Philadelphia in 1994. Higdon has received awards from the Guggenheim Foundation, American Academy of Arts and Letters, International League of Women Composers , and others. Her 1996 work Shine was named Best Contemporary Piece by USA Today .

[ 32 ] : 252–253 Of Higdon's many pieces, blue cathedral is most frequently performed. In 2010, she won the Grammy award for Best Contemporary Classical Composition for her Percussion Concerto and the Pulitzer Prize for Music for her composition Violin Concerto , premiered by Hilary Hahn.

[ 35 ] Others [ edit ] Additional women composers are listed below by birth year, along with their varied nationalities. Some were also performers; for example, Agnes Tyrrell , Amy Beach , and Verdina Shlonsky were noted pianists. For a full list, see List of female composers by birth year .

Agnes Tyrrell (1846–1883; English and Czech) Ethel Smyth (1858–1944; British) Amy Beach (1867–1944; American) Dora Pejačević (1885–1923; Croatian) Florence Price (1887–1953; American) Nadia Boulanger (1887–1979; French) Lili Boulanger (1893–1918; French) Verdina Shlonsky (1905–1990; Israeli) Imogen Holst (1907–1984; English) Violet Archer (1913–2000; Canadian) Vítězslava Kaprálová (1915–1940; Czech) Thea Musgrave (1928–; Scottish) Sofia Gubaidulina (1931–2025; Russian) Songwriters [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) [l]ike most aspects of the... music business [in the 1960s], songwriting was a male-dominated field. Though there were plenty of female singers on the radio, women... were primarily seen as consumers:... Singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument, writing songs, or producing records simply wasn't done... [and women] were not socialized to see themselves as people who create [music].

Erika Abrams in Rebeat , 28 January 2015 19th century-early 20th century [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The music of only a few of the many woman songwriters in the USA was heard or published in the late 19th and early 20th century because of the expectation that women would perform music, not make it, according to Richard A. Reublin and Richard G. Beil, who called this a "glaring and embarrassing omission in our musical heritage." [ 36 ] For instance, Chicago music critic George P. Upton argued that "women lacked the innate creativity to compose good music" due to what he referred to as their biological predisposition. Later, however, it was accepted that women would have a role in music education , and as part of that role women wrote hymns and children's music, but not much in the way of secular music in America; indeed, only around seventy such works can be found before 1880.

[ 36 ] About 95% of the songwriters in the British music hall during the early 1900s were men, as also about 70% of singers.

[ 37 ] In the mid-19th century, however, women songwriters emerged, including Faustina Hasse Hodges , Susan McFarland Parkhurst , Augusta Browne , and Marion Dix Sullivan . By 1900, their numbers had grown, though many used pseudonyms or initials to hide their sex.

[ 36 ] Carrie Jacobs-Bond was the preeminent woman composer from the late 1900s into the middle of the 20th century and became the first woman songwriter whose compositions reached a million in sales.

[ 36 ] Maude Nugent (1877–1958) wrote "Sweet Rosie O'Grady" in 1896 as well as "Down at Rosie Reilly's Flat," "My Irish Daisy," and "Mary From Tipperary." [ 36 ] Charlotte Blake (1885–1979) was a staff writer for the Whitney Warner Publishing Co., in Detroit, Michigan. Initially, the company billed her as "C. Blake," but by 1906 advertisements used her full name.

[ 36 ] Caro Roma (1866–1937) was the pseudonym for Carrie Northly , one of Tin Pan Alley era's most popular and well-known early musicians.

[ 36 ] Her songs include "Can't Yo' Heah Me Calling"; "Faded Rose"; "The Angelus"; "Thinking of Thee"; "A Perfect Day"; and "Resignation." [ 36 ] Jazz [ edit ] Lil Hardin Armstrong (1898–1971) Ella Fitzgerald in 1940 Billie Holiday in 1947 Examples of women in 20th-century jazz While jazz songwriting has long been a male-dominated field, woman jazz songwriters —including Ann Ronell , Irene Higginbotham , Dorothy Fields , Lil Hardin Armstrong , and Billie Holiday —also achieved success.

[ 38 ] Women influenced jazz music by producing, composing, and performing it. One early influential woman was Bessie Smith ("Empress of the Blues"). A Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee, she was awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1989.

[ 39 ] Another woman who made history in the jazz industry is Dolly Jones , the first women jazz trumpeter to be recorded.

[ 40 ] Women such as Billie Pierce , Lovie Austin , Jeanette Kimball , Mary Lou Williams , Alice Coltrane , and Hazel Scott all had an impact on the jazz genre.

[ 41 ] Women often began their careers playing in an all-women's jazz group, [ 42 ] such as Valaida Snow , known as the "Queen of the Trumpet," [ 43 ] and Nona Hendryx , a jazz vocalist and multi-instrumentalist.

[ 43 ] World War II opened many doors for woman artists. However, once the men came home from war, female jazz musicians faced difficulties such as sexual harassment and harsh criticism.

[ citation needed ] Popular music in the 1960s [ edit ] Dusty Springfield in 1965 In the 1960s pop music scene, women were mostly singers.

[ 44 ] A few women wrote songs at the Brill Building in New York City, considered the center of the American music industry that dominated the pop charts at this time—among them, Carole King , Ellie Greenwich , and Cynthia Weil —penning iconic hits for other artists.

Singer-songwriters [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: Many of the women on the bulleted list are notable enough for their contributions that they should have more prominence like those in the lead sentences.. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Joan Baez playing at the March on Washington in August 1963 Women were well represented in the late 1960s success of singer-songwriters who wrote in the confessional style of poets such as Anne Sexton and Sylvia Plath .

Songwriters such as Joni Mitchell wanted to escape categories of race and gender and be seen simply as artists, as she explained in a 1994 interview during which she pointed out discrimination, sex-based exclusion, and gratuitous sexualization, although she also rejected feminism.

[ 45 ] Carole King , after stellar early success as a songwriter, sang her pieces on one of the most successful albums of the period, Tapestry, which sold over 15 million copies.

[ 46 ] She challenged conventions around dating, marriage, and sex, promoting casual relationships and highlighting the notion of friendship with those of the opposite sex [ 47 ] with her hit song " You've Got a Friend ." In 2013, she was the first women recipient (and fifth overall) of the Gershwin Prize for Popular Song .

[ 48 ] Carole King , one of the most successful singer-songwriters, was included among Rolling Stone ' s 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time and Songwriters Hall of Fame .

[ 49 ] One-time model Grace Slick achieved notoriety for her role in San Francisco's burgeoning psychedelic music scene in the mid-1960s.

Other notable women singer-songwriters include: [ 50 ] Dolly Parton , who has sole writing credit on over 700 songs and became the most successful female country artist of all time [ 49 ] Elyse Weinberg [ 51 ] Janis Ian Joni Mitchell Laura Marling Laura Nyro [ 44 ] Loretta Lynn , who wrote songs on the political issues of white working-class women in America, including contraception and divorce and was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2013 [ 52 ] [ 49 ] Lotti Golden , known for songs about gender identity and drug use [ 51 ] Melanie Musical theatre [ edit ] Ethel Merman Known as the "First Lady of Musical Theatre," Ethel Merman's powerful voice and larger-than-life presence graced many Broadway stages.

In musical theatre, woman songwriters are rare. In 2013, Cyndi Lauper was the first woman to win the Tony Award for Best Score without a male collaborator for the music and lyrics for Kinky Boots .

[ 53 ] In 2015 an all-woman writing team made history by winning the Tony Award for Best Score .

[ 54 ] Lisa Kron (Best Book), Jeanine Tesori and Kron (Best Original Score) [ 53 ] won Best Score for Fun Home .

[ 54 ] Other  woman songwriters include Lauren Pritchard , who wrote Songbird ; Zoe Sarnak, who wrote A Lasting Impression and The Years Between ; and Katie Thompson [ example needed ] .

[ 54 ] The gender imbalance in musical theater continues in the 21st century with women making up, as reported in 2019, only 3% of wind band composers and 12% of choral composers.

[ 55 ] Despite the scarcity of women in musical theater composition, over fifty women have received international recognition for composing musical scores for Broadway and Off-Broadway productions.

[ 55 ] Black women [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: "Black women" is not a genre of music. Further thinking about where to place this sub-section, or perhaps how to integrate it in the overall article, is needed.. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Abbey Lincoln (1930–2010), was an American jazz vocalist, songwriter, and actress, who wrote and performed her own compositions. She was a civil rights advocate during the 1960s.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Black women have made historical contributions to American music. Examples include jazz artist Billie Holiday ; soul artists Aretha Franklin and Diana Ross ; disco artists Donna Summer and Chaka Khan ; and later singing artists such as Missy Elliott , Mariah Carey , Beyoncé , and Rihanna (although she is from Barbados). However, of the over 380 members of the Songwriters Hall of Fame , only Sylvia Moy and Valerie Simpson are black women, as reported in 2009.

[ 58 ] Instrumental performers [ edit ] Popular music [ edit ] Performers and bandleaders [ edit ] Janis Joplin , known for her mezzo-soprano vocals Suzi Quatro in 2007 Professional women instrumentalists were initially uncommon in rock music.

[ 59 ] : 101–102 [ 44 ] One exception is women who played instruments in American all-female garage rock bands , although none of these bands achieved more than regional success.

Heavy metal bands remained almost exclusively male [ 60 ] at least until the mid-1980s, [ 61 ] with a few exceptions such as Girlschool .

[ 60 ] When Suzi Quatro emerged in 1973, no other prominent woman rock musician worked as a singer, instrumentalist, songwriter, or bandleader.

[ 62 ] : 2 [ 62 ] : 3 Many artists both sang and composed songs, but these artists also played an instrument : Nancy Wilson Joan Jett Sister Rosetta Tharpe Lita Ford Tal Wilkenfeld Bonnie Raitt Joni Mitchell Kaki King Orianthi Jennifer Batten Mary Ford Carole King Shirley Horn Eva Cassidy Ruth Brown Marian Anderson Gunhild Carling (multi-instrumentalist) Bands [ edit ] The Bangles were a prominent part of the 1980s pop-rock scene with hits like "Manic Monday" and "Eternal Flame." They blended catchy pop hooks with a rock edge.

An all-female band is a musical group in popular music genres such as rock, blues , and jazz composed of female musicians . All-female bands are sometimes also called "girl groups." [ 63 ] They were difficult to maintain: many struggled with replacing female musicians once they departed, and some chose to open the bands to men to continue.

[ 64 ] 1930s–1960s [ edit ] Stevie Nicks performing In the Jazz Age and during the 1930s, all-female bands such as the Blue Belles, the Parisian Redheads (later the Bricktops), Lil-Hardin's All-Girl Band, the Ingenues , the Harlem Playgirls , Phil Spitalny's Musical Sweethearts, and Helen Lewis and Her All-Girl Jazz Syncopators were popular.

Ina Ray Hutton led the Melodears from 1934 to 1939.  Eunice Westmoreland, under the name Rita Rio , led a band that appeared on NBC Radio and for Vitaphone and RKO . The New Coon Creek Girls worked in the 1930s.

[ 64 ] A Polish group, Filipinki , was established in 1959.

[ 65 ] All-female bands also played rock and roll , including Goldie & the Gingerbreads in 1964; the Pleasure Seekers with Suzi Quatro in 1964; the Feminine Complex in 1968; and Fanny in 1969. Others included the Liverbirds (1962–1967); the Ace of Cups (1967); the Heart Beats (1968); and Ariel (1968–1970).

1970s–1980s [ edit ] In 1971 Fanny became the first all-female band to reach the Hot 100's top 40, with "Charity Ball" peaking at No. 40. In 1975, the Canadian sister duo of Kate and Anna McGarrigle , recorded the first of a string of albums.

The Runaways were an early commercially successful hard rock band, releasing their first album in 1976: band members Joan Jett , Cherie Currie , and Lita Ford all went on to successful solo careers.

The Happy Hollow Stringband (1974–1979) played bluegrass, with Sandy Crisco on banjo. She reported that it could be difficult to find the ladies' restroom during bookings, as many male instrumentalists did not know where it was.

[ 64 ] Another female band of the era was the WildWood Girls. Beginning in 1979 from the Chicago area, the band became a family affair. They performed for the USO and Department of Defense and also worked at Dollywood and at Bill Monroe's Bean Blossom Festival . They released six recordings.

[ citation needed ] The 1980s brought chart success to women instrumentalists for the first time. On the Billboard Hot 100-year-end chart for 1982, [ 66 ] Joan Jett's " I Love Rock 'n' Roll " at No. 3 and the Go-Go's " We Got the Beat " at No. 25 showed that women who could play could bring in money.

In 1989, The Dixie Chicks (later just The Chicks) rose from street corners in Dallas, Texas, to great success. The band is a trio with Natalie Maines as lead singer, Natalie Maguire on the fiddle and mandolin, and Emily Robison on banjo, the dobro, guitar, and the accordion. They won five Grammys , the Country Music Association 's Album of the Year, and the Vocal Group of the Year award in 2002.

[ citation needed ] Punk [ edit ] Main article: Women in punk rock Joan Jett is often referred to as the "Godmother of Punk." [ 67 ] In the United Kingdom, the advent of punk in the late 1970s with its "anyone can do it" ethos encouraged women to make significant contributions.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] "That was the beauty of the punk thing," Chrissie Hynde later said. "[Sexual] discrimination didn't exist." [ 70 ] Beyond participation, woman punk artists influenced the development of that genre of music.

[ 71 ] Rock historian Helen Reddington claimed that many or most punk women musicians were more interested in the ideology and sociopolitical implications than on fashion, such as fishnet stockings and spiky blond hair [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Johnny Rotten wrote that "During the Pistols era, women were out there playing with the men, taking us on in equal terms... It wasn't combative, but compatible." [ 74 ] Women instrumentalists were involved in bands such as the Slits ; the Raincoats ; the Mo-dettes ; Dolly Mixture ; and the Innocents .

[ citation needed ] This egalitarian view was challenged, however, by guitarist Viv Albertine , who commented that "the A&R men, the bouncers, the sound mixers, no one took us seriously... So, no, we got no respect anywhere we went. People just didn't want us around." [ 75 ] [ 76 ] A similar view was voiced by Sonic Youth 's Kim Gordon , who said she thought of women as natural anarchists because "you're always operating in a male framework." [ 77 ] Heavy metal [ edit ] Girlschool is a British all-women heavy metal band formed in the new wave of British heavy metal scene in 1978 and frequently associated with contemporaries Motörhead . They are the longest running all-female rock band , still active after more than 35 years.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] South London band Girlschool formed in 1978 and became known in the early 1980s. Band member Kathy Valentine left to join the Go-Go's , switching from guitar to bass. Among Girlschool's early recordings was an EP titled St. Valentine's Day Massacre , which the group recorded with Bronze label-mates Motörhead under the name Headgirl . In 1974, the Deadly Nightshade , a rock/country band, was signed by Phantom.

[ 80 ] Grunge [ edit ] Courtney Love in 2012 Women were represented in grunge bands such as L7 , Lunachicks , Dickless , STP, 7 Year Bitch , Courtney Love 's group Hole , and Babes in Toyland .

Riot Grrrl was part of an underground feminist punk movement.

[ 81 ] Women instrumentalists include bassists D'arcy Wretzky and Melissa Auf der Maur from The Smashing Pumpkins , and drummers Patty Schemel (Hole and Courtney Love projects), and Lori Barbero of Babes in Toyland .

[ 82 ] Kathleen Hanna , frontwoman of Bikini Kill , influenced grunge with her punk and feminist approach.

1990s–2000s [ edit ] Alanis Morissette signing autographs for fans, 2011 In the 1990s, music magazines put Bonnie Raitt [ 83 ] [ 84 ] and Tina Weymouth [ 85 ] on their covers. Club bands The Go-Go's and The Bangles were the first bands to find sustained success.

In rock, bands such as Hole , Super Heroines , The Lovedolls, and L7 became popular, offering self-confident and "bad" attitudes, challenging assumptions about how an all-female band should behave.

Courtney Love described Hole's artistic ambitions as "[not] only repeating what men have done" while "coming at things from a more feminine, lunar, viewpoint." [ 86 ] In the 1990s, the punk female-led Riot Grrrl movement was associated with bands such as Bratmobile and Bikini Kill .

In pop music, two commercial groups briefly rose to fame.

Destiny's Child was an American group composed of Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland , and Michelle Williams , beginning as Girl's Tyme in 1990 and becoing Destiny's Child in 1997. The Spice Girls was a British pop group composed of Mel B , Melanie C , Emma Bunton , Geri Halliwell , and Victoria Beckham . Their single "Wannabe" came out in 1996 and reached number one in 37 countries.

[ 87 ] 2000s–2010s [ edit ] Florence and the Machine performing at the O 2 ABC Glasgow during the band's Lungs Tour In the 2000s, bands started using their influence to promote feminism and women in music. Bands like The Distillers , fronted by Brody Dalle , influenced the rise of street punk.

St. Vincent gained traction and appeared on the cover of Guitar World magazine wearing a T-shirt with a bikini decal, a comment on how when women appear with guitars, they are usually minimally dressed, helping to sell the instruments.

Haim , a band composed of three sisters, calls out music festivals for the lack of woman-fronted bands and the lower payment for women artists compared to male artists of the same level.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Samantha Fish is known for her blues-infused rock sound guitar playing skills From 2010 to 2018, many girl bands gained attention, such as British band Little Mix , made up of Jesy Nelson ; Leigh-Anne Pinnock ; Jade Thirlwall ; and Perrie Edwards . Little Mix was the first all-female group since the Pussycat Dolls to reach the US top five with DNA (2012). It also broke the Spice Girls ' record for the highest debut US chart position for a British girl group's first release.

[ 90 ] [ unreliable source?

] Fifth Harmony , an American group composed of Ally Brooke ; Normani Kordei ; Dinah Jane ; Lauren Jauregui ; and Camila Cabello had three albums chart in the top 10 of the US Billboard 200 .

[ 91 ] Jazz [ edit ] Women instrumentalists in jazz include: Toshiko Akiyoshi : bandleader, pianist, arranger, composer Regina Carter : jazz violin Melba Liston : trombonist and arranger Vi Redd : alto saxophonist Melissa Aldana : tenor saxophonist Emily Remler : guitar Mimi Fox : guitarist Sweet Emma Barrett : pianist Terri Lyne Carrington : drummer Carla Bley : pianist Mary Lou Williams : pianist Billie Pierce : pianist Jeanette Kimball : pianist Lovie Austin : pianist and bandleader Joelle Khoury : pianist and composer Shirley Horn : pianist Eva Cassidy : guitarist, pianist Ruth Brown : pianist Mary Lou Williams (left) and Sarah Vaughan were two well-known jazz performers Female jazz bands include The International Sweethearts of Rhythm and orchestras such as the Hour of Charm Orchestra . During World War II , these groups entertained the troops while the male musicians served. However, after the war, the public favored the "normalcy" signaled by male musicians.

[ 92 ] Vocalist June Norton was the first black woman in the Washington, DC area to appear singing in TV commercials marketed towards Southern states, leading to her winning many awards including the 1962 Achievement Award from the National Association of Colored Women ; the TV Personality of the Year award [ clarification needed ] ; the 1962 Emphasis Award from the National Association of Market Development; and the 1962 Singer of the Year Award from the YMCA .

[ 92 ] Pianist, composer, and vocalist Shirley Horn recorded more than 25 albums and worked as a side musician for Stuff Smith , Toots Thielemans , Charlie Haden , and Oscar Peterson . Her debut recording, Embers and Ashes , attracted attention. A few months after, Miles Davis contacted Horn and told the Village Vanguard that he refused to play unless Horn opened for him. She received many awards including a Grammy in 1999 for Best Jazz Vocal Album for I Remember Miles; five Washington Area Music Awards; an honorary music degree from the Berklee College of Music ; and a 2004 NEA Jazz Master Fellowship and Award from the National Endowment for the Arts.

[ 92 ] Classical music [ edit ] Statue of Ethel Smyth unveiled in Duke's Court Plaza, Woking , England, in 2022 Women instrumentalists have been performing classical music since the genre began, in all its forms (solos, small groups, and orchestras) and settings (religious, academic, royal, and commercial), despite reluctance to credit their abilities.

In the Album Era, promoters did not hesitate to use performers' physical attractiveness to gain exposure, increase sales, and even select performers to promote.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Although some women artists rejected this approach, those who complied tended to achieve greater success.

[ 94 ] Orchestra [ edit ] The Montreal Women's Symphony Orchestra in 1942 Marin Alsop with OSESP Classical violinist Sarah Chang before performing a 2005 solo concert The Aeolian Ladies' Orchestra, founded in 1894 by Rosabel Watson , was one of the first professional orchestras exclusively staffed by women. A music newspaper editorial in 1917 in England encouraged orchestras to allow women to play the "lighter instruments," with the understanding that they would relinquish their positions to male artists after World War I ended.

[ 37 ] Women were accepted in orchestras as harp players before being accepted on other instruments, as the harp was considered a "women's instrument." [ citation needed ] In 1922, harpist Stephanie Goldner became the first woman member of the New York Philharmonic .

[ 95 ] A hundred years later, women outnumbered men in the entire orchestra.

[ 96 ] In the 1990s, to circumvent gender bias , some orchestras adopted blind auditions , requiring candidates to perform behind a screen. The practice continued into the 21st century, despite objections that equity could be advanced by modifying the practice.

[ 97 ] A 1980s study reported that women made up 36% of US orchestras, 30% in the United Kingdom, and 16% in East and West Germany. Their chances of being hired in orchestras were greater in less prominent ones.

[ 98 ] At one point, the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra (VPO) argued that "ethnic and gender uniformity" gave their orchestra a better sound.

[ 98 ] Several male VPO musicians stated in a 1996 interview that classical music has "gender-defined qualities which can be most clearly expressed by male uniformity"; [ 98 ] and first flautist Dieter Flury was of the opinion that accepting women would be "gambling with the emotional unity ( emotionelle Geschlossenheit ) that this organism currently has." [ 99 ] Only after protests by the National Organization for Women and the International Association of Women in Music while the orchestra was touring in 1997 did the VPO  accept women to permanent membership, agreeing to admit Anna Lelkes as a harpist.

[ 100 ] As of 2013 [update] , the VPO had six woman members. Violinist Albena Danailova became one of the orchestra's concertmasters in 2008, the first woman to hold that position.

[ 101 ] VPO president Clemens Hellsberg said that VPO used blind auditions .

[ 102 ] The Czech Philharmonic excludes women.

[ citation needed ] The Berlin Philharmonic was reported to have a history of gender discrimination.

[ 98 ] Of the orchestras ranked among the world's top five by Gramophone in 2008, [ 103 ] the last to appoint a woman to a permanent position was the Berlin Philharmonic .

[ 104 ] In 2013, an article in Mother Jones stated that "[m]any prestigious orchestras have significant female membership—women outnumber men in the New York Philharmonic 's violin section—and several renowned ensembles, including the National Symphony Orchestra , the Detroit Symphony , and the Minnesota Symphony, are led by women violinists. Brass, percussion, and string-bass orchestra sections are still predominantly male." [ 105 ] Soloists [ edit ] In classical music, soloists may perform unaccompanied solos on their instrument, as occurs with pianists who play works for solo piano or stringed instruments who play Baroque suites for one instrument (e.g., Bach suites for solo cello ). In many cases, though, soloists are accompanied by a pianist; a small chamber music ensemble; or, in the case of a concerto, a full symphony orchestra.

In the 2014–2015 season, the majority of concerto soloists who performed with major Canadian orchestras were male. In the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra , 67% of the concerto soloists were male. In the Toronto Symphony Orchestra , 74% of the concerto soloists were male. In the National Arts Centre Orchestra , 79% of the concerto soloists were male. In the Montreal Symphony Orchestra , 84% of the concerto soloists were male.

[ 94 ] When the CBC news story on the gender balance of concerto soloists was released, the conductor of the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra, Bramwell Tovey , disputed the accuracy of the news story in regard to his orchestra, arguing that the article only took a single season into account.

[ citation needed ] An internationally famed soloist is Argentina's Martha Argerich , considered as one of the recorded era's greatest pianists.

[ citation needed ] Singers [ edit ] Popular music [ edit ] Cher Donna Summer Madonna Whitney Houston Mariah Carey Beyoncé Taylor Swift Lady Gaga Examples of influential female pop artists, all of whom are among the best-selling music artists of all time Singers in "pop music" perform the vocals for bands and other music groups, which may range in size from a duo or a power trio to a large jazz big band . Singers typically do both live performances and studio recordings. Those who do live performances may sing in small venues such as coffeehouses or nightclubs , or they may perform in larger venues ranging from arts centres to stadiums. Some singers also perform in music videos used to promote the songs.

In some styles of pop, singers may play a rhythm-section instrument, such as rhythm guitar, electric bass, or percussion instrument while they sing. In other styles of pop, singers perform choreographed dance moves during the show. Women pop singers known for elaborate dance routines in their live shows include Cher , Madonna , Beyoncé , Britney Spears , and Lady Gaga .

Cher has been described as "a pioneer of female autonomy during a male-driven era [who] paved a way in a sexist industry with her music." [ 106 ] Although she recalls that era as "a time when girl singers were patted on the head for being good and told not to think," [ 107 ] her own image eventually changed due to her "refusal of dependence on a man and the determination ... to refuse the conventional role assigned to women over forty years old in an industry that fetishises youth ." [ 108 ] Madonna , also a key figure in pop music, has also been credited with paving the way for women artists and permanently changing the music industry for women and today's pop stars.

[ 109 ] Other influential women contemporaries in pop music include Annie Lennox , Cyndi Lauper , Debbie Harry , Diana Ross , Donna Summer , Grace Jones , Gloria Estefan , Janet Jackson , Kate Bush , Kylie Minogue , Nina Hagen , Olivia Newton-John , Pat Benatar , Stevie Nicks , and Tina Turner .

[ citation needed ] Singer-songwriter and music producer Björk has commented that the male collaborators of women singers are typically credited for the sound of their recordings because people see them performing on stage and assume they don't produce recordings or play an instrument.

[ 110 ] Lady Gaga has also weighed in on the difficulties faced by women recording artists because of the similarity of the music industry to a boys' club they can't get into.

[ 111 ] Along the same lines, Indie folk singer-songwriter/guitarist Ani di Franco states that for women, in the past, even entering a guitar store was an "act of courage" because it felt like a "boys' club." [ 45 ] Indeed, one study found that customers did not treat a saleswoman at a guitar store as if she knew anything about guitars until she used special guitar terms.

[ 45 ] Women in funk music include Chaka Khan , Labelle , Brides of Funkenstein , Klymaxx , Mother's Finest , and Betty Davis . Despite funk 's popularity in modern music, few have examined the work of funk women. One who has, however, is cultural critic Cheryl Keyes, who focused on Betty Davis , calling her "an artist whose name has gone unheralded as a pioneer in the annals of funk and rock. Most writing on these musical genres has traditionally placed male artists like Jimi Hendrix, George Clinton (of Parliament-Funkadelic), and bassist Larry Graham as trendsetters in the shaping of a rock music sensibility." [ 112 ] Some of the most influential women singers since the 2000s include Adele , Alicia Keys , Ariana Grande , Avril Lavigne , Beyoncé , Billie Eilish , Britney Spears , Charli XCX , Christina Aguilera , Dua Lipa , Florence Welch , Katy Perry , Kelly Clarkson , Lady Gaga , Lana Del Rey , Miley Cyrus , Pink , Rihanna , Shakira , SZA , and Taylor Swift . Most of them write their own songs, and some also produce music.

In East Asian pop music, during the 2010s, Japanese idol girl groups have been very successful in what is the largest physical music market in the world—and second largest overall—with 17 number-one singles just in 2017 . The best-selling among all the J-pop idol girl groups, AKB48 , is the best-selling act in Japan ever by number of singles sold—and third by total number of records sold —and has had as well the best-selling single in the country every year of the decade so far. Also, the best-selling album ever in the country , First Love , released in 1999, is by a woman, Japanese American singer and songwriter Hikaru Utada .

South Korean idol girl groups have also been very successful the 2010s, with Twice having the best-performing single of 2016 in the country, as well as having won a total of 43 awards since their debut in October 2015. Another highly successful Korean idol girl group this decade is Blackpink , reaching the highest place ever for a K-pop girl group on the Billboard Hot 100 as well as being the first K-pop girl group to be number-one on the Billboard Emerging Artists chart.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] It has also won a total of 16 awards since their debut in August 2016. Although K-pop has become increasingly popular in the US with many idol girl groups climbing their way up the leaderboards, most of its popularity is towards male groups, with woman groups being overshadowed by the concept of a boys-only club.

[ citation needed ] Chinese idol girl groups have also recently achieved significant success, with C-pop groups like SNH48 and Rocket Girls 101 , with the latter selling over 1.6 million copies of their debut EP in 2018.

[ 115 ] Blues [ edit ] Ma Rainey (1886–1939) [ 116 ] was one of the earliest known American professional blues singers and one of the first generation of such singers to record.

[ 117 ] Classic female blues was an early form of blues music popular in the 1920s. An amalgam of traditional folk blues and urban theater music, the style is also known as vaudeville blues.  Classic blues songs performed by woman vocalists were accompanied by pianists or small jazz ensembles, and were the first blues to be recorded. The classic female blues singers were pioneers in the record industry , as they were among the first black singers and blues artists who were recorded. They were also instrumental in popularizing the 12-bar blues throughout the US.

[ citation needed ] Gertrude "Ma" Rainey (1886–1939), known as the " Mother of the Blues," is credited as the first to perform the blues on stage as popular entertainment when she began incorporating blues into her act of show songs and comedy around 1902.

[ 118 ] : 38 [ 119 ] : 34 New York-based cabaret singer Mamie Smith recorded "Crazy Blues" in 1920, which sold over 75,000 copies, [ 118 ] and she became known as "America's First Lady of the Blues." In 1920, the vaudeville singer Lucille Hegamin became the second black woman to record blues when she recorded "The Jazz Me Blues." [ 118 ] : 16 Ethel Waters , Alberta Hunter , Mary Stafford , Katie Crippen , Edith Wilson , and Esther Bigeou , among others, made their first recordings before the end of 1921.

[ 120 ] These blues recordings were typically labeled as " race records " to distinguish them from records sold to white audiences. Nonetheless, the recordings of some of the classic female blues singers were purchased by white buyers as well.

[ 121 ] Marion Harris became one of the first white female singers to record the blues.

The most popular of the classic blues singers was Tennessee -born Bessie Smith (no relation to Mamie Smith), who first recorded in 1923 and became known as the "Empress of the Blues." She became the highest-paid black artist of the 1920s, recording over 160 songs. Other classic blues singers who recorded extensively until the end of the 1920s were Ida Cox , Clara Smith , and Sara Martin . These early blues singers were an influence on later singers such as Mahalia Jackson and Janis Joplin . These blues women's contributions to the genre included "increased improvisation on melodic lines, unusual phrasing which altered the emphasis and impact of the lyrics, and vocal dramatics using shouts, groans, moans, and wails. The blues women thus effected changes in other types of popular singing that had spin-offs in jazz, Broadway musicals , torch songs of the 1930s and 1940s, gospel , rhythm and blues , and eventually rock and roll ." [ 119 ] : 8 Country music [ edit ] Dolly Parton Loretta Lynn Miranda Lambert Shania Twain Examples of leading and pioneer country musical female figures A large number of women singers in the country music genre have been influential to the industry through their success. Despite the popularity of male country artists and the discrimination displayed throughout their music, many women artists have worked their way past, leading them to achieve multiple accomplishments.

Dolly Parton , a country singer in the industry for over 55 years, developed a successful career. She consistently created new projects to release to her fans and was described as "unstoppable" by Rolling Stone magazine.

[ 122 ] Included in these projects are over 45 musical albums; multiple film features; a theme park, Dollywood ; and the creation of a production company.

[ 123 ] Carrie Underwood , an iconic American Idol winner, also created a lasting impact in the country music genre. With over 251,000 units sold, Underwood's album Cry Pretty was her fourth album to reach number one on the Billboard 200 list, [ 124 ] after Blown Away, Play On, and Carnival Ride . These achievements led her to become the first woman singer to have four country albums as number one in the all-genre Billboard 200 .

[ 124 ] Underwood has had multiple other number ones throughout her career, surpassing many other popular artists while leaving a strong impact on the female country music industry.

A women's rights activist and animal lover, Miranda Lambert , has also had a dominating career within country music. Her songs titled "Over You" and "Heart Like Mine" took over the Billboard charts and country music radio stations in 2010 and 2011.

[ 125 ] As a solo woman artist, she writes her music through honesty and reality.

[ 126 ] The messages sent through her music are intended to help other women not feel alone as they go through difficult life situations. Using the fame she has earned from the music industry, Lambert works with charities like the Humane Society as a way to give back.

[ 127 ] However, gender discrimination and sexism occurs frequently in country music and has become more prominent in this genre over time, going backwards compared to some categories like rap and pop. Dr. Eric Rasmussen, a professor in the College of Media and Communication and Texas Tech University, argues that compared to the 1990s, the country music of the 2010s discriminates more against women; for instance, in "talking more about women's appearance, [showing] women in tight or revealing clothing, comparing women to objects, referring to women in slang [terms] versus their real names, and portraying women as distrustful and cheaters." [ 128 ] Starting in the 2010s, a popular subgenre has developed: bro-country , with lyrics that have been criticized for sexually objectifying women and framing them as assets for men's use.

[ 129 ] Some popular bro-country artists include Luke Bryan , Florida Georgia Line , and Blake Shelton . Bro-country may be influenced by historical aspects of Southern culture that have been associated with racism and sexism. Women in country music continue to face these issues and often find no way to directly deal with them; for instance, as recording artist Kacey Musgraves describes her experience in country music, if a label fails to get a woman's song off the ground, it is immediately blamed on her personality or the fact that she is a woman, or on her not making a radio station program director feel important.

[ citation needed ] Jazz [ edit ] Nina Simone , an influential jazz musical figure Although women have been underrepresented in jazz as instrumentalists, composers, songwriters and bandleaders, there have been many female jazz singers.

Bessie Smith sang both the blues and jazz.

Lena Horne first appeared in the Cotton Club as a teenager.

Ella Fitzgerald and Billie Holiday were known for their ballads during the Swing Era.

Shirley Horn sang both jazz and blues.

Nina Simone sang jazz, folk, and rhythm and blues.

Etta Jones sang rhythm and blues and jazz.

Anita O'Day is known for her contributions to bebop.

Betty Carter sang during the Post-Bop Era.

Mary Lou Williams was a singer and pianist during the Swing and Hard Bop Eras.

Sarah Vaughan is known for her singing in the Cool Jazz Era.

Other jazz singers include Rosemary Clooney , Diane Schuur , and Flora Purim . Contemporary jazz singers include Norah Jones , Diana Krall , Melody Gardot , Dianne Reeves and singer-bassist Esperanza Spalding . whose advocacy for discussion of the current discrimination in jazz was highlighted in 2017 when she spent 77 hours straight livestreaming the creation of an album, Exposure, through the entire process of writing, arranging, and recording that showed to thousands a woman working confidently within the male-dominated space of a recording studio.

[ 130 ] Classical music [ edit ] From left to right: Cecilia Bartoli and classical crossover pop singer, Sarah Brightman Classical singers typically do both live performances and recordings. Live performances may be in small venues, such as churches, or large venues, such as opera halls or arts centers. Classical singers may specialize in specific types of singing, such as art songs —songs performed with piano accompaniment—or opera, which is singing accompanied by a symphony orchestra in a staged, costumed theatrical production.

Classical singers are typically categorized by their voice type, which indicates both their vocal range and in some cases also the "color" of their voice. Among voice types that indicate the range of a woman singer's voice are (from lowest to highest range) contralto , mezzo-soprano and soprano . Among voice types that indicate both the woman singer's range and the "color" of her voice type are coloratura soprano and lyric soprano .

Whereas popular music singers typically use a microphone and a sound reinforcement system for their vocals, in classical music the voice must be projected into the hall naturally, a skill that requires specialized vocal training.

Black women [ edit ] Marian Anderson in 1940 Marian Anderson (1897–1993) [ 131 ] was a black contralto of whom music critic Alan Blyth said: "Her voice was a rich, vibrant contralto of intrinsic beauty." [ 132 ] Most of her singing career was spent performing in concert and recital in major music venues and with famous orchestras throughout the United States and Europe between 1925 and 1965.

Anderson became an important figure in the struggle for black artists to overcome racial prejudice in the United States during the mid-20th century when the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) refused permission for her to sing to an integrated audience in Constitution Hall , Washington, DC. With the aid of First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt and her husband President Franklin D. Roosevelt , she performed a critically acclaimed open-air concert on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington before a crowd of more than 75,000 and a radio audience in the millions on Easter Sunday, 9 April 1939. She continued to break barriers for black artists in the United States, becoming the first black person, American or otherwise, [ citation needed ] to perform a leading role at the Metropolitan Opera , 7 January 1955 in New York City.

[ 133 ] Classical singers [ edit ] A short list of noted women classical singers includes: Elly Ameling Cecilia Bartoli Kathleen Battle Maria Callas Natalie Dessay Joyce DiDonato Renée Fleming Elina Garanca Susan Graham Anna Netrebko Jessye Norman Frederica von Stade World music [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Enya Björk Mercedes Sosa Natalia Lafourcade Bi Kidude Yma Sumac Carmen Miranda Anggun Examples of world music icons Women play an important role in world music , a musical category encompassing many different styles of music from around the world, including ethnic music and traditional music from Africa, the Caribbean, South America, Asia, and other regions; indigenous music; neotraditional music; and music in which more than one cultural tradition intermingle, such as mixtures of Western pop and ethnic music). The term was popularized in the 1980s as a marketing category for non-Western traditional music.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] Brazilian actress, singer, and dancer Carmen Miranda became known in the West as an exotic supplement in Hollywood films in the 1930s, akin to dancer Josephine Baker before and exotica Yma Sumac after. In the 1960s, Elis Regina was the most prominent woman bossa nova singer, [ citation needed ] influencing popular music around the world. In the 1960s and 1970s, Argentinian folk singer Mercedes Sosa , South African Miriam Makeba , and Greek Maria Farantouri were recognized for their engagement against the oppressive political situations in their home countries. Sosa's " Gracias a la vida " ("Thanks to Life"), Makeba's " Pata Pata " ("Touch, Touch"), and Maria Farantouri 's collaboration with composer Mikis Theodorakis (especially the "Mauthausen Trilogy") were musical icons of the struggle for human rights. The "Queen of Salsa" Celia Cruz emigrated from Cuba to the United States in 1966.

With the rising interest in the then-so-called world music in the 1980s, old recordings of long established artists were re-discovered for a global audience and distributed worldwide; well known in their home country—sometimes stars with legendary status—like Arabic singers Umm Kulthum and Asmahan ; Fairuz , Algerian raï singer Cheikha Rimitti ; Asha Bhosle —the most prolific Indian playback singer for Bollywood film soundtracks; Romani Esma Redžepova ; Mexican ranchera singer Chavela Vargas ; and the Mahotella Queens from South Africa; or they were recorded for the first time (by Caucasian males) like Cesária Évora from Cape Verde, Stella Chiweshe from Zimbabwe, and Afro-Peruvian Susana Baca .

There are many women world music performers, including: Ann Savoy ; Bi Kidude ; Brenda Fassie ; Chabuca Granda ; Chava Alberstein ; Cleoma Breaux Falcon ; Dolly Collins ; Elizabeth Cotten ; Frehel ; Gal Costa ; Genoa Keawe ; Googoosh ; Hazel Dickens ; Jean Ritchie ; Lata Mangeshkar ; Leah Song ; Lola Beltrán ; Lucha Reyes ; Lucilla Galeazzi (The Mammas); Lydia Mendoza ; Maria Tanase ; Mariam Doumbia ; Nada Mamula ; Ofra Haza ; Oumou Sangare ; Rita Marley ; Rosa Passos ; Roza Eskenazi ; Safiye Ayla ; Salamat Sadikova ; Selda Bagcan ; Shirley Collins ; Valya Balkanska ; Violeta Parra ; Warda ; Marta Gómez; and Zap Mama .

Eastern music [ edit ] Arabic music [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A group of musicians, including women performers, from a Baghdad musical theater group in the 1920s Arabic music is an amalgam of the music of the Arab people in the Arabian Peninsula and the music of all the varied peoples that make up the Arab world.

During the Medieval Era , women professional musicians were called awalim (plural) or al'meh , which means a '"learned female." These singers were often hired on the occasion of a celebration in the harem of a wealthy person. They were not with the harem but in an elevated room that was concealed by a screen so as not to be seen by either the harem or the master of the house. The female awalim were more highly paid than male performers and more highly regarded.

Male professional musicians during this period in Egypt were called alateeyeh (plural), or alatee (singular), which means "a player upon an instrument." However, this name applies to both vocalists as well as instrumentalists. Male professional musicians were considered disreputable and lowly, and they earned their living playing at parties. In the 9th century, the use of male instrumentalists was harshly criticized in a treatise [ which?

] because the men were associated with perceived vices such as playing chess and writing love poetry .

Centuries later, in one of the reports commissioned by Napoleon after the invasion of Egypt on the state of Ottoman culture, mention is made that there were guilds of male instrumentalists who played to male audiences and "learned female" singer/musicians who sang and played for women audiences.

Chinese music [ edit ] A half-section of the Song dynasty (960–1279) version of the Night Revels of Han Xizai , original by Gu Hongzhong ; [ 136 ] the woman musicians in the center of the image are playing transverse bamboo flutes and guan , and the male musician, a wooden clapper called paiban In Chinese music of ancient times, music was a major activity for women, especially learned women. Since ancient times, women performers were associated with the guqin — a seven-string Chinese musical instrument of the zither family that is plucked. The guqin has traditionally been considered by scholars and literati as an instrument of great subtlety and refinement. One notable woman guqin player was Cai Wenji , associated with the piece Hujia Shiba-pai 《胡笳十八拍》 .

Women musicians have also played a key role in Chinese folk music. In southern Fujian and Taiwan , Nanyin or Nanguan music is a genre of traditional Chinese folk ballads sung by a woman accompanied by a xiao flute and a pipa , as well as other traditional instruments. The music is sung in the Minnan topolect—that is, regional dialect. The music is generally sorrowful and typically deals with the topic of a love-stricken woman.

The Chinese pop (C-pop) music industry in the 1930s and 1940s was dominated by the Seven Great Singing Stars , who were the most renowned singers of China during that period: Zhou Xuan , Gong Qiuxia , Yao Lee , and Bai Hong emerged in the 1930s; afterwards Bai Guang , Li Xianglan and Wu Yingyin in the 1940s. After 1949, the early generations of C-pop were denounced by the Chinese Communist Party as yellow music , sexually indecent (the color yellow is associated in China with eroticism and sex). Only after the end of the Cultural Revolution by the early 1980s could yellow music be performed again.

After China's extensive political and cultural changes in modern times, its popular music has increasingly emulated and taken inspiration from the styles of popular music of South Korea ( K-pop ) and Japan ( J-pop ), both of which it now closely resembles. As such, during the 2010s several girl groups were established based on both the Japanese model, such as SNH48 (created in 2012) and its sister groups , and the Korean model, such as Rocket Girls (created in 2018 from the Chinese version of a Korean reality television talent competition show). These groups have achieved significant success, with the debut EP of Rocket Girls selling over 1.6 million copies.

[ 115 ] Despite this, solo Chinese woman artists continue to be much more popular overall in the country, as they have traditionally been.

[ 137 ] Some of the most recently popular solo Chinese woman singers include Faye Wong ; G.E.M. Gloria Tang; Lala Hsu ; 胡66 [ zh ] ; Ada Zhuang ; Kelly Yu ; Chen Li ( 陳粒 ); Feng Timo ; Bibi Zhou ; Shuangsheng [ zh ] ( 双笙 ); Tia Ray ; Vanessa Jin ( 金玟岐 ); and Jane Zhang .

[ 138 ] Indian music [ edit ] Asha Bhosle is an Indian singer best known as a playback singer in Hindi cinema. In 2011, she was officially acknowledged by the Guinness Book of World Records as the most-recorded artist in music history.

[ 139 ] Indian classical music is the art music of the Indian subcontinent . The origins of Indian classical music can be found in the Hindu chants. This chanting style evolved into jatis and eventually into ragas .

Indian classical music has also been significantly influenced by, or syncretised with, Indian folk music. The major composers from the historical Indian classical music tradition were men. In Indian folk music , lavani is a music genre popular in Maharashtra traditionally performed by women.

Bhangra ( Punjabi : ਭੰਗੜਾ ) is a form of dance-oriented folk music of Punjab . The present musical style is derived from non-traditional musical accompaniment to the riffs of Punjab called by the same name. The female dance of the Punjab region is known as Giddha ( ਗਿੱਧਾ ).

Modern women vocalists include D. K. Pattammal ; M. S. Subbalakshmi ; Gangubai Hangal ; Hirabai Barodekar ; Kesarbai Kerkar ; Kishori Amonkar ; Malini Rajurkar ; Mogubai Kurdikar ; Prabha Atre ; Roshan Ara Begum ; and Shruti Sadolikar Katkar . One woman instrumentalist is Annapurna Devi .

In the music of Bollywood (the centre of India's film industry) and other regional film industries in India, women playback singers have had a significant role, with the sisters Lata Mangeshkar and Asha Bhosle , who have mainly worked in Hindi films, often referred to as two of the best-known and most prolific playback singers in India. In 2011, Bhosle was officially acknowledged by the Guinness Book of World Records as the most recorded artist in music history.

[ 139 ] Iranian music [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fātemeh Vā'ezi ( Persian : فاطمه واعظی ), commonly known by her stage name Parīsā ( Persian : پریسا ), is a Persian classical vocalist and musician Traditionally, it has been difficult for woman singers to appear publicly in Iran. Women were allowed to perform only for Ta'zieh religious rituals, and men were generally forbidden to listen to women. Before the Iranian Revolution , women could sing only in certain circumstances: in private, while working, for other women, or during women's celebrations. Since the Revolution, however, women have been permitted to perform as solo vocalists for female audiences and for male audiences as a part of a chorus.

Qamar ol-Molouk Vaziri (1905–1959) was one of the first woman masters of Persian music. Other noted woman musicians include Delkash ; Simin Ghanem ; Maryam Akhondy , founder of Barbad Ensemble; Persian classical guitarist Lily Afshar ; singer Shakila , winner of the Persian Academy Award; the conductor Soodabeh Salem ; Afsaneh Rasaei ; Pirayeh Pourafar , founder of Nava Ensemble and Lian Ensemble; and Mahsa Vahdat .

[ clarification needed ] Classical singer Fatemeh Vaezi (commonly known by her stage name Parisa) has given concerts accompanied by a female orchestra. After 1986 Maryam Akhondy started working with other Iranian musicians in exile, and in 2000 created the all-woman a cappella group Banu, which sang old folk songs that were part of women's activities and celebrations. Singer Sima Bina has taught many female students; Ghashang Kamkar , both male and female. She and Vaezi have criticized the patriarchal power structure in Iran for its treatment of woman musicians.

[ 140 ] Iranian folk-music performers include Sima Bina ; Darya Dadvar; Monika Jalili ; Ziba Shirazi ; Zohreh Jooya ; and Shushā Guppy . Iranian pop performers include Googoosh ; Hayedeh ; Mahasti ; Leila Forouhar ; Pooran ; and Laleh Pourkarim . Iranian world music performers include Azam Ali and Cymin Samawatie .

Japanese music [ edit ] The Japanese idol girl group AKB48 is the best-selling act in Japan by number of singles sold.

Japan has the world's largest physical music market, with US $2 billion in 2014 and the second largest overall music market , with a total retail value of 2.6 billion dollars in 2014.

[ 141 ] Japanese idol women artists dominate the physical singles market, with 9 out of the top 10 best-selling singles in the country in 2015 belonging to either the idol girl group AKB48 or its "sister" and "rival" groups.

[ 142 ] AKB48 has had the best-selling singles of the year in the country for the past six years [ as of?

] , and the group is also the best-selling act in Japan by number of singles sold.

[ 143 ] Japanese American singer and songwriter Hikaru Utada has the best-selling album in the country , First Love .

[ citation needed ] Jewish music [ edit ] There is literary evidence from biblical books such as The Book of Judges that women (including Miriam , Deborah , and Hannah ), participated in musical traditions that included singing lamentations and playing instruments. However, women are not mentioned in references to liturgy . Women were eventually banned from liturgical worship ( kolisha ). Though they would continue to have a role in the musical rituals of the domestic sphere at home, burials, and weddings, these customs were not documented as were liturgical music, and its creators and performers.

[ 144 ] Music scholars and educators [ edit ] Musicologists and music historians [ edit ] Rosetta Reitz (1924–2008) was an American jazz historian and feminist who established a record label producing 18 albums of the music of the early women of jazz and the blues [ 145 ] Although the vast majority of major musicologists and music historians have been men. some women musicologists have reached the profession's top ranks.

Susan McClary is a musicologist associated with new musicology who incorporates feminist music criticism in her work. She holds a PhD from Harvard University . One of her best known works is Feminine Endings (1991), covering musical constructions of gender and sexuality; gendered aspects of traditional music theory; gendered sexuality in musical narrative; music as a gendered discourse; and issues affecting women musicians. In her book, McClary suggests that the sonata form (used in symphonies and string quartets) may be a sexist or misogynistic procedure that constructs of gender and sexual identity. In her Conventional Wisdom (2000), she argues that the traditional musicological assumption of the existence of "purely musical" elements, divorced from culture and meaning, the social and the body, is a conceit used to veil the social and political imperatives of the worldview that produces the classical canon most prized by supposedly objective musicologists.

Carolyn Abbate , an American musicologist who received her PhD from Princeton University , has been described by the Harvard Gazette as "one of the world's most accomplished and admired music historians." [ 146 ] Other women scholars in musicology and music history include: Eva Badura-Skoda Margaret Bent Suzanne Cusick Ursula Günther Maud Cuney Hare Liudmila Kovnatskaya Kendra Preston Leonard Rosetta Reitz Elaine Sisman Hedi Stadlen Rose Rosengard Subotnik Anahit Tsitsikian Ethnomusicologists [ edit ] Frances Densmore (1867–1957) was an American anthropologist and ethnographer known for her studies of Native American music and culture Ethnomusicologists study the many musics around the world that emphasize their cultural, social, material, cognitive, biological, and other dimensions or contexts instead of, or in addition to, its isolated sound component or any particular repertoire.

Ethnomusicology— a term coined by Jaap Kunst from the Greek words ἔθνος ( ethnos , 'nation') and μουσική ( mousike , "music")—is often described as the anthropology or ethnography of music. Initially, it was almost exclusively oriented toward non-Western music, but now includes the study of Western music from anthropological, sociological, and intercultural perspectives.

Women have made significant contributions in ethnomusicology, especially in the intersection of gender studies and ethnomusicology.

[ 147 ] Ellen Koskoff, professor emerita at the Eastman School of Music, past president of the Society for Ethnomusicology and host of a radio show called "What in the World is Music?", has done extensive work on this.

[ 148 ] In Women and Music in Cross-Cultural Perspective (1987), Koskoff argues that music performed by women is "devalued" and in some cases, even considered "non-music" despite having "musical form." [ 147 ] : 15 She goes on to explain that the distinction between men—occupying public spheres—and women—occupying private, domestic ones—has created two complementary, not different, halves of culture, [ 147 ] : 1 and that because  women's identity is widely believed to be embedded in their sexuality, "one of the most common associations between women and music... links women's primary sexual identity and role with music performance." [ 147 ] : 6 In this association, Koskoff finds four types of music performance emerge in connection with inter-gender relations and the established social/sexual arrangement: one that confirms and maintains it one that appears to maintain it so as to protect other more relevant values one that protests but maintains it (often symbolically) one that challenges and threatens it [ 147 ] : 10 Deborah Wong , a professor at the University of California, Riverside, [ 149 ] is known for her focus on the music of Southeast Asia and Asian American music-making, [ 149 ] and has also studied taiko , or Japanese American drumming.

[ 150 ] Other women ethnomusicologists include: Judith Becker Frances Densmore Ida Halpern Maud Karpeles Janet E. Tobitt Katherine Hagedorn Music educators [ edit ] Main article: Women in music education A music teacher leading a music ensemble in an elementary school in 1943 Although music critics argued in the 1880s that "women lacked the innate creativity to compose good music" due to "biological predisposition," [ 36 ] later it was accepted that women would have a role in music education . They became so involved in this field that from the latter half of the 19th century well into the 20th, they dominated it.

[ 36 ] Yet  at least in the US, studies of women's contributions in music education have been overlooked because of an emphasis on bands and the top echelon of leaders in hierarchical music organizations.

[ 151 ] When looking further, however, women have had many music education roles in the "home, community, churches, public schools, and teacher-training institutions" and "as writers, patrons, and through their volunteer work in organizations." [ 151 ] Despite the limitations imposed on women's roles in music education in the 19th century, women were accepted as teachers in kindergarten , because this was deemed to be a "private sphere." Women also taught music privately as well as in girl's schools and Sunday schools. They also trained musicians in school music programs. By the turn of the 20th century, women began to be employed as music supervisors in elementary schools, teachers in normal schools, and professors of music in universities. Women also became more active in professional organizations in music education, and  presented papers at conferences.

Women music educators "outnumber men two-to-one" in teaching general music, choir, private lessons, and keyboard instruction.

[ 152 ] : 177 More men tend to be hired as for band education, administration, and jazz jobs, however, and to work in colleges and universities.

: 177 According to Dr. Sandra Wieland Howe, there is still a " glass ceiling " for women in music education careers, as there is "stigma" associated with women in leadership positions and "men outnumber women as administrators." [ 153 ] Noted women music educators include: Frances Clarke (1860–1958) founded the Music Supervisors National Conference (MSNC) in 1907. Even though a small number of women served as president of the MSNC and the following renamed versions of the organization over the next century, in the 20th century, there were only two woman presidents between 1952 and 1992, which "[p]ossibly reflects discrimination." After 1990, however, leadership roles for women in the organization opened up; and from 1990 to 2010, there were five woman presidents.

[ 152 ] : 171 Julia Crane (1855–1923) was an American music educator who set up a school, the Crane School of Music in Potsdam, New York , the first school specifically for the training of public school music teachers.

[ 154 ] As of 2015, the Crane School of Music is one of three schools that make up the State University of New York (SUNY) at Potsdam , with 630 undergraduate and 30 graduate students and a faculty of 70 teachers and professional staff.

[ citation needed ] Crane is among the most important figures in the history of American music education.

[ 155 ] A student of Manuel García , [ 156 ] she was inducted into the Music Educators Hall of Fame in 1986.

[ 157 ] Cornelia Schröder-Auerbach (1900–1997), a musician, musicologist, pianist, and organist, studied musicology in Breslau , Munich , Jena , and Freiburg in Breisgau , [ 158 ] where she received her doctorate in musicology in 1928, supervised by Wilibald Gurlitt .

[ 159 ] She was the first woman to graduate with a doctorate in this field.

[ 160 ] : 207 With Peter Harlan and her husband, the composer Hanning Schröder , she founded the Harlan Trio for historically informed performances in 1930, path-breaking for this new genre, [ 160 ] : 209 based also on her research in clavichord music and compositions. With the Nazi takeover of the German government and its anti-semitic discriminations, the non-observant Protestant Schröder-Auerbach was banned in 1934 from publicly performing because her four grandparents had been Jewish.

[ 160 ] : 212 From early 1944 on, under veiled so-called Aryan identity she restarted public music performances in Dargun as the church organist, choirmaster, and music teacher, [ 160 ] : 212 also networking in the music chapter of the Mecklenburg state association of the Cultural Association of the GDR . In 1952 she joined the East German Academy of Arts in East Berlin , where she rebuilt the music archive that had been lost in 1945 with the destruction of the predecessor Prussian Academy of Arts ; but since she lived in the American Sector of Berlin , the East German Academy dismissed her in 1959. She also worked as author, lexicographer, and music critic for the Berliner Börsen-Courier , radio stations, and the Deutsche Grammophon .

Carolynn Lindeman (born 1940) graduated from Oberlin College Conservatory of Music , the Mozarteum Academy, San Francisco State University and Stanford University , where she received her Doctor of Musical Arts . She was a professor at San Francisco State University from 1973 to 2005 and president of the Music Educators National Conference from 1996 to 1998. She edited the Strategies for Teaching series. She "[a]cknowledge[d gender] discrimination in academia." [ 152 ] : 172 June Hinckley (1943–2007) graduated with a PhD from Florida State University . She was a music and fine arts supervisor in Brevard County, Florida. She wrote articles on music education and was president of the Music Educators National Conference from 1998 to 2000.

[ 152 ] : 172 Lynn Brinckmeyer received her PhD from the University of Kansas . She was an associate professor and director of choral music education at Texas State University . and president of the Music Educators National Conference from 2006 to 2008.

[ 152 ] : 172 Barbara Geer graduated from the University of North Carolina . She was a music consultant for a school system in North Carolina and served as president of the Music Educators National Conference from 2008 to 2010.

[ 152 ] : 172 Grace Harriet Spofford (1887–1974) was an American music educator and administrator. She graduated from Smith College in 1909, [ 161 ] and later from the Peabody Conservatory of Music with degrees in piano (1913) and organ (1916).

[ 162 ] Her first position in education was directly after her time at Smith, teaching piano at Heidelberg College (now Heidelberg University) .

[ 163 ] After attending Peabody, Spofford became a piano teacher and later an administrator there. From 1924 to 1931, she was the first dean of the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia; and from 1935 to 1954, she was the director of the Henry Street Settlement 's music school. She was largely responsible for commissioning The Second Hurricane , a play-opera by Aaron Copland and Edwin Denby .

[ 164 ] After retirement, Spofford was involved with international music relations. Between 1954 and 1963, she served as chairman of music of the International Council of Women three times, during which the council sponsored the recording of orchestral works by five women composers: Mabel Wheeler Daniels , Miriam Gideon , Mary Howe , Julia Perry , and Louise Talma . In 1964 and 1966, Spofford was a delegate to the International Music Council . She received an honor from the National Federation of Music Clubs for "distinguished service to music in the field of human rights" in 1968.

[ 163 ] Sharon Isbin was a multiple Grammy Award-winning classical guitarist. In 1989, she created the Master of Music degree, Graduate Diploma and Artist Diploma for classical guitar at the Juilliard School , making history by becoming their first guitar faculty member and the founding director of the Guitar Department. She added the Bachelor of Music degree and Undergraduate Diploma to the program in 2007, and the Doctor of Musical Arts in 2018.

[ 165 ] Isbin has appeared as soloist with over 200 orchestras, and has commissioned more concertos than any other guitarist.

[ citation needed ] She is the author of the Classical Guitar Answer Book and the director of the Guitar Department at the Aspen Music Festival.

[ 165 ] Conducting [ edit ] US Army Captain Sharon Toulouse leading a military music ensemble in 2008 JoAnn Falletta conducting Rite of Spring Alondra de la Parra As the majority of professional orchestra conductors are male, The Guardian called conducting "one of the last glass ceilings in the music industry." [ 105 ] According to the UK's Radio 3 editor, Edwina Wolstencroft: "The music world has been happy to have female performers ... for a long time ... But owning authority and power in public is another matter. That's where female conductors have had a hard time. Our society is more resistant to women being powerful in public than to women being entertaining." [ 166 ] Many women within the orchestrating profession experience forms of discrimination, whether it be gender, racial, or both. Women, initially, were not encouraged to play professionally because it was deemed inappropriate by society. Women were further considered neither strong nor skilled enough to play instruments other than the piano, or to survive grueling rehearsal schedules.

[ 167 ] The low percentage of women conductors is not because women do not study conducting in music school; indeed, in 2009 and 2012 almost half of the recipients of conducting doctorates were women.

[ 105 ] As an example of the low overall ratio of women to men conductors, a 2013 article stated that in France, out of 574 concerts only 17 were conducted by women and no women conducted at the National Opéra in Paris .

[ 168 ] Bachtrack reported that in a list of the world's 150 top conductors that same year, only five were women.

[ 169 ] A small number of woman conductors have become top-ranked international conductors, however. In January 2005, Australian conductor Simone Young became the first woman to conduct the Vienna Philharmonic . In 2008 Marin Alsop , a protégée of Leonard Bernstein , became the first woman to become the music director and principal conductor of a major US orchestra when she won the top job at the Baltimore Symphony .

[ 170 ] Despite "protests from a large swathe of the Baltimore Symphony when she was first named Music Director," since that time "plaudits [have] roll[ed] in." [ 170 ] In 2014, Alsop became the first woman conductor to lead the Last Night of the Proms concert—one of the most important classical music events in Britain—in its 118-year history.

[ 170 ] Whereas there is a lack of women in professional orchestra, more recent studies show that the conducting profession itself lacks gender and racial diversity. There is a clear distinction between the low number of white women in the field compared to that of white men, but an even lower number of other racial and ethnic identities. The proportion of non-white musicians represented in the orchestra workforce—and of African-American and Hispanic/Latino musicians in particular—remains extremely low.

[ 171 ] The orchestra field continues to remain predominantly white. Positions such as conductors, executives, and staff are dominated by white individuals: in particular, white males. In high-level executive positions, it remains rare to see women or people of color.

However, the gender gap narrowed in the early 1990s, with women musicians making up between 46% and 49% of the total musician pool in the two decades since.

[ 171 ] The years 1980 to 2014 saw a fourfold increase in the proportion of diverse musicians on stage, driven largely by an increase in musicians from Asian/Pacific Islander backgrounds.

[ 171 ] Over the years, more attention was brought to gender and racial disparity in the field and this has caused positive impacts in the orchestrating field. Data about conductors from 2006 to 2016 reveals a gradual but steady trend towards greater racial and ethnic diversity, with the percentage of African-American, Latino/Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander, American Indian/Alaskan Native, and other non-white conductors increasing from 15.7% in 2006 to 21% in 2016.

[ 171 ] Although there has been reconstruction of the whiteness and gender domination of males in the field, there is still work to be done.

Jeri Lynne Johnson was the first African-American woman to win an international conducting prize when she was awarded the Taki Concordia Conducting Fellowship in 2005. A graduate of Wellesley College and the University of Chicago , she is a conductor, composer, and pianist. She is the founder and music director of the Black Pearl Chamber Orchestra, the first multi-ethnic professional orchestra in Philadelphia . From 2001 to 2004, she was the assistant conductor of The Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia .

[ 172 ] She has led orchestras around the world including the Colorado Symphony , Bournemouth Symphony (UK), and the Weimar Staatskapelle (Germany). Alongside prominent woman conductors Marin Alsop and JoAnn Falletta , Ms. Johnson was heralded on the NBC The Today Show as one of the nation's leading woman conductors.

[ citation needed ] Music critics [ edit ] Popular music [ edit ] American pop music critic Ann Powers (pictured in 2007) According to Holly Kruse, articles about pop music are usually written from "masculine subject positions." [ 173 ] There are also relatively few women in music journalism; for instance, "by 1999, the number of female editors or senior writers at Rolling Stone hovered around... 15%." [ 174 ] Ann Powers , a woman music critic and journalist, appointed in 2006 as the chief pop-music critic for the Los Angeles Times , [ 175 ] has critiqued the perceptions of sex in the music industry.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Anwen Crawford, a writer for The Monthly , "explores women's long struggle for visibility and recognition in the field of rock criticism, even though we've been helping to pioneer it from the start." [ 178 ] Noting that the "most famous rock-music critics... are all male," [ 110 ] she comments that "[f]emale expertise, when it appears, is repeatedly dismissed as fraudulent. Every woman who has ever ventured an opinion on popular music could give you some variation [of this experience]." [ 178 ] Classical music [ edit ] Marion Lignana Rosenberg (1961–2013), a music critic, writer, translator, broadcaster, and journalist, wrote for many periodicals, including Salon.com , The New York Times , and Playbill William Osborne states that the "large US papers, which are the ones that influence public opinion, have virtually no women classical music critics." [ 179 ] Two of the only women critics with major US papers have been Wynne Delacoma of the Chicago Sun-Times and Anne Midgette of The New York Times , who was the "first woman to cover classical music in the entire history of the paper." [ 179 ] Other musical professions [ edit ] Record producing and sound engineering [ edit ] A 2013 Sound on Sound article pointed out that there were "few women in record production and sound engineering " [ 180 ] —indeed, that "[n]inety-five percent of music producers are male, and although there are women producers achieving great things in music, they are less well-known than their male counterparts." [ 180 ] "As of 2012, only three women hadd ever been nominated for best producer at the Brits or the Grammys " and none won either award.

[ 181 ] "Women who want to enter the [producing] field face a boys' club, or a guild mentality." [ 181 ] Despite this situation, women have been taking on the challenge since the 1940s.

Mary Shipman Howard was an engineer in New York City in the 1940s, and Lillian McMurry a record producer and founder of Trumpet Records in the 1950s. One of the first women to produce, engineer, arrange, and promote music on her own rock and roll music label was Cordell Jackson (1923–2004), who founded the Moon Records label in Memphis in 1956 and on the label began releasing and promoting singles she recorded in her home studio, serving as engineer, producer, and arranger.

Ethel Gabriel had a 40-year career with RCA and was the first major label record producer.

[ citation needed ] Trina Shoemaker is a mixer, record producer, and sound engineer responsible for producing, engineering, and/or mixing records for bands such as Queens of the Stone Age ; [ 182 ] Sheryl Crow ; [ 182 ] Emmylou Harris ; [ 182 ] Something for Kate ; [ 182 ] Nanci Griffith .

[ 182 ] In 1998 Shoemaker became the first woman to win the Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album for her work on The Globe Sessions .

[ 183 ] She went on to work with artists such as Blues Traveller , Emmylou Harris , the Indigo Girls , and The Dixie Chicks (now just The Chicks).

[ 184 ] Other women include: Leslie Ann Jones , engineer at Skywalker Sound Sylvia Massy , producer, engineer, and mixer Emily Lazar , mastering engineer Susan Rogers , engineer for Purple Rain Genya Ravan , producer of The Dead Boys ' Young, Loud and Snotty Sylvia Robinson , early hip-hop music producer Judith Sherman , producer and engineer of classical and new music Lari White , co-producer of Toby Keith 's White Trash With Money DJs and turntablists [ edit ] A DJ mixing two record players at a live event DJ Virgin is a London, UK-based DJ.

There are relatively few women DJs or turntablists in hip-hop music , house music , nu metal , and other genres in which DJs and turntablists participate, and it is difficult for women DJs to fit in a male-dominated field, [ 185 ] especially because women in music are often seen mainly in singing roles in popular music .

Part of this may stem from a general low percentage of women in audio technology-related jobs, such as audio engineering and production. In 2007, Mark Katz's article "Men, Women, and Turntables: Gender and the DJ Battle" stated that "very few women battle; the matter has been a topic of conversation among hip-hop DJs for years." [ 186 ] In 2010 Rebekah Farrugia stated "the male-centricity of EDM [Electronic Dance Music] culture" contributes to "a marginalisation of women in these [EDM] spaces." [ 187 ] While turntablism and broader DJ practices should not be conflated, Katz suggests use or lack of use of the turntable broadly by women across genres and disciplines is impacted by what he defines as "male technophilia." [ 186 ] Historian Ruth Oldenziel concurs in her writing on engineering with this idea of socialization as a central factor in the lack of women's engagement with technology. As she explains: "[A]n exclusive focus on women's supposed failure to enter the field ... is insufficient for understanding how our stereotypical notions have come into being; it tends to put the burden of proof entirely on women and to blame them for their supposedly inadequate socialization, their lack of aspiration, and their want of masculine values. An equally challenging question is why and how boys have come to love things technical, how boys have historically been socialized as technophiles." [ 188 ] Lucy Green has focused on gender in relation to musical performers and creators, and specifically on educational frameworks as they relate to both.

[ 189 ] She suggests that women's alienation from technological areas of music is not necessarily about dislike of them but connected with "their dominantly masculine delineations." [ 190 ] Still, women and girls do increasingly engage in turntable and DJ practices, individually [ 191 ] and collectively, [ 192 ] and "carve out spaces for themselves in EDM and DJ Culture." [ 187 ] There are various projects dedicated to the promotion and support of these practices, such as women DJs London [ 193 ] and some artists and collectives go beyond these practices to be more gender-inclusive; [ 194 ] for example, Discwoman , a New York-based collective and booking agency, which describes itself as "representing and showcasing cis women, trans women and genderqueer talent." [ 195 ] Movements, organizations, events and genres [ edit ] Women's music [ edit ] Bernice Johnson Reagon (born 1942) is a singer, composer, scholar, and social activist, who founded the a cappella ensemble Sweet Honey in the Rock in 1973. She was an important figure in the womyn's music scene.

[ citation needed ] Women's music (also womyn 's music or wimmin's music) is music "by women, for women, and about women." [ 196 ] [ 197 ] The genre emerged as a musical expression of the second-wave feminist movement [ 198 ] as well as labor , civil rights , and peace movements .

[ 199 ] In the United States, the movement was started by lesbians, (such as Cris Williamson , Meg Christian , and Margie Adam ); African-American musicians (including Linda Tillery , Mary Watkins , Gwen Avery); and activists (such as Bernice Johnson Reagon and her group Sweet Honey in the Rock , and peace activist Holly Near ).

[ 199 ] Women's music also refers to the wider industry of women's music that goes beyond the performing artists to include women studio musicians , producers, sound engineers , technicians , cover artists, distributors, promoters , and festival organizers.

[ 196 ] Organizations [ edit ] International Alliance for Women in Music [ edit ] The International Alliance for Women in Music (IAWM) is an international organization dedicated to fostering and encouraging the activities of women in music, particularly in areas such as composing , performing, and research, in which gender discrimination is an historic and ongoing concern. The IAWM engages in efforts to increase the programming of music by women composers to combat discrimination against women musicians, including symphony orchestra membershhip, and to include accounts of the contributions of women musicians in university music curricula . To end gender discrimination , the IAWM led successful boycotts of the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra 's American concerts in the 1990s.

[ 200 ] Advocacy by the organization has contributed to the inclusion of women composers in college music history textbooks.

[ 201 ] Women in Music (WIM-NY) [ edit ] Women in Music (WIM-NY) is an American organization founded in New York City in 1985 to "support, cultivate and recognize the talents of women" in music.

[ 202 ] WIM-NY holds activities and events, including "seminars, panels, and networking events." [ 202 ] Members include "record label executives, artist managers, songwriters, musicians, attorneys, recording engineers, agents, publicists, studio owners, music publishers, online and traditional marketers" from "all genres of music and all areas of the [music] industry." [ 202 ] Women in Music Canada [ edit ] Women in Music Canada Professional Association (WIMC) is an organization based in Toronto, Ontario, established in 2012. It is a federally registered non-profit organization that aims to "foste[r] equality in the music industry through the support and advancement of women." [ 203 ] Now Girls Rule [ edit ] Elis Paprika , founder of Now Girls Rule, performing at Playtime Festival in Mongolia in 2019 Now Girls Rule is a Mexican feminist organization created for the empowerment and promotion of women artists and women-fronted acts and bands, that celebrates music created by women, as well generating spaces and expanding the art scene in Mexico by focusing on the creation of new generations of artists through education and inspiration.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Now Girls Rule was founded by independent Mexican rock musician Elis Paprika in 2014, drawing the name from her single "Now Girls Rule" released that year, where she featured other important Latin American women artists Sandrushka Petrova and Ana Cristina Mo from the band Descartes a Kant , Renee Mooi, and Vanessa Zamora . Throughout her career, Paprika has continuously brought attention to the fact that, despite the enormous number of talented women artists, the Mexican music scene has historically failed in the promotion and creation of appropriate spaces and opportunities for women in music.

Now Girls Rule features several events connected with music: Girl Camps feature music and fanzine design lessons for young girls ages 7–17; all teachers are established woman artists from the Mexican music scene.

[ 206 ] The format was created for young aspiring artists to meet and learn from women who have pursued their dreams and worked to make a living from their art, so they can be inspired to develop careers in music and art.

Now Girls Rule Nights are a series of live concerts featuring established women artists and women-fronted bands, while inviting up-and-coming women-fronted acts to perform to reach new crowds.

Now Girls Rule Networkings are a space where professional women of various backgrounds and women artists come together to meet and talk about their work in the hope of joining forces in new ventures and projects.

La Marketa, the first-ever all-women artists' bazaar in Mexico, was created so artists can directly sell their merchandise to their fans and keep 100% of their sales.

[ 207 ] La Marketa is an all-age, gender-inclusive, and pet-friendly event featuring live performances by some of the artists.

Paprika also hosts the Now Girls Rule Podcast , a weekly show through Vive Latino 's Señal VL channel, that features music by woman artists and women-fronted acts she has met around the world while touring. Woman artists from the Middle East, such as Iranian-Turkish performer AIDAZ, have emerged in the electronic and visual music scenes, blending traditional culture with modern performance art.

Riot Grrrl [ edit ] Carrie Brownstein from the punk-indie band Sleater-Kinney , performing at Vegoose in 2005 Corin Tucker was the lead singer and guitarist for Sleater-Kinney, another band closely associated with the Riot Grrrl movement Riot Grrrl is an underground feminist hardcore punk movement that originally started in the early 1990s in Washington, DC [ 208 ] and the greater Pacific Northwest , noticeably in Olympia, Washington .

[ 209 ] It is often associated with third-wave feminism , which is sometimes seen as its starting point. Riot Grrrl has also been described as a musical genre that came out of indie rock, with the punk scene serving as an inspiration for a musical movement in which women could express themselves in the same way men had been doing for the past several years.

[ 210 ] Riot Grrrl bands often address issues such as rape, domestic abuse , sexuality , racism, patriarchy , and female empowerment . Bands associated with the movement include Bikini Kill , Bratmobile , Heavens to Betsy , Excuse 17 , Huggy Bear , Cake Like , Skinned Teen , Emily's Sassy Lime , Sleater-Kinney , and also queercore groups like Team Dresch .

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] In addition to a music scene and genre, Riot Grrrl is a subculture involving a DIY ethic , zines , art, political action, and activism.

[ 213 ] Riot Grrrls also hold meetings, start chapters, and support and organize women in music.

[ 214 ] Festivals [ edit ] Debbie Harry , best known as the lead vocalist of the band Blondie , performing at Glastonbury Festival 2023 Ariana Grande headlined the Coachella festival in 2019, becoming the youngest artist ever to headline the event Women's music festivals, which may also be called womyn 's music festivals, have been held since the 1970s. Some women's music festivals are organized for lesbians. The first women's music festival was held in 1973 at Sacramento State University. In May 1974, the first National Woman's Music Festival was held in Champaign-Urbana, Illinois, founded by University of Illinois student Kristin Lems .

[ 215 ] It celebrated its 40th year in Middleton, Wisconsin, from 2–5 July 2015.

[ 216 ] As of that year, it is a four-day event that includes concerts, workshops, comedy, theatre, films, and writing events that "promote and affirm the creative talents and technical skills of women" from diverse, multicultural communities, including women with disabilities. Although most attendees are women, men may attend.

[ 217 ] The Michigan Womyn's Music Festival , created in 1976, became the largest festival in the United States.

[ 218 ] : 28 The Women in Music Festival, held by the University of Rochester 's Eastman School of Music , began in 2005 as a celebration of the contributions of women to composition, performance, teaching, scholarship, and music administration.

[ 219 ] From its modest beginnings with Eastman students and faculty members performing music by women composers, the Festival has grown to include additional concerts and events throughout Rochester, New York and to host composers in residence, including Tania León (2007); Nancy Van de Vate (2008); Judith Lang Zaimont (2009); Emma Lou Diemer (2010); and Hilary Tann (2011). The festival has presented more than 291 different works by 158 composers.

[ citation needed ] Many other festivals have been created throughout the United States and Canada since the mid-1970s, varying in size from a few hundred to thousands of attendees; for instance, the Los Angeles Women's Music Festival , which began in 2007 with over 2,500 attendees. Outside the US there is the Sistajive Women's Music Festival in Australia.

Some music festivals are focused around the lesbian community, such as the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival, near Hart, Michigan.

[ citation needed ] Although women's music festivals are centered on music, they support many other facets of lesbian and feminist culture. Some festivals are designed to provide a safe space for women's music and culture.

Lilith Fair co-founder Sarah McLachlan Lilith Fair was a concert tour and travelling music festival that consisted solely of women solo artists and female-led bands. Founded by Canadian musician Sarah McLachlan , Nettwerk Music Group 's Dan Fraser and Terry McBride , and New York talent agent Marty Diamond, it took place during the summers of 1997 to 1999, and was revived in the summer of 2010.

[ 220 ] McLachlan organized the festival after becoming frustrated with concert promoters and radio stations that refused to feature two women musicians in a row.

[ 221 ] Bucking conventional industry wisdom, she booked a successful tour for herself and American singer-songwriter Paula Cole . At least one of their appearances together—on 14 September 1996—went by the name of "Lilith Fair" and included performances by McLachlan, Cole, Lisa Loeb , and Michelle McAdorey , formerly of Crash Vegas . The next year, McLachlan founded the Lilith Fair tour, taking Lilith from the medieval Jewish legend that Lilith was Adam 's first wife.

[ citation needed ] In 1997, Lilith Fair garnered $16 million gross, making it the top-grossing of any touring festival, [ 221 ] and among all concert tours that year it was the 16th-highest grossing.

[ 221 ] The festival received several pejorative nicknames, including "Breast-fest" and "Girlapalooza." [ 222 ] [ 223 ] Issues and approaches [ edit ] This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines . The reason given is: Much of the material in this section has already been addressed throughout the article. IF a need for a final section is really desired, the contents and layout should be rethought and reorganized.

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In 1993, American musicologist Marcia Citron asked, "why is music composed by women so marginal to the standard 'classical' repertoire?" [ 224 ] Citron "examines the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received 'canon' of performed musical works," pointing out that in the 1800s, women composers typically wrote art songs for performance in small recitals rather than symphonies intended for orchestral performances, which were viewed as a more important genre for composers. As women composers did not write many symphonies, they were deemed not notable as composers.

[ 224 ] Glass ceiling [ edit ] Singers such as Bonnie Raitt ( left ) and Cher ( right ) debuted in a historically male-dominated industry in their scenes.

Multiple research studies and news articles in recent years have brought to light the lack of women in top executive roles in the music industry, at record labels, music publishers , and talent management . The industry itself has recognized this issue over the past few decades but little has changed.

In 1982, for example, Cosmopolitan published an article interviewing and profiling six women executives which found: "For the first time, women are pioneering in the zany competitive, and very lucrative, pop-record industry." [ 225 ] [ 226 ] Only a few women executives were included in the chapter about women in the business side of the music industry in the encyclopedic book, She Bop: The Definitive History of Women in Rock, Pop and Soul , which primarily focused on women musicians and vocalists.

The New York Times reported in 2021: "Three years ago, an academic tallied the performers, producers and songwriters behind hit songs, and found that women's representation fell on a scale between, roughly, poor and abysmal." [ 227 ] [ 228 ] Despite advances in the 1970s and 1980s, women senior executives are still scarce in the music business today.

[ 229 ] According to a 2021 Annenberg study, "across 70 major and independent music companies...13.9% were women." [ 230 ] Women fare far better outside the music industry; according to a 2021 report by U.S. News & World Report , "Women held 31.7% of top executive positions across all industries." [ 231 ] The novel Appassionata by Jilly Cooper is set in the world of classical music and follows the career change of Abigail Rosen from vioin soloist to conductor.

[ 232 ] Racism, sexism and discrimination [ edit ] Some of this section's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Performers such as Beyoncé and Lady Gaga have been vocal about multiple issues, including sexism and gender inequality Women musicians and performers from all genres experience discrimination and sexist treatment.

[ 233 ] The three prominent forms of subtle discrimination experienced by women singers are being mistaken for non-musicians; lack of artistic control compared to their male counterparts; and having their sexuality , age, and femininity constantly scrutinized.

[ 234 ] In many cases, women musicians are dismissed into inferior roles, such as a "gimmick," "good for a girl," and "invisible accessory." [ 234 ] Men lead most of the music projects, and women musicians' artistic freedom is constrained by male bandleaders or managers.

[ 234 ] Another prevalent form of discrimination towards women vocalists and musicians in the music industry is sexual misconduct .

[ 235 ] Many women musicians are afraid to come out about their experiences with sexual assault because their stories are dismissed as being overly sensitive to what is considered normal in the music industry. At the turn of the 20th century, however, many women vocalists such as Kesha , Taylor Swift , Lady Gaga , and Dua Lipa came forward with their stories, helping shape the anti-harassment movement. Additionally, under the MeToo movement , more stories of misconduct and discrimination in the music industry are being re-examined.

[ 236 ] Dua Lipa has spoken out about sexism in the music industry, saying that "women struggle to get recognition," as often the success of major women artists is discredited by the belief that there is a "man behind the woman." [ 237 ] Another form of sexism in the music industry appears in the lyrics.

[ 233 ] As noted by Sarah Neff, there are five major themes in lyrics from all genres that facilitate female discrimination: "portrayal of women in traditional gender roles, portrayal of women as inferior to men, portrayal of women as objects, portrayal of women as stereotypes , and portrayal of violence against women." [ 233 ] Utilizing a series of sexist markers, studies have found that countless lyrics entails sexist themes, including "depicting women in traditional gender roles , describing relationships with women in unrealistic ways, and attributing a woman's worth strictly on the basis of her physical appearance." [ 238 ] Sexism in music is well documented for genres such as rap and hip-hop ; but with newer research, it also been found true for country music, rock, and other genres.

[ 238 ] Women conductors faced sexism, racism, and gender discrimination throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. All-women orchestras were founded and organized, one example being the Fadette Women's Orchestra in Boston founded in 1888 by conductor Caroline B. Nichols .

[ 167 ] A number of other all-women orchestras were founded in the early decades of the 20th century, with women conductors leading these groups. Writer Ronnie Wooten notes: "It is both interesting and ironic that something that is considered 'universal'  has historically excluded women (with the exception of certain stereotypically defined roles) and more specifically women of color." [ 239 ] This comments on the fact that the under-representation of women in conducting is seen as not only a sexism issue but also a racism issue.

Women conductors continue to face sexism in the early decades of the 21st century. In the 2010s, several male conductors and musicians made sexist statements about women conductors. In 2013, Vasily Petrenko , the principal conductor of the Oslo Philharmonic and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic , provoked outrage when he told a Norwegian newspaper that "orchestras react better when they have a man in front of them." [ 240 ] He also stated that "when women have families, it becomes difficult to be as dedicated as is demanded in the business." [ 240 ] Bruno Mantovani , the director of the Paris Conservatoire , gave an interview in which he made sexist statements about women conductors. Mantovani raised the "problem of maternity " and he questioned the ability of women to withstand the physical challenges and stresses of the profession, which he claimed involve "conducting, taking a plane, taking another plane, conducting again." [ 94 ] Yuri Temirkanov , the music director of the St. Petersburg Philharmonic , made sexist statements about women conductors in a September 2013 interview, stating: "The essence of the conductor's profession is strength. The essence of a woman is weakness." [ 94 ] Finnish conductor Jorma Panula made sexist statements about women conductors in 2014; he stated that "women [conductors are not]... getting any better—only worse," which he called a "purely biological question." [ 241 ] [ 242 ] See also [ edit ] Women's music Women in music education Women in musicology Lists of women in music Women in classical music Women in jazz Women in punk rock Women in rock Women in Latin music Women in art Women in dance Women in film Girl group All-female band List of all-female bands Women Who Rock: Making Scenes, Building Communities Oral History Archive Unsung: A History of Women in American Music Music and women's suffrage in the United States Notes [ edit ] ^ This painting by Artemisia Gentileschi, representing Saint Cecilia, has become identified with Maddalena Casulana since 2010.  However, there is no evidence that it is actually a portrait of Casulana.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Philips, Abbey (1 September 2011).

"Spacebomb: Truth lies somewhere in between" .

RVANews .

^ Cyrus and Mather, Cynthia J and Olivia Carter (1 October 1998).

"Rereading Absence: Women in Medieval and Rennaissance Music" .

Symposium.music.org . Retrieved 2 October 2024 .

^ Bennett, Judith M.; Hollister, Warren C. (2001).

Medieval Europe: A Short History (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill . p. 317.

ISBN 9780071121095 .

^ Dowell, Nathan (Spring 2019).

"Lesser-Known Virtues: How the Ordo Virtutum Reflects Hildegard of Bingenâ•Žs Monastic Worldview" .

newprairiepress.org . Retrieved 2 October 2024 .

^ "Hildegard von Bingen Resource Page: Hildegard Publishing Company" .

hildegard.com . 21 November 2022 . Retrieved 2 October 2024 .

^ Maddocks, Fiona.

Hildegard of Bingen: The Woman of Her Age (New York: Doubleday, 2001), p. 194.

^ "Hildegard von Bingen" .

ABC Classic . 10 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ Alternative names: Madalena Casulana di Mezarii, Madalena Casula.

^ Bridges, Thomas W. (2001). "Casulana [Mezari], Maddalena".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.05155 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Bowers, Jane (1996). "Caterina Assandra".

Women Composers: Music Through the Ages . Vol. 1. New York: G. K. Hall .

ISBN 9780816109265 – via Archive.org .

^ "Assand2.mid" .

Early Women Masters . Archived from the original (midi file) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

^ a b Glixon, Beth L. (1999). "More on the life and death of Barbara Strozzi".

The Musical Quarterly .

83 (1): 134– 141.

doi : 10.1093/mq/83.1.134 .

^ Cessac, Catherine (2001). "Jacquet de La Guerre, Elisabeth".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.14084 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Cyr, Mary (Winter 2008).

"Elisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre: Myth or Marvel? Seeking the Composer's Individuality" .

The Musical Times .

149 (1905): 79– 87.

doi : 10.2307/25434573 .

JSTOR 25434573 .

^ Huberty, Michel; Giraud, Alain; Magdelaine, F. and B. (1989).

Hohenzollern-Waldeck . L'Allemagne Dynastique (in French). Vol. 5. France: Laballery. pp. 162, 172.

ISBN 978-2-901138-05-1 .

^ Buja, Maureen (11 August 2022).

"Meet a Prussian princess who was also a composer!" . Retrieved 8 July 2025 .

^ Jonsson, Leif; Ivarsdotter-Johnsson, Anna, eds. (1993).

Den gustavianska tiden (PDF) . Musiken i Sverige (in Swedish). Vol. II. Frihetstid och gustaviansk tid 1720-1810. Stockholm: T. Fischer & Co and Royal Swedish Academy of Music . pp. 302, 373, 402.

ISBN 978-91-7054-701-0 – via Swedish Musical Heritage.

^ "Swedish Musical Heritage - Elisabeth Olin" .

www.swedishmusicalheritage.com . Retrieved 8 July 2025 .

^ Sadie, Julie Anne; Samuel, Rhian (1994).

The Norton/Grove dictionary of women composers . New York: W. W. Norton .

ISBN 9780393034875 . Retrieved 13 October 2010 .

^ Cook, Elizabeth (1997). "Beaumesnil, Henriette Adélaïde Villard de". In Sadie, Stanley (ed.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Opera . Vol. 1. New York: Grove ( Oxford University Press ). p. 366.

ISBN 978-0-19-522186-2 .

^ "Composers Biography V-Vz" .

Dolmetsch Organisation . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ Wessely, Helene; Godt, Irving (2001). "Martínez, Marianne [Anna Katharina] von".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.17913 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Godt, Irving (1 October 1995).

"Marianna in Italy: The International Reputation of Marianna Martines (1744-1812)" .

Journal of Musicology .

13 (4): 538, 541.

doi : 10.2307/763898 .

ISSN 0277-9269 .

JSTOR 763898 .

^ Baldwin, Olive; Wilson, Thelma (24 February 2010) [2001]. "Abrams, Harriett".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.00059 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Raessler, Daniel M. (2001). "Guest [Miles], Jane Mary".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.00059 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Ballchin, Robert, ed. (1983). "Guest, Jane Mary".

Catalogue of Printed Music in the British Library to 1980 . Vol. 25. London: K. G. Saur.

ISBN 978-0-86291-322-9 .

^ Raessler, Daniel M. (3 January 2008) [2004]. "Miles [née Guest], Jane Mary [Jenny] (c. 1762–1846), pianist and composer".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/59208 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Letter of 16 July 1820, in Hensel, Sebastian, ed. (1884).

The Mendelssohn Family (1729–1847) From Letters and Journals . Vol. I. Translated by Klingemann, Carl. London: Sampson Low and Co. p. 82.

OCLC 1061914545 .

^ Letter to Lea Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, 24 June 1837, in Mendelssohn Bartholdy, Felix (1864). Mendelssohn Bartholdy, Paul (ed.).

Letters of Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy from 1833 to 1847 . Translated by Lady Wallace. London: Longman. p. 113.

OCLC 17521633 .

^ a b Reich, Nancy B.

(1986). "Clara Schumann".

Women Making Music: The Western Art Tradition . Urbana: University of Illinois Press . p. 250.

ISBN 9780252014703 .

^ Tu, Mary-Ann (2012).

"About Katherine" .

Katherine Hoover . Archived from the original on 25 June 2014 . Retrieved 4 May 2017 .

^ a b c d e Gray, Anne K. (2007).

The World of Women in Classical Music . La Jolla, California: WordWorld .

ISBN 978-1-59975-320-1 – via Archive.org .

^ a b c Von Glahn, Denise (2013).

Music and the Skillful Listener (eBook). Bloomington: Indiana University Press .

ISBN 9780253007933 . Retrieved 4 May 2017 .

^ Larsen, Libby.

"Libby Larsen: About" .

Libby Larsen . Archived from the original on 20 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 May 2017 .

^ "Jennifer Higdon Biography" .

Jennifer Higdon . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Reublin, Richard A.; Beil, Richard G. (September 2002).

"In Search of Women in American Song; A Neglected Musical Heritage" .

Parlor Songs . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b Mullen, John (2015).

The Show Must Go On! Popular Song in Britain During the First World War . Farnham: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 9781472441584 .

^ Gioia, Ted (12 March 2013).

"Five women songwriters who helped shape the sound of jazz" .

Oxford University Press : OUPblog .

^ "Bessie Smith" .

Rock & Roll Hall of Fame . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

^ "Dolly Jones | Biography & History" .

AllMusic . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

^ Daoud, Alexandra (26 September 2017).

"Women in Jazz: 10 Ladies Who Changed Music Forever" .

Project Revolver . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

^ Schoenberg, Loren (2002).

The NPR curious listener's guide to jazz .

^ a b Saur, Kirsten (20 April 2016).

"Swing It Sister: The Influence of Female Jazz Musicians on Music and Society" .

The Research and Scholarship Symposium .

15 .

Cedarville University .

^ a b c White, Erika (28 January 2015).

"Music History Primer: 3 Pioneering Female Songwriters of the '60s" .

REBEAT Magazine .

^ a b c Carson, Mina; Lewis, Tisa; Shaw, Susan M.; Baumgardner, Jennifer; Richards, Amy (2004).

Girls Rock!: Fifty Years of Women Making Music (1 ed.).

University Press of Kentucky .

ISBN 9780813123103 .

JSTOR j.ctt130j6dp .

^ "Songwriters Hall of Fame" .

songhall.com .

^ Kutulas, Judy (2017).

After Aquarius Dawned: How the Revolutions of the 1960s Became the Popular Culture of the 1970s . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 9781469632933 .

JSTOR 10.5149/9781469632926_kutulas .

^ White, Erika (28 January 2015).

"Music History Primer: 3 Pioneering Female Songwriters of the '60s" .

REBEAT Magazine .

^ a b c "Songwriters Hall of Fame" .

songhall.com .

^ Barton, Laura (26 January 2017).

"From Joni Mitchell to Laura Marling: how female troubadours changed music" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ a b Saal, Hubert (14 July 1969). "The Girls: Letting Go".

Newsweek . pp.

68– 71.

^ Branigin, William (20 November 2013).

"Presidential Medal of Freedom honors diverse group of Americans" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 17 January 2018 .

^ a b Purcell, Carey (7 June 2015).

"Fun Home Duo Make History as First All-Female Writing Team to Win the Tony" .

Playbill . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

^ a b c Gioia, Michael (2 August 2015).

" "It's Revving Up" – The Next Generation of Female Songwriters Share Their Hopes for the Future" .

Playbill . Retrieved 15 October 2015 .

^ a b Mantel, Sarah; Snyder, Linda J. (1 May 2013).

"Women Composers and the American Musical: The Early Years" .

Journal of Singing .

69 (5): 527.

ISSN 1086-7732 . Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 3 April 2019 .

^ Griffen, Anders (December 2012).

"The Abbey Lincoln Collection, 1949–2008 (MC 101)" .

Institute of Jazz Studies , Rutgers University Libraries . Retrieved 30 May 2015 .

^ Chinen, Nate (14 August 2010).

"Abbey Lincoln, Jazz Singer and writer, Dies at 80" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2011 . Retrieved 14 August 2010 .

^ Wiser, Carl (14 January 2009).

"Black Women Songwriters: Song Writing" .

Songfacts . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ Schaap, Julian; Berkers, Pauwke (2014).

"Grunting Alone? Online Gender Inequality in Extreme Metal Music" .

IASPM Journal .

4 (1): 101– 116.

doi : 10.5429/2079-3871(2014)v4i1.8en .

hdl : 1765/51580 .

^ a b Brake, Mike (1990). "Heavy Metal Culture, Masculinity and Iconography". In Frith, Simon; Goodwin, Andrew (eds.).

On Record: Rock, Pop and the Written Word . London: Routledge . pp.

87– 91.

ISBN 9780415053068 .

^ Walser, Robert (1993).

Running with the Devil: Power, Gender and Madness in Heavy Metal Music . Middletown: Wesleyan University Press . p. 76.

ISBN 9780819562609 .

^ a b Auslander, Philip (28 January 2004).

"I Wanna Be Your Man: Suzi Quatro's musical androgyny" (PDF) .

Popular Music .

23 (1): 1– 16.

doi : 10.1017/S0261143004000030 .

S2CID 191508078 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 May 2013.

^ For example, vocalist groups Sugababes and Girls Aloud are referred to as "girl bands" Meet the duo dressing Girls Aloud OK magazine, 20 March 2009; The nation's new sweetheart The Observer , 9 November 2008; while instrumentalists Girlschool are termed a "girl group" Biography for Girlschool Internet Movie Database; The Hedrons The Belfast Telegraph , 19 January 2007 ^ a b c Henry, Murphy Hicks (2013). "All-Female Bands".

Pretty Good for a Girl: Women in Bluegrass . Music in American Life.

University of Illinois Press . pp.

304– 315.

ISBN 9780252032868 .

JSTOR 10.5406/j.ctt3fh3cr.50 .

^ "Filipinki. W USA przecierały szlaki, w ZSRR czerwone dywany" .

Gazeta Wyborcza . 2 November 2013 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ "The Billboard Hot 100 1982" .

Billboard . Archived from the original on 20 October 2006 . Retrieved 30 October 2008 .

^ "Joan Jett can see similarities with biopic alter ego Kristen Stewart as she advises Twilight star on dealing with fame" .

The Daily Record . 23 December 2010. Archived from the original on 23 December 2010 . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ Coon, Caroline (1977).

1988: The New Wave Punk Rock Explosion . London: Omnibus/Hawthorne Books.

ISBN 978-0801561290 .

^ Berman, Judy (8 August 2011).

"15 Essential Women Punk Rock Icons" .

Flavorwire . Retrieved 25 November 2015 .

^ "Women of Punk and Post-Punk Music" .

Biography.com . Archived from the original on 28 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2015 .

^ "Why Women in Punk?" .

Women in Punk . Punk77 . Retrieved 26 November 2015 .

^ Reddington, Helen (2012).

The Lost Women of Rock Music: Female Musicians of the Punk Era . Ashgate/Equinox Publishing.

ISBN 978-1845539573 . Archived from the original on 27 November 2015 . Retrieved 26 November 2015 .

^ Woronzoff, Elizabeth (19 August 2012).

" 'The Lost Women of Rock Music' Is an Important Work, But a Replay of the Same Old Themes" .

Pop Matters . Retrieved 26 November 2015 .

^ Lydon, John (1995).

Rotten: No Irish, No Blacks, No Dogs . London: Coronet. p. 378.

ISBN 978-0312428136 .

^ Petridis, Alexis (June 2014).

"The Slits' Viv Albertine on punk, violence and doomed domesticity" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 November 2015 .

^ Andrews, Charlotte Richardson (3 July 2014).

"Punk has a problem with women. Why?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 November 2015 .

^ "Women Who Rock: 10 Essential Punk Songs" .

The Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Museum . Archived from the original on 2 February 2012 . Retrieved 27 November 2015 .

^ "Girlschool biography" . Girlschool Official Website . Retrieved 27 January 2011 .

^ "Reviews" .

Classic Rock . Girlschool official website. December 2004. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012 . Retrieved 3 September 2010 .

...apparently listed in The Guinness Book Of Records for being the world's longest-surviving all-female rock band ^ Hill, R. L. (2016).

" 'Power has a penis': Cost reduction, social exchange and sexism in metal—reviewing the work of Sonia Vasan" .

Metal Music Studies .

2 (3): 263– 272.

doi : 10.1386/mms.2.3.263_7 .

ISSN 2052-3998 .

^ True, Everett (24 August 2011).

"Ten myths about grunge, Nirvana and Kurt Cobain" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 January 2017 .

^ Bobbitt, Melissa (6 March 2019).

"The 10 Greatest Drummers of the '90s" .

LiveAbout . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ "Bonnie Raitt cover story".

Guitar Player Magazine . May 1977.

^ "Bonnie Raitt cover story".

Guitar Player Magazine . July 1998.

^ "Tina Weymouth & David Byrne, The Talking Heads".

Guitar Player Magazine . March 1984.

^ Boder, Christopher (October 1991). "The Hole Story".

Buzz . Vol. VII, no. 70. p. 13.

Most women in rock are only repeating what men have done. The women in this band are not doing that. We're coming at things from a more feminine, lunar, viewpoint.

^ "Simon Fuller: Guiding pop culture" .

BBC News . 18 June 2003 . Retrieved 18 September 2011 .

^ Silva, Marsha (13 June 2018).

"HAIM Says a Male Group Got Paid 10 Times More by a Festival" .

Digital Music News .

^ Larsson, Naomi (12 October 2017).

"Live music acts are mostly male-only. What's holding women back?" .

The Guardian .

^ "Simon Cowell Congratulates Little Mix After DNA Beats Spice Girls' Record Stateside" .

HuffPost . 5 June 2013.

^ Kaufman, Gil (24 August 2014).

"See Fifth Harmony Melt Down Onstage After VMA Win" .

MTV . Archived from the original on 6 October 2022.

^ a b c Arnwine, B. (2018). "The Beautiful Struggle: A Look at Women Who Have Helped Shape the DC Jazz Scene". In Jackson, M.; Ruble, B. (eds.).

DC Jazz: Stories of Jazz Music in Washington, DC . Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press . pp.

117– 128.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvvnh25 .

ISBN 978-1-62616-590-8 .

JSTOR j.ctvvnh25 .

S2CID 243928638 .

^ Stange, Mary Zeiss; Oyster, Carol K.; Sloan, Jane E. (2011). "Women In Classical Music".

Encyclopedia of Women in Today's World . Vol. 1. SAGE Publications. p. 249.

ISBN 978-1-4129-7685-5 .

^ a b c d e Morreale, Michael (19 March 2014).

"Classical Music's Shocking Gender Gap" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 27 June 2016 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ "Steffy Goldner – America & The New York Philharmonic (1921–1932)" .

New York Philharmonic Archives .

^ Hernandez, Javier C. (22 November 2022).

"In a 'Sea Change,' Women of the Philharmonic Now Outnumber the Men" .

The New York Times .

It was not until 1922 that the Philharmonic hired its first female member, Stephanie Goldner, a 26-year-old harpist from Vienna. She departed in 1932, and the orchestra became an all-male bastion again for decades.

^ Woolfe, Zachary; Barone, Joshua (10 September 2020).

"Musicians on How to Bring Racial Equity to Auditions" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 10 July 2025 .

^ a b c d Osborne, William (October 1996).

"Art Is Just an Excuse: Gender Bias in International Orchestras" .

IAWM Journal : 6– 14 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ Musikalische Misogynie [ Musical Misogyny ] (Radio broadcast) (in German). translation by William Osborne, transcribed by Regina Himmelbauer. Westdeutscher Rundfunk Radio 5. 13 February 1996.

{{ cite AV media }} :  CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) ( link ) ^ Perlez, Jane (28 February 1997).

"Vienna Philharmonic Lets Women Join in Harmony" .

The New York Times .

^ "Vienna opera appoints first ever female concertmaster" .

France 24 . 8 May 2008 . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Oestreich, James R. (28 February 1998).

"Even Legends Adjust To Time and Trend, Even the Vienna Philharmonic" .

The New York Times .

^ "The world's greatest orchestras" .

Gramophone . 23 March 2010 . Retrieved 29 April 2013 .

^ Oestreich, James R.

(16 November 2007). "Berlin in Lights: The Woman Question".

The New York Times .

^ a b c Levintova, Hannah (23 September 2013).

"Here's Why You Seldom See Women Leading a Symphony" .

Mother Jones . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ Tom, Lauren (18 May 2017).

"Cher's 10 Best Trump Tweets" .

Billboard .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2024.

^ Holden, Stephen (30 June 1996).

"Queen of the Comeback, Cher Tries Yet Again" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 18 November 2015 . Retrieved 17 January 2016 .

^ Tasker 2002 , p. 191.

^ von Aue, Mary (24 October 2014).

"Why Madonna's Unapologetic 'Bedtime Stories' Is Her Most Important Album" .

Vice Magazine . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ a b Crawford, Anwen (26 May 2015).

"The World Needs Female Rock Critics" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on 9 November 2021 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Mizoguchi, Karen (12 December 2015).

"Lady Gaga Calls Music Industry a 'F—king Boys Club' " .

People .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2021.

^ Keyes, Cheryl L. (2013).

" 'She Was Too Black for Rock and Too Hard for Soul': (Re)discovering the Musical Career of Betty Mabry Davis" .

American Studies .

52 (4): 35– 55.

doi : 10.1353/ams.2013.0107 .

ISSN 2153-6856 .

S2CID 159486276 .

^ Zellner, Xander (25 June 2018).

"BLACKPINK Makes K-Pop History on Hot 100, Billboard 200 & More With 'DDU-DU DDU-DU' " .

Billboard . Retrieved 1 September 2018 .

^ "Emerging Artists: The week of June 30, 2018" .

Billboard . Retrieved 1 September 2018 .

^ a b 撞 .

QQ Music (in Chinese).

Tencent . Retrieved 1 September 2018 .

^ Oliver, Paul (2001). "Rainey, Ma [née Pridgett, Gertrude]".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.50130 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Southern, Eileen (1997).

The Music of Black Americans: A History (3rd ed.). W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-97141-5 .

^ a b c Stewart-Baxter, Derrick (1970).

Ma Rainey and the Classic Blues Singers . New York: Stein & Day .

ISBN 9780812813173 .

^ a b Harrison, Daphne Duval (1988).

Black Pearls: Blues Queens of the '20s . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press .

ISBN 9780813512792 – via Archive.org .

^ Harris, Sheldon (1994).

Blues Who's Who (Revised ed.). New York: Da Capo Press . pp. 48, 137, 254, 484, 540, 580.

ISBN 9780306801556 .

^ Steinberg, Jesse R.; Fairweather, Abrol (2011).

Blues: Thinking Deep about Feeling Low . Hoboken: Wiley . p. 159.

ISBN 9780470656808 .

^ Nilles, Billy (26 November 2023).

"Dolly Parton's Fascinating World Will Have You Captivated From 9 to 5—And Beyond" .

E!

. Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Rylah, Juliet Bennett (17 November 2023).

"The business of Dolly Parton" .

The Hustle . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ a b Caulfield, Keith (23 September 2018).

"Carrie Underwood Makes Country History on the Billboard 200 Chart As 'Cry Pretty' Debuts at No. 1" .

Billboard . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Weiner, Natalie (31 October 2019).

"Fine Tune: Inside Miranda Lambert's Brilliant Catalog of Timeless Country" .

Billboard . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Ramirez, Daniel (Fall 2016).

"A Double Shot of Honesty With a Reality Chaser" .

Texas Lifestyle Magazine . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Leimkuehler, Matthew.

"Miranda Lambert's MuttNation helps 'a whole lot of mutts' with $250,000 donation" .

The Tennessean . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Rasmussen, Eric E.; Densley, Rebecca L. (February 2017).

"Girl in a Country Song: Gender Roles and Objectification of Women in Popular Country Music across 1990 to 2014" .

Sex Roles .

76 ( 3– 4): 190.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-016-0670-6 .

ISSN 0360-0025 .

S2CID 255003988 .

^ McCarthy, Amy (18 June 2014).

"Bro Country's Sexism Is Ruining Country Music" .

Dallas Observer . Archived from the original on 21 June 2014 . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Russonello, Giovanni (1 December 2017).

"For Women in Jazz, a Year of Reckoning and Recognition" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ "Marian Anderson Biography" .

Lakewood Public Library . Archived from the original on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 9 April 2012 .

^ Schauensee, Max de; Newland, Marti (reviser) (25 July 2013). "Marian Anderson".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.A2240043 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Gelb, Peter.

"Black Voices at the Met" .

Metropolitan Opera . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Erlmann, Veit (1996).

"Aesthetics of the Global Imagination: Reflections on World Music in the 1990s" .

Public Culture . Vol. 8, no. 3. pp.

467– 488.

^ Frith, Simon (2000). "The Discourse of World Music". In Born, Georgina; Hesmondhalgh, David (eds.).

Western Music and Its Others: Difference, Representation, and Appropriation in Music .

University of California Press .

ISBN 9780520220836 – via Archive.org .

^ Patricia Ebrey (1999), Cambridge Illustrated History of China , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 148.

^ 歌手列表 .

QQ Music (in Chinese).

Tencent . Retrieved 26 August 2018 .

^ 歌手列表 .

QQ Music (in Chinese).

Tencent . Retrieved 26 August 2018 .

^ a b "Singer Asha Bhosle enters Guinness World Records for most single studio recordings" .

India Today . 21 October 2011 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ Fereshteh Javaheri, 'With These Problems of Life, There Is No Time for Art,' trans. Maryam Habibian, Zanan, No. 36 (1997), p. 23.

^ "The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry Releases Its 2014 Data on the World Music Market" .

Arama! Japan . 22 April 2015 . Retrieved 22 April 2015 .

^ "2015年 年間音楽ランキングを発表! 年間シングルランキング 1位〜25位" .

Oricon Style (in Japanese).

Oricon . 28 December 2015 . Retrieved 29 February 2016 .

^ "【オリコン】AKB48、シングル総売上日本一3615.8万枚 秋元氏総売上は1億枚突破" .

Oricon Style (in Japanese). 9 December 2015 . Retrieved 11 March 2016 .

^ Dunbar, Julie C. (2011).

Women, Music, Culture .

Routledge . p. 23.

ISBN 978-1351857451 . Retrieved 9 August 2019 .

^ Martin, Douglas.

"Rosetta Reitz, Champion of Jazz Women, Dies at 84" , The New York Times , 14 November 2008. Retrieved 19 November 2008.

^ "Abbate named University Professor" .

Harvard Gazette . 20 November 2013 . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ a b c d e Koskoff, Ellen (1987).

Women and Music in Cross-Cultural Perspective . New York: Greenwood Press .

ISBN 9780313243141 .

^ Koskoff, Ellen (1 January 2019).

"My Music" .

Ethnomusicology .

63 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.5406/ethnomusicology.63.1.0001 .

ISSN 0014-1836 .

S2CID 239295576 .

^ a b "Deborah Wong" .

University of California, Riverside . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ "Women Who Rock Oral History Archive :: Deborah Wong" .

University of Washington . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ a b Wieland Howe, Sandra (2015).

"Women Music Educators in the United States: A History" .

GEMS (Gender, Education, Music, and Society) .

8 (4). Gender Research in Music Education.

^ a b c d e f Wieland Howe, Sondra (Fall 2009).

"A Historical View of Woman in Music Education Careers" .

Philosophy of Music Education Review .

17 (2): 162– 183.

doi : 10.2979/PME.2009.17.2.162 .

JSTOR 40495498 .

S2CID 145805294 .

^ Wieland Howe, Sondra (5 July 2012).

A Historical View of Woman in Music Education Careers (Slideshow).

^ Shehan Campbell, Patricia; Klinger, Rita (2000). "Learning". In Koskoff, Ellen (ed.).

Garland Encyclopedia of World Music . Vol. 3: The United States and Canada.

Garland Publishing . p. 276.

ISBN 9780824049447 .

^ Livingston, Carolyn.

"Women in American Music Education: How Names Mentioned in History Books are Regarded by Contemporary Scholars" .

MENC Sessions (April 1994) . Archived from the original on 7 February 2007 . Retrieved 19 May 2008 .

^ "Garcia's Method of Breathing".

Werner's Magazine . December 1889. p. 270.

^ "Music Educators Hall of Fame Honorees" .

The National Association for Music Education . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 19 May 2008 .

^ Drechsler, Martina; Scheithauer, Uwe (2016). "Cornelia Schröder-Auerbach". In Josten, Hildegard; YOPIC e.V. (eds.).

Frauenspuren II: Porträts fast vergessener Frauen aus Steglitz-Zehlendorf . Berlin: YOPIC e.V. and Bezirksamt Steglitz-Zehlendorf. p. 60.

^ cf.

Schröder-Auerbach, Cornelia (1930).

Die deutsche Clavichordkunst des 18. Jahrhunderts (in German) (1st ed.). Kassel: Bärenreiter.

OCLC 3547512 .

, simultaneously: Freiburg, Univ., Diss., 1928, 2nd and 3. ed. 1953 and 1959.

^ a b c d Schüler, Nico (3 February 2024). "Der gebürtige Rostocker Komonist Hanning Schröder (1896–1987): Mit neuer Sachlichkeit zur Zwölftontechnik". In Möller, Hartmut; Schröder, Martin (eds.).

Musik, Kultur, Wissenschaft (in German). Vol. 1. Rostocker Schriften zur Musikwissenschaft und Musikpädagogik.

ISBN 978-3-89924-307-9 .

^ "Grace Harriet Spofford papers" .

Five College Archives & Manuscript Collections . Retrieved 20 April 2019 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Howe, Sondra Wieland (2014).

Women Music Educators in the United States: A History . Plymouth, United Kingdom: Scarecrow Press .

ISBN 978-0810888470 .

^ a b Sicherman, Barbara (1986).

Notable American Women: The Modern Period: A Biographical Dictionary . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674627338 .

^ Egan, Robert F. (1989).

Music and the Arts in the Community: The Community Music School in America . Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press .

ISBN 9780810821170 .

^ a b "Isbin, Sharon" .

Juilliard School . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Duchen, Jessica (28 February 2015).

"Why the male domination of classical music might be coming to an end" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b Jagow, Shelley M. (1998).

"Women Orchestral Conductors in America: The Struggle for Acceptance—An Historical View from the Nineteenth Century to the Present" .

College Music Symposium .

38 : 126– 145.

ISSN 0069-5696 .

JSTOR 40374324 . Archived from the original on 21 September 2015.

^ Tribot Laspière, Victor (2 October 2013).

"Une main ferme à l'Orchestre national de France" .

France Musique (in French) . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ Pentreath, Rosie (6 March 2015).

"11 of today's top women conductors" .

BBC Music Magazine . Archived from the original on 16 March 2015 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b c Burton-Hill, Clemency (21 October 2014).

"Culture – Why aren't there more women conductors?" .

BBC . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b c d American Symphony Orchestra League . Oxford Music Online. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. 2001. 00790.

^ "Sisters in the Spotlight" .

Ebony . March 2003 . Retrieved 18 May 2010 .

^ Jones, Steve, ed. (2002).

Pop Music and the Press . Philadelphia: Temple University Press . p. 134.

ISBN 9781566399661 .

^ McLeod (2002) at 94, quoted in Leonard, Marion (2007).

"Meaning Making in the Press" .

Gender in the Music Industry: Rock, Discourse, and Girl Power . Aldershot, Hampshire, England: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 67.

ISBN 9780754638629 .

^ MacDonald, Patrick (7 March 2006).

"Ann Powers named L.A. Times pop critic" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on 10 March 2007.

^ Powers, Ann (19 October 2011).

"Why I Write: Ann Powers Reflects on Writing About Rock" .

National Writing Project . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

^ "Pop music critic Ann Powers searches for the language of rock and roll" .

Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . Archived from the original on 1 October 2011 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

^ a b Friedlander, Emilie (3 June 2015).

"The World Doesn't Need More Female Music Critics" .

The Fader . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ a b Osborne, William (11 June 2005).

"Women Music Critics" . Osborne-conant.org . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b Ncube, Rosina (September 2013).

"Sounding Off: Why So Few Women In Audio?" .

Sound on Sound .

^ a b Savage, Mark (29 August 2012).

"Why are female record producers so rare?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ a b c d e "Trina Shoemaker Credits" .

AllMusic . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ Dunbar, Julie C. (2010).

Women, Music, Culture: An Introduction . Taylor & Francis. p. 304.

ISBN 978-0415875622 .

^ Massey, Howard (2009).

Behind the Glass: Top Record Producers Tell How They Craft the Hits, Volume 2 . Hal Leonard Corporation. pp.

256–257 .

ISBN 978-0879309558 .

^ Fong, Melissa (10 September 2014).

"Female DJs tackle gender bias" .

Ricochet . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ a b Katz, Mark (12 December 2007). "Men, Women, and Turntables: Gender and the DJ Battle".

The Musical Quarterly .

89 (4): 580– 599.

doi : 10.1093/musqtl/gdm007 .

^ a b Farrugia, Rebekah (2013).

Beyond the Dance Floor: Female DJs, Technology and Electronic Dance Music Culture . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-1841505664 .

^ Oldenziel, Ruth A.

(1997).

"Boys and Their Toys: The Fisher Body Craftsman's Guild, 1930–1968, and the Making of a Male Technical Domain" .

Technology and Culture .

38 (1): 60– 96.

doi : 10.2307/3106784 .

JSTOR 3106784 .

S2CID 108698842 .

^ Green, Lucy (2008).

Music, Gender, Education . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521555227 .

^ "Music" .

Gender and Education Association . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ "Female Turntablists on the Rise" .

BPM SUPREME . Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ Mitchell, Aurora (7 February 2016).

"9 All-Female DJ Collectives You Need To Know Right Now" .

The Fader . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ "Enter" .

femaledjs.london . Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ Rodgers, Tara (2010).

Pink Noises: Women on Electronic Music and Sound . Durham: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-0822346739 .

^ "About – Discwoman" .

Discwoman.com . Archived from the original on 19 April 2017 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ a b Lont, Cynthia (1992). "Women's Music: No Longer a Small Private Party". In Garofalo, Reebee (ed.).

Rockin' the Boat: Mass Music & Mass Movements . Cambridge, MA: South End Press .

ISBN 978-0-89608-427-8 .

^ Garofalo 1992:242 ^ Peraino, Judith (2001). "Girls with Guitars and Other Strange Stories".

Journal of the American Musicological Society .

54 (3): 693.

^ a b Mosbacher, Dee (2002).

Radical Harmonies . Woman Vision.

OCLC 53071762 .

^ "VPO Watch" .

International Alliance for Women in Music . Archived from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 2 October 2015 .

^ Baker, Vicki D. (October 2003). "Inclusion of Women Composers in College Music History Textbooks".

Journal of Historical Research in Music Education .

25 (1): 5– 19.

doi : 10.1177/153660060302500103 .

JSTOR 40215274 .

S2CID 142153524 .

^ a b c "About" . Women in Music. 20 June 2014. Archived from the original on 11 May 2016 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ "Women in Music Canada" .

Women in Music Canada . n.d . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ "Now Girls Rule" .

Now Girls Rule . 10 December 2020. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ "Facebook: Now Girls Rule" . 30 August 2014 . Retrieved 30 August 2014 – via Facebook.

^ "Now Girls Rule - Girl Camp & Now Girls Rule Night 2016" . 18 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2021 . Retrieved 30 January 2017 – via YouTube.

^ "La Marketa by Now Girls Rule-2019 edition" . 8 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2021 . Retrieved 12 December 2019 – via YouTube.

^ Kaye, Deirdre (9 April 2015).

"Boston wins 'Most Feminist City' with Riot Grrrl Day – we made a playlist to celebrate" .

SheKnows Media . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Feliciano, Steve (19 June 2013).

"The Riot Grrrl Movement" .

New York Public Library .

^ Leonard, Marion (31 January 2014). "Riot grrrl".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.A2257186 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ "List of Riot Girl Bands" . Hot-topic.org. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009 . Retrieved 30 September 2012 .

^ Meltzer, Marisa (15 February 2010).

Girl Power: The 1990s Revolution in Music .

Macmillan Publishers . p. 42.

ISBN 9781429933285 .

^ Jackson, Buzzy (2005).

A Bad Woman Feeling Good: Blues and the Women Who Sing Them . New York: W. W. Norton .

ISBN 978-0-393-05936-6 .

^ Schilt, Kristen (2003).

" 'A Little Too Ironic': The Appropriation and Packaging of Riot Grrrl Politics by Mainstream Female Musicians" (PDF) .

Popular Music and Society .

26 (1): 5.

doi : 10.1080/0300776032000076351 .

S2CID 37919089 .

^ Huttel, Richard (26 March 1974).

"UI grad student organizing national women's folk festival" .

Daily Illini . Retrieved 7 April 2018 – via Illinois Digital Newspaper Collections .

^ "National Womens Music Festival – July 5–8, 2018 Middleton, Wisconsin" .

National Women's Music Festival . Archived from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ "Membership and Contributions" .

National Womens Music Festival . Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Morris, Bonnie J. (1999).

Eden Built By Eves: The Culture of Women's Music Festivals (1st ed.).

Alyson Publications .

ISBN 9781555834777 .

^ "Women in Music Festival" .

University of Rochester . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Pellegrinelli, Lara (19 July 2010).

"With Sales Lagging, Lilith Fair Faces Question of Relevance" .

NPR . Retrieved 30 May 2015 .

^ a b c Freydkin, Donna (28 July 1998).

"Lilith Fair: Lovely, lively and long overdue" .

CNN . Retrieved 4 July 2008 .

^ Hilburn, Robert (27 June 1998). "Lilith's last laugh".

Vancouver Sun . p. D13.

^ "ARTS : Music: Popular" .

GLBTQ.com . Archived from the original on 13 May 2014 . Retrieved 29 May 2014 .

^ a b Citron, Marcia J. (1993).

Gender and the Musical Canon .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521449748 .

^ "Women in the Record Industry".

Cosmopolitan . November 1982.

^ Sutherland, Sam, ed. (20 November 1982).

"Inside Track" .

Billboard . Retrieved 13 January 2024 – via Google Books .

Sexual equality has been an issue in the music and entertainment fields as much as in other trades, but now Cosmopolitan's on the case. The current edition of the feminine monthly plugs into music biz careers via a long feature on a group of women executives interviewed by the magazine.

^ Sisario, Ben (8 March 2021).

"For Women in Music, Equality Remains Out of Reach" .

The New York Times .

Three years ago, an academic tallied up the performers, producers and songwriters behind hit songs, and found that women's representation fell on a scale between, roughly, poor and abysmal. The starkness of those findings shook the music industry and led to promises of change, like a pledge by record companies and artists to consider hiring more women... But the latest edition of that study, released on Monday by Stacy L. Smith of the University of Southern California's Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, has found that the numbers for women in music have mostly not improved, and in some ways even gotten worse.

^ O'Brien, Lucy (1996). "Talkin' Business".

She Bop: The Definitive History of Women in Rock, Pop and Soul . New York: Penguin Books . p. 425.

ISBN 978-0-14-025155-5 .

...Women have built up a strong presence within the publishing business through a combination of assiduous attention to detail and people management.

^ Mullen, Caitlin (22 July 2021).

"Women's representation shrinks as rank increases in music industry" .

The Business Journal : Bizwomen . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

Annenberg researchers have repeatedly found women artists capture the spotlight, but they have a smaller role in the broader industry...

^ Smith, Stacy L.; Lee, Carmen; Choueiti, Marc; Pieper, Katherine; Moore, Zoe; Dinh, Dana; Tofan, Arthur (June 2021).

Inclusion in the Music Business: Gender & Race/Ethnicity Across Executives, Artists & Talent Teams (PDF) (Report).

USC Annenberg . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

A total of 70 major and independent companies were examined for their top executives. At the pinnacle of power within these entities..., 86.1% of top executives were men (13.9% women, n=10) ^ Gilligan, Chris (6 March 2023).

"States With the Highest Percentage of Female Top Executives" .

U.S. News and World Report . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

The share of women holding top executive positions in the U.S. has grown steadily in recent years, according to data from the U.S. Census Bureau. Women held 31.7% of top executive positions across industries in 2021, a near five-point increase since 2015 when it stood at 27.1%.

^ "Sex and Chopin on the score for the symphonists".

The Bookseller . 19 January 1996. p. 44.

^ a b c Neff, Sarah E. (2014).

Sexism Across Musical Genres: A Comparison .

Honors Theses (Undergraduate honors thesis).

Western Michigan University . Paper 2484 – via ScholarWorks @ WMU.

^ a b c Jordan, Meggan M. (2006).

10x The Talent = 1/3 Of The Credit: How Female Musicians Are Treated Differently In Music (MA thesis). University of Central Florida. Paper 946 – via STARS.

^ Coopersmith, Tristan (2018).

"Leading A Business Through #MeToo: Female Executives Faced Tough Decisions This Year as an Array of Powerful Music Figures Were Accused of Sexual Misconduct. Four Such Leaders Share Their Stories" .

Billboard . No. 27. p. 108.

^ Cheng, Ing-Haw; Hsiaw, Alice (2022).

"Reporting Sexual Misconduct in the #MeToo Era" (PDF) .

American Economic Journal: Microeconomics .

14 (4): 761– 803.

doi : 10.1257/mic.20200218 .

ISSN 1945-7669 .

S2CID 219347062 .

SSRN 3506936 .

^ Savage, Mark (29 March 2018).

"Dua Lipa talks music industry sexism" .

BBC News . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .

^ a b Rogers, Anna (2013).

"Sexism in Unexpected Places: An Analysis of Country Music Lyrics" .

Caravel Undergraduate Research Journal .

University of South Carolina . Retrieved 3 April 2019 .

^ Wooten, Ronnie (2017). "Women of Color in the Conducting Profession: Where Are They?".

Black History Bulletin .

80 (1): 15– 24.

doi : 10.5323/blachistbull.80.1.0015 .

JSTOR 10.5323/blachistbull.80.1.0015 .

S2CID 80533534 .

^ a b Higgins, Charlotte (2 September 2013).

"Male conductors are better for orchestras, says Vasily Petrenko" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ Vincent, Michael (5 April 2014).

"Editorial: CBC Classical music gender gap article poses new questions" .

Ludwig van Toronto . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ "Jorma Panula naiskapellimestareista: "Saahan ne yrittää" " .

MTV Finland (in Finnish). 30 March 2014. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

Mutta naiset... Kyllähän ne yrittää! Toiset irvistää ja rehkii ja präiskyttää mutta ei se siitä parane, pahenoo vain! ... Niin, tämä on puhtaasti biologinen kysymys Literary sources [ edit ] Negra, Diane (2001).

Off-White Hollywood: American Culture and Ethnic Female Stardom .

Psychology Press .

ISBN 0-415-21678-8 .

Tasker, Yvonne (2002).

Working Girls: Gender and Sexuality in Popular Cinema .

Routledge .

ISBN 1-134-82660-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bowers, Jane and Tick, Judith (eds.).

Women Making Music: The Western Art Tradition, 1150–1950 (Reprint Edition). Board of trustees of the University of Illinois, 1986.

Citron, Marcia J.

Gender and the Musical Canon . CUP Archive, 1993.

Dunbar, Julie C.

Women, Music, Culture: An Introduction . Routledge, 2010.

Gates, Eugene.

The Woman Composer Question: A Bibliography . The Kapralova Society, 1998–2020, available online at The woman composer question: a bibliography Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse , 2000. "Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of 'Blind' Auditions on Female Musicians", American Economic Review , 90(4): 715–741.

Pendle, Karin Anna.

Women and Music: A History . Indiana University Press, 2001.

Solie, Ruth A., ed., Musicology and Difference: Gender and Sexuality in Music Scholarship . University of California Press, 1993.

Millar, B. 2008 "selective hearing:gender bias in the music preferences young adults", Psychology of music, vol. 46, no.4, pp. 429–445 Schmutz, V., & Faupel, A. (2010). Gender and Cultural Consecration in Popular Music. Social Forces, 89(2), 685–707. Retrieved from Gender and Cultural Consecration in Popular Music Barongan, C., & Hall, C. N. (1995). The influence of misogynous rap music on sexual aggression against women. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 19, 195–207.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Women in music .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pc4w6
Cached time: 20250814220457
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.913 seconds
Real time usage: 3.213 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 31828/1000000
Revision size: 212465/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 706803/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 37389/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 66/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 935431/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.740/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25157244/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2570.232      1 -total
 54.82% 1408.942      2 Template:Reflist
 19.69%  506.106     98 Template:Cite_web
 12.10%  310.959     54 Template:Cite_book
  7.08%  181.949     29 Template:Citation_needed
  6.53%  167.940     34 Template:Fix
  5.34%  137.360     31 Template:Rp
  5.08%  130.552     26 Template:Cite_news
  5.03%  129.408     31 Template:R/superscript
  4.98%  128.059     23 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47988234:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220457 and revision id 1305714649. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women_in_music&oldid=1305714649 " Categories : Women in music Gendered occupations Occupations in music Women and the arts Women by role Music history Music-related lists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template with an id parameter CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: unfit URL CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2025 Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing suspected AI-generated texts from August 2025 Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles needing additional references from January 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2025 Articles needing additional references from May 2025 Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from May 2025 All articles needing rewrite Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Articles to be expanded from July 2025 All articles to be expanded All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2024 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Punjabi-language text Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2025 Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from July 2025 Articles lacking reliable references from April 2023 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 17:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Women in music 12 languages Add topic

