Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Motivations 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Separatism by continent 2.2 Gender separatism 2.3 Geographical and socioeconomic separatism 2.4 Racial separatism 2.5 Religious separatism 3 Governmental responses 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Lists 4.2 General 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Separatism 66 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Буряад Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Advocacy for separation from a larger group "Separatist movement" redirects here; not to be confused with Separation of powers .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( August 2021 ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Separatism is the advocacy of cultural, ethnic, tribal, religious, racial, regional, governmental, or gender separation from the larger group. As with secession , separatism conventionally refers to full political separation. Groups simply seeking greater autonomy are usually not considered separatists.

[ 1 ] Some discourse settings equate separatism with religious segregation , racial segregation , or sex segregation , while other discourse settings take the broader view that separation by choice may serve useful purposes and is not the same as government-enforced segregation. There is some academic debate about this definition, and in particular how it relates to secessionism , as has been discussed online.

[ 2 ] Separatist groups practice a form of identity politics , or political activity and theorizing founded in the shared experiences of the group's members. Such groups believe attempts at integration with dominant groups compromise their identity and ability to pursue greater self-determination .

[ 3 ] However, economic and political factors usually are critical in creating strong separatist movements as opposed to less ambitious identity movements.

[ 4 ] Motivations [ edit ] Support for Catalan independence is based on the idea that Catalonia is a nation.

The former KLA leader Hashim Thaçi (left) and then-U.S. Vice President Joe Biden with Declaration of Independence of Kosovo Groups may have one or more motivations for separation, including: [ 5 ] Emotional resentment and hatred of rival communities.

Protection from genocide and ethnic cleansing.

Resistance by victims of oppression, including denigration of their language, culture or religion.

Influence and propaganda by those inside and outside the region who hope to gain politically from intergroup conflict and hatred.

Economic and political dominance of one group that does not share power and privilege in an egalitarian fashion.

Economic motivations: seeking to end economic exploitation by more powerful group or, conversely, to escape economic redistribution from a richer to a poorer group.

Preservation of threatened religious, language or other cultural tradition.

Destabilization from one separatist movement giving rise to others.

Geopolitical power vacuum from breakup of larger states or empires.

Continuing fragmentation as more and more states break up.

Feeling that the perceived nation was added to the larger state by illegitimate means.

The perception that the state can no longer support one's own group or has betrayed their interests.

Opposition to political decisions.

Types [ edit ] Ethnic separatism can be based on cultural, linguistic as well as religious or racial differences. Ethnic separatist movements were relevant since they represented historical delineations between states , or in recent times, were the cause of conflicts between peoples in Europe, Africa and Asia with different ethnic/linguistic origins.

Separatism by continent [ edit ] Pro-independence rally in Iraqi Kurdistan in September 2017 Pro-Russian separatists in Donetsk , eastern Ukraine , April 2015 List of active separatist movements in Africa List of active separatist movements in Asia List of active separatist movements in Europe List of active separatist movements in North America List of active separatist movements in Oceania List of active separatist movements in South America Gender separatism [ edit ] The relationship between gender and separatism is complex.

[ 6 ] Feminist separatism is women's choosing to separate from ostensibly male-defined, male-dominated institutions, relationships, roles and activities.

[ 7 ] Lesbian separatism advocates lesbianism as the logical result of feminism. Some separatist feminists and lesbian separatists have chosen to live apart in intentional community , cooperatives , and on land trusts .

[ 8 ] Queer nationalism (or "Gay separatism") seeks a community distinct and separate from other social groups.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] On the other hand, the MGTOW movement is sometimes considered a male-gender separatism, as at the center of this ideology is the notion of male separatism where men should not be a part of a feminist-biased society. Some fringe elements even propose a utopical no-women state.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Geographical and socioeconomic separatism [ edit ] Kabyle protesters in Paris holding the Berber flag , April 2016 South Sudanese independence referendum in 2011 marked the end of South Sudan 's long struggle for independence.

Some examples include: Alberta separatism Berber separatism in North Africa Bougainville independence movement Cape Independence Casamance independence movement Cascadian separatists Catalan independence movement Provisional Revolutionary Government of Cibao Euskadi (Basque Country) independence movement Hong Kong independence movement New England New State Movement Malaysian Sabah and Sarawak separatists West Papuan independence Free South movement Quebec sovereignty movement Scottish independence movement Taiwanese independence movement Racial separatism [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some separatist groups seek to separate from others along racial lines. They oppose interracial marriage and integration with other races and seek separate schools, businesses, churches and other institutions, and often separate societies, territories, countries, and governments: Territories considered for "Aztlán" Black separatism (also known as black nationalism ) is the most prominent wave advancing the concepts of "Black racial identity" in the United States and has been advanced by black leaders like Marcus Garvey and organizations such as the Nation of Islam .

Critical race theorists like New York University 's Derrick Bell and University of Colorado 's Richard Delgado argue that US legal, education and political systems are rife with blatant racism. They support efforts like "all-black" schools and dorms and question the efficacy and merit of government-enforced integration.

[ 14 ] In 2008 statements by Barack Obama's former pastor Jeremiah Wright, Jr.

, revived the issue of the current relevance of black separatism.

[ 15 ] Latin American concepts of racial identity such as the bronze race and La Raza Cósmica are found in the small separatist Raza Unida Party . The Chicano Movement (or Chicano nation ) in the United States sought to recreate Aztlán , the mythical homeland of the Aztecs comprising the Southwestern United States .

[ 16 ] White separatism in the United States and Western Europe seeks separation of the white race and limits to nonwhite immigration under the argument that these policies are necessary for the white race's survival.

Religious separatism [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Ecclesiastical separatism Sikhs in London protesting against the Indian government Religious separatist groups and sects want to withdraw from some larger religious groups and/or believe they should interact primarily with coreligionists: [ citation needed ] English Christians in the 16th and 17th centuries who wished to separate from the Church of England and form independent local churches were influential politically under Oliver Cromwell , who was himself a separatist. They were eventually called Congregationalists .

[ 17 ] The Pilgrims who established the first successful colony in New England were separatists.

[ 18 ] Christian separatist groups in Indonesia , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] India [ 21 ] and South Carolina (United States) [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Zionism sought the creation of the State of Israel as a Jewish homeland, with separation from gentile Palestinians.

Simon Dubnow , who had mixed feelings toward Zionism, formulated Jewish Autonomism , which was adopted in eastern Europe by Jewish political parties such as the Bund and his own Folkspartei before World War II.

[ 24 ] Zionism can also be seen as somewhat ethnic too, however, as its definition of who is Jewish has often included people of Jewish background who do not practice the Jewish religion. It is further complicated as some who had ancestors who converted to Judaism, such as some Ethiopian Jews, may not share ethnic history with the Jews, however, are considered to be so but not without debate.

[ 25 ] Moro Islamic Liberation Front fighter in the Philippines The Partition of India and (later Pakistan and Bangladesh ) arose as a result of separatism on the part of Muslims.

The demand for an independent Sikh homeland called Khalistan emerged during the 1970s and 1980s amid political tensions in Punjab , particularly surrounding the Anandpur Sahib Resolution , which primarily sought greater autonomy for Punjab and the protection of Sikh identity within the Indian Union. Escalation occurred when armed militants led by Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale occupied the Harimandir Sahib (Golden Temple) complex. In June 1984, the Government of India launched Operation Blue Star to remove the militants from the site. The military action resulted in casualties, including civilians, and caused deep anguish among many Sikhs globally.

Later that year, the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards led to the tragic 1984 anti-Sikh riots , in which thousands of Sikhs were killed. While these events led to a rise in support for the Khalistan movement in some sections of the Sikh diaspora, the movement steadily declined in India by the 1990s.

Today, Sikhs in India are equal citizens under the Constitution, and actively contribute to the country’s political, military, economic, and cultural life. The idea of Khalistan holds little to no support among Indian Sikhs, and is generally viewed as a fringe movement, largely sustained by diaspora activism abroad. Attempts to revive it within India have consistently failed to gain traction.

[ 26 ] Muslim separatist groups in the Philippines ( Mindanao and other regions: Moro Islamic Liberation Front , Abu Sayyaf ), in Thailand (see also South Thailand insurgency ), in India (see also Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir ), in the People's Republic of China ( Xinjiang : East Turkestan Islamic Movement ), Tanzania ( Zanzibarian separatist movements), in the Central African Republic (Regions that are inhabited by Muslims: Séléka ), in Russia (in the Northern Caucasus , especially in Chechnya : Caucasus Emirate ), in Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina : Alija Izetbegovic espoused an Islamic inspired separatism) Governmental responses [ edit ] In 1861, the American Civil War started after a separatist movement of southern US states seceded from the United States .

How far separatist demands will go toward full independence, and whether groups pursue constitutional and nonviolent action or armed violence, depend on a variety of economic, political, social and cultural factors, including movement leadership [ 27 ] and the government's response.

[ 4 ] Governments may respond in a number of ways, some of which are mutually exclusive. Some include: [ 28 ] accede to separatist demands improve the circumstances of disadvantaged minorities, be they religious, linguistic, territorial, economic or political adopt "asymmetric federalism" where different states have different relations to the central government depending on separatist demands or considerations allow minorities to win in political disputes about which they feel strongly, through parliamentary voting, referendum, etc.

settle for a confederation or a commonwealth relationship where there are only limited ties among states.

See also [ edit ] Political science portal Lists [ edit ] Lists of separatist movements Lists of active separatist movements List of active separatist movements recognized by intergovernmental organizations List of historical separatist movements List of states with limited recognition Lists of ethnic groups List of indigenous peoples General [ edit ] Annexation Autonomism (political doctrine) Ethnic nationalism Ethnic minority Ethnocentrism Homeland Identity politics Intersectionality Kinship Language secessionism Micronation Military occupation Multiculturalism Minority group Nation Polarization Partition Refugee Secession Stateless nation Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization References [ edit ] ^ Doyle, Don (2010).

Secession as an International Phenomenon . University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 9-780-8203-3008-2 .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-19 . Retrieved 2020-10-16 .

^ "Secessionism and Separatism Monthly Series: "Secession and Secessionism" by Alexandar Pavković - H-Nationalism - H-Net" .

networks.h-net.org .

Archived from the original on 2016-04-01 . Retrieved 2016-03-21 .

^ "Identity Politics".

Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Stanford University . November 2, 2007.

Archived from the original on August 30, 2006 . Retrieved May 7, 2008 .

^ a b See D.L. Horowitz's "Patterns of Ethnic Separatism", originally published in Comparative Studies in Society and History , 1981, vol 23, 165-95. Republished in John A. Hall, The State: Critical Concepts , Archived 2017-03-27 at the Wayback Machine , Routledge, 1994.

^ Spencer, Metta (1998).

Separatism: Democracy and Disintegration . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

2– 4.

ISBN 9780847685851 .

Archived from the original on 2015-03-19 . Retrieved 2015-08-15 .

^ "Secessionism and Separatism Monthly Series: "Gendering Secession" by Jill Vickers - H-Nationalism - H-Net" .

networks.h-net.org .

Archived from the original on 2018-09-13 . Retrieved 2016-03-21 .

^ Frye, Marilyn; Meyers, Diana Tietjens (1997). "Some Reflections on Separatism and Power".

Feminist Social Thought: A Reader . Routledge. pp.

406– 414.

^ Joyce Cheney, Lesbian Land , Word Weavers Press, 1976.

^ Mark K. Bloodsworth-Lugo, In-Between Bodies: Sexual Difference, Race, and Sexuality Archived 2017-03-27 at the Wayback Machine , SUNY Press, 2007, ISBN 0-7914-7221-3 ^ Richard D. Mohr, Gays/Justice: A Study of Ethics, Society, and Law Archived 2019-06-19 at the Wayback Machine , Columbia University Press, 1988, ISBN 0-231-06735-6 ^ Lamoureux, Mack (24 September 2015).

"This Group of Straight Men Is Swearing Off Women" .

Vice . Retrieved 2022-06-04 .

^ Bates, Laura (2020-08-26).

"Men going their own way: the rise of a toxic male separatist movement" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2022-06-04 .

^ "Male supremacists have a new utopian dream" . 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 2022-06-04 .

^ Foer, Franklin (November 23, 1997).

"Racial Integration" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2011 . Retrieved May 7, 2008 .

^ Barlow, Rich (April 26, 2008).

"Topic turns to Wright case" .

Boston Globe .

^ Professor Predicts 'Hispanic Homeland' Archived 2012-11-07 at the Wayback Machine , Associated Press, 2000 ^ "Encyclopædia Britannica on religious separatists" .

Archived from the original on 2008-10-12 . Retrieved 2008-05-07 .

^ Goodwin, John Abbot (1888).

The Pilgrim republic: an historical review of the colony of New Plymouth . Houghton Mifflin Company. p.

1 .

pilgrims.

^ "Christian separatist on trial in Indonesia" .

BBC . British Broadcasting Corporation. August 19, 2002.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2018 . Retrieved August 24, 2009 .

^ Brummitt, Chris (April 5, 2002).

"Christian separatist leader threatens to raise independence flags in Maluku" .

Associated Press . Archived from the original on February 15, 2011.

^ Hussain, Syed Zarir (December 31, 2002).

"Christian separatist group in Tripura target tribal Hindus" .

Indo-Asian News Service .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2018 . Retrieved August 24, 2009 .

^ "Christian separatist ready for new home" .

Ventura County Star . June 9, 2007. Archived from the original on August 6, 2012 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

^ "Colorado Rep. disavows ties to SC Christian separatist group" . Associated Press. October 9, 2005. Archived from the original on September 13, 2018 . Retrieved August 24, 2009 .

^ Pinson, Koppel S. (1958).

Simon Dubnow . pp.

13– 69.

^ Lucotte G, Smets P; Smets (December 1999). "Origins of Falasha Jews studied by haplotypes of the Y chromosome".

Human Biology .

71 (6): 989– 993.

PMID 10592688 .

^ Punj, Blbir (June 16, 2006).

"The Ghost of Khalistan" .

Sikh Times .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2018 . Retrieved July 5, 2008 .

^ Link to: Archived 2008-06-11 at the Wayback Machine Chima, Jugdep. "Effects of Political Leadership on Ethnic Separatist Movements in India" Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association, Palmer House Hotel, Chicago, Illinois, April 12, 2007, (PDF); Chima, Jugdep. "How Does Political Leadership Affect the Trajectories of Ethnic Separatist Insurgencies?: Comparative Evidence from Movements in India" Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Political Science Association, Marriott Wardman Park, Omni Shoreham , Washington Hilton, Washington, DC, September 01, 2005 (PDF).

^ Metta Spencer, 5-6.

Further reading [ edit ] Kingsbury, Damien (March 2021).

Separatism and the State . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9780367276485 .

Brown, Graham K.

"Horizontal Inequalities, Ethnic Separatism and Violent Conflict: The Case of Aceh, Indonesia" (PDF) .

United Nations Human Development Report 2005 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-05-12 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

Griffiths, Ryan (March 26, 2008).

"Globalization, Development and Separatism: The Influence of External and Internal Economic Factors on the Strategy of Separatism" . Archived from the original on May 24, 2009.

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the ISA's 49th Annual Convention, Bridging Multiple Divides, Hilton San Francisco, San Francisco, California.

Cabestan, Jean-Pierre; Pavković, Aleksandar, eds. (2013).

Secessionism and Separatism in Europe and Asia: To have a state of one's own . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-66774-6 .

Cordesman, Anthony (October 9, 2007).

"Pandora's Box: Iraqi Federalism, Separatism, "Hard" Partitioning, and US Policy" (PDF) .

Working Draft . Center for Strategic and International Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 10, 2007.

Millard, James (2004).

"Violent Separatism in Xinjiang: A Critical Assessment" (PDF) .

eastwestcenter.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-02-22 . Retrieved 2008-05-19 .

Miller, Michelle Ann (2004). "The Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam law: a serious response to Acehnese separatism?".

Asian Ethnicity . pp.

333– 351.

5 (3) Miller, Michelle Ann (2012).

Autonomy and Armed Separatism in South and Southeast Asia . Singapore: ISEAS.

Keating, Joshua (2018).

Invisible Countries: Journeys to the Edge of Nationhood . Yale.

ISBN 978-0-300-22162-6 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Separatism at Wikimedia Commons From Spain to Iraq, states have to see that suppressing secession won't work v t e Autonomous types of first-tier subdivision administration Federalism Asymmetric federalism Confederation Cooperative federalism Corporative federalism Dual federalism Ethnic federalism Federacy Federal monarchy Federal republic Federated state Federation Fiscal federalism Symmetric federalism List of federal countries Unitary state Devolution Regional state Unions Composite monarchy Dual monarchy Dynastic union Empire Colonial empire Multinational state Personal union Political union Real union Superstate Supranational union Continental union Subordinacy Associated state Client state Colony Dependent territory Direct rule Dominion Indirect rule Mandate Protectorate Puppet state Satellite state Trusteeship Tributary state Vassal state Development Annexation Cession Detachment Irredentism Military occupation Partition Secession Separatism Territorial dispute See also Autonomy Autonomous area Decentralization Hegemony Home rule Stateless nation Subsidiarity Suzerainty Tribal sovereignty v t e Secessions by country Africa Mali South Africa Asia China Hong Kong Macau Taiwan Tibet Xinjiang India Khalistan Sikkim Indonesia Iraq Pakistan Philippines Russia Siberia Turkey Europe Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Russia Spain United Kingdom North America Canada Alberta Quebec Denmark (Greenland) United States Oceania Australia Tasmania Western Australia Papua New Guinea Bougainville Independence Movement South America Brazil Historical Bangladesh Brazil Colombia Czechoslovakia East Timor Gran Colombia Indian subcontinent Mexico Ottoman Empire Peru–Bolivian Confederation Prussia Republic of Venice Soviet Union Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata Yugoslavia Active separatist movements Historical separatist movements Independence referendum Irredentism Secession Separatism v t e Colonization , decolonization , and separatism By region Exploration Americas Africa Asia Oceania Antarctica — World oceans Colonization and Imperialism List of empires Americas Antarctica Africa European colonies Asia Southeast Asia Oceania Extraterrestrial Decolonization and Anti-imperialism Sovereign states formation dates Americas in South America Africa Asia Europe Ottoman Spain Ukraine Oceania General topics Exploration Maritime history ( European ) Age of Discovery Colonization Antiquity — Imperialism Chartered companies Interventionism Colonialism Chronology History Empires Detribalization Settler colonialism wars Current: Non-self-governing Dependent Colonial empires in the modern era Overseas, major: British Dutch French German Italian Portuguese Spanish Overseas, minor: American Australian Austro-Hungarian Belgian Couronian (Polish-Lithuanian) Danish New Zealand Norwegian Swedish Mostly contiguous: American Chinese Japanese Ottoman Russian South African Decolonization and Separatism Independence Declaration Diplomatic recognition Facts on the ground Referendum Limited Namibia exception Non-recognition Partition Unilateral Nation-building Non-interventionism Political status Right to homeland Rebellion List Rump state Secession Self-determination League of Nations mandate Separatism Active Political parties Historical Sovereignty Special Committee on Decolonization Territorial integrity Wars of national liberation List Related concepts Anabaptism Analysis of European colonialism and colonization Endangered language Christianity and colonialism Criticisms of globalization Decolonization of knowledge Decolonization of public space Indigenous peoples Internal colonialism Neocolonialism Opposition to immigration Plantation Postcolonialism Settler Terra nullius Uncontacted peoples Zionism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐k87tv
Cached time: 20250816194049
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.742 seconds
Real time usage: 0.908 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4515/1000000
Revision size: 28692/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 222998/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13813/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 165531/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.431/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20510621/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  697.361      1 -total
 27.31%  190.445      1 Template:Reflist
 16.29%  113.626     11 Template:Cite_book
 14.90%  103.913      1 Template:Political_philosophy
 14.08%   98.170      1 Template:Politics
 13.71%   95.619      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 13.49%   94.040      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.50%   80.190      2 Template:Lang
 10.48%   73.056     17 Template:Cite_web
  8.17%   56.988      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:286527:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816194049 and revision id 1298967044. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Separatism&oldid=1298967044 " Categories : Separatism Political theories Politics and race Religion and politics Independence movements Secession Segregation Nationalism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from August 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from August 2021 Articles that may contain original research from August 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2011 United States-centric Articles that may contain original research from November 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 20:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Separatism 66 languages Add topic

