Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents John Vitéz 24 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Vitéz János ) Hungarian archbishop (1408–1472) For the poem by Sándor Petőfi, see János Vitéz .

The native form of this personal name is Vitéz János . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

His Eminence John Vitéz Cardinal Archbishop of Esztergom Primate of Hungary Archdiocese Esztergom Installed 15 May 1465 Term ended 8 August 1472 Predecessor Dénes Szécsi Successor Johann Beckenschlager Previous post(s) Bishop of Várad (1445–1465) Orders Created cardinal 1471 Rank Archbishop of Esztergom Personal details Born c. 1408 Zredna, Kingdom of Hungary Died 8 August 1472 Esztergom , Kingdom of Hungary Nationality Hungarian, Croatian Denomination Catholic Coat of arms John Vitéz de Zredna ( Hungarian : zrednai Vitéz János , Croatian : Ivan Vitez od Sredne , Slovak : Ján Vitéz zo Sredny ; c.

1408 – 8 August 1472) was a Hungarian and Croat humanist , diplomat, Latinist , mathematician , astrologist and astronomer . He served as Archbishop of Esztergom from 1465 until his death.

Early life [ edit ] Vitéz was born in Sredna near Križevci in a Croat - Hungarian [ 1 ] family which was already influential at the Hungarian court . Vitéz's mother was originated from the Garázda genus (originally from Bosnia , genus is named after Goražde ). On his father's side he derived from Pilis county (his father's surname was originally Csévi ).

[ 2 ] His father was the secretary of the regent John Hunyadi , from 1446 to 1452. Vitéz became a prothonotary in his government.

Vitéz studied in Vienna , where he graduated in law and became knowledgeable in physics, astronomy and alchemy due to frequent contacts with other humanists. In the chancery of King Sigismund , he probably met the excellent Italian humanist Pier Paolo Vergerio . For a while (around 1437) he was the canon in Zagreb . In that period, he helped strengthen the relations between the Croatian capital and the thriving Italian cultural and scientific centers. Then he left for Hungary , where he was to play a major role in the development of cultural and scientific institutions.

Career [ edit ] Vitéz was one of the educators of Hunyadi 's son Matthias Corvinus , who became King of Hungary .

[ 3 ] Vitéz became the bishop of Oradea in 1445 and turned it into a humanist centre, where he invited a number of Polish and German humanists, such as Gregory of Sanok .

[ citation needed ] He was a book collector [ 3 ] and built a library there. Both his court and the library moved from Oradea to Esztergom in 1465, when he became the primate of Hungary, or the archbishop of Esztergom – one of the two bishoprics in Hungary.

In the government of Matthias Corvinus , he fulfilled many positions. First of all, due to his earlier practice, he was an excellent diplomat to the king. In 1458 he was sent to Prague to George of Poděbrady to redeem the king and then he (according to Bonfini ) welcomed the king when he entered the kingdom. He served the king in a few diplomatic missions, especially to the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick III . After 1464 he became active in the highest and secret chancellor (together with Stephen Várdai), but did not take many actions in the position. During the late 1460s he became estranged to the king and in 1471 he led a plot against the ruler.

Vitéz, who spoke and wrote in excellent Latin , had a major role in the international circle of humanists at Corvin's court, some of whom were prominent scientists, such as Regiomontanus , Bylica , Peuerbach , Hans Dorn. He was especially interested in natural sciences and promoted their study. He founded the academy and library in Oradea (moved to Esztergom) and the Universitas Istropolitana in Pozsony (currently Bratislava ). He promoted astrologic and astronomic research, had astronomic instruments of his own, and founded the observatory in Esztergom. He is sometimes referred to as the Father of Hungarian Humanism.

As the initiator of a rebellion against the king (1471–1472), he lost his privileges and estates. Soon after, he fell ill and died in Esztergom .

His nephew was the great Latin humanist Janus Pannonius .

See also [ edit ] List of Catholic clergy scientists Statue in Esztergom Wikimedia Commons has media related to János Vitéz .

References [ edit ] ^ Igor Fisković; (1989) Renaissance Art in Dalmatia and Hungary p. 92; Balcánica XX, Belgrade [1] ^ Vince Bunyitay, A VÁRADI PÜSPÖKSÉG TÖRTÉNETE   ALAPÍTÁSÁTÓL A JELENKORIG , Nagyvárad, 1883 ^ a b "Books 1–5 of History. Ethiopian Story. Book 8: From the Departure of the Divine Marcus" .

World Digital Library . Retrieved 7 March 2013 .

In Croatian: Ivan Vitez od Sredne in Prominent Scientists and Works in the Middle Ages Catholic Church titles Preceded by John de Dominis Bishop of Várad 1445–1465 Succeeded by Johann Beckenschlager Preceded by Dénes Szécsi Archbishop of Esztergom 1465-1472 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Croatia Vatican Israel Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Vitéz&oldid=1254998962 " Categories : 1400s births 1472 deaths 15th-century Hungarian cardinals 15th-century Croatian writers 15th-century astronomers Croatian astronomers Croatian astrologers 15th-century astrologers Croatian Renaissance humanists Croatian Latinists Hungarian nobility Archbishops of Esztergom Bishops of Várad Catholic clergy scientists Hungarian Renaissance humanists 15th-century Hungarian writers 15th-century mathematicians Medieval Hungarian astronomers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Croatian-language text Articles containing Slovak-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 2 November 2024, at 17:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Vitéz 24 languages Add topic

