Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early activities 1.2 Conflict with radicals 1.3 Empire and later life 2 Family 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély 5 languages Deutsch Français مصرى Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French politician Portrait of Michel Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély by François Gérard (1808).

Michel Louis Etienne Regnaud , later 1st Count Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély (3 December 1761, Saint-Fargeau – 11 March 1819, Paris ) was a French politician.

Biography [ edit ] Early activities [ edit ] He was a lawyer in Paris and lieutenant of the maritime provostship of Rochefort . With the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, he was elected deputy to the Estates-General by the Third Estate in the sénéchaussée of Saint-Jean-d'Angély .

[ 1 ] His eloquence made him a prominent figure in the National Constituent Assembly , where he boldly attacked Honoré Mirabeau , and settled the dispute about the ashes of Voltaire by decreeing that they belonged to the nation.

[ 1 ] Conflict with radicals [ edit ] The moderation shown by the measures he proposed at the time of King Louis XVI 's flight to Varennes , by his refusal to accede to the demands for the king's execution , and by the articles he published in the Journal de Paris and the Ami des Patriotes , marked him out for the hostility of the radical parties.

[ 1 ] He was arrested after the revolution of 10 August , but succeeded in escaping, and during the Thermidorian Reaction which followed the fall of Maximilien Robespierre , Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély was appointed administrator of the military hospitals in Paris. His powers of organization brought him to Napoleon 's notice.

He accompanied Napoleon during the French invasion of Malta in June 1798, but he became sick and did not participate in the subsequent campaign in Egypt .

[ 2 ] Regnaud was appointed Commissioner of Government of French-occupied Malta [ 3 ] and he was the editor of the propaganda newspaper Journal de Malte [ 2 ] before returning to France in November 1798.

[ 3 ] The following year, he took part in the 18 Brumaire Coup (9 November 1799).

[ 1 ] Empire and later life [ edit ] Under the Empire , he enjoyed the confidence of Napoleon Bonaparte, and was made councillor of state, president of election in the Conseil d'État , member of the Académie Française , procureur général of the high court , and was created Count Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély in 1808.

[ 4 ] He was dismissed on the first Bourbon Restoration , but resumed his posts during the Hundred Days , and, after the battle of Waterloo , persuaded the Emperor Napoleon to abdicate . He was exiled by the government of the Second Restoration, but subsequently obtained leave to return to France. He died on the day of his return to Paris. His supposed memoirs , Les Souvenirs du Comte Regnault de St Jean d'Angély (Paris, 1817), are spurious.

[ 5 ] Family [ edit ] Regnaud had married in 1795 Laure Guesnon de Bonneuil, the daughter of a former Maître d'Hôtel of the Count of Artois . They had no children, [ citation needed ] but his natural son Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély became Marshal of France .

[ 5 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Chisholm 1911 , p. 46.

^ a b Hanley, Wayne (2005).

The Genesis of Napoleonic Propaganda, 1796–1799 . Columbia University Press. pp.

144– 147.

ISBN 9780231124560 .

^ a b "The Links and relationship between Malta and France" .

The Malta Independent . 7 August 2011. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020.

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 46–47.

^ a b Chisholm 1911 , p. 47.

References [ edit ] Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Regnault de Saint Jean d'Angély, Michel Louis Étienne, Comte ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

46– 47.

v t e Académie française seat 8 Claude de Malleville (1634) Jean Ballesdens (1648) Géraud de Cordemoy (1675) Jean-Louis Bergeret (1684) Charles-Irénée Castel de Saint-Pierre (1694) Pierre Louis Maupertuis (1743) Jean-Jacques Lefranc, Marquis de Pompignan (1759) Jean-Sifrein Maury (1784) Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély (1803) Pierre-Simon Laplace (1816) Pierre Paul Royer-Collard (1827) Charles de Rémusat (1846) Jules Simon (1875) Adrien Albert Marie de Mun (1897) Alfred-Henri-Marie Baudrillart (1918) Octave Aubry (1946) Édouard Herriot (1946) Jean Rostand (1959) Michel Déon (1978) Daniel Rondeau (2019) v t e French occupation of Malta Background French Revolution Decline of the Order of St John Mediterranean campaign of 1798 French invasion of Malta Occupation Reforms Commission of Government Gozitan Nation Journal de Malte Siege of Malta National Congress Battalions Battle of the Malta Convoy Action of 31 March 1800 La Nazione Gozitana Fortifications French Valletta ( Saluting Battery ) Floriana Lines ( Porte des Bombes ) Cottonera Lines Fort Manoel Fort Ricasoli Fort Tigné Maltese & British Capuchin Convent Battery Corradino Batteries Għargħar Battery Jesuit Hill Battery Marsa Battery Mdina Saint Julian's Tower and Battery Saint Lucian Entrenchment and Redoubt Saint Peter's Battery San Rocco Battery San Rocco Redoubt Sliema Batteries Ta' Għemmuna Battery Tal-Borg Battery Tas-Samra Battery Windmill Redoubt Żabbar Batteries and Redoubt Żejtun Batteries Notable figures French Napoleon Claude-Henri Belgrand de Vaubois Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud Jean de Bosredon de Ransijat Sylvain de Bosredon Louis Masson Maltese Emmanuele Vitale Francesco Saverio Caruana Vincenzo Borg Dun Mikiel Xerri Saverio Cassar British Horatio Nelson Alexander Ball Thomas Graham Henry Pigot Thomas Troubridge George Martin Aftermath Malta Protectorate Treaty of Paris Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Portugal Netherlands Poland Belgium People Netherlands Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michel-Louis-Étienne_Regnaud_de_Saint-Jean_d%27Angély&oldid=1278559302 " Categories : 1761 births 1819 deaths People from Yonne Counts of the First French Empire Bonapartists Government ministers of France Members of the National Constituent Assembly (France) Members of the Chamber of Representatives (France) Members of Parliament for Charente-Maritime Newspaper editors of the French Revolution 18th-century French lawyers French occupation of Malta Expelled members of the Académie Française Commission des Sciences et des Arts members Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 05:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély 5 languages Add topic

