Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical origins 2 Definition and principles Toggle Definition and principles subsection 2.1 Supply-side vs. previous approaches to economic policy 2.2 Role of the marginal tax rates 2.3 Laffer curve 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Reaganomics 3.2 Clinton years 3.3 Kansas experiment 3.4 Trump years 4 Fiscal policy theory 5 Effect on economic growth and tax revenues Toggle Effect on economic growth and tax revenues subsection 5.1 1920s tax cuts 5.2 Revenue Act of 1964 5.3 Reaganomics 5.4 Bush tax cuts 5.5 Trump tax cuts 5.6 China's supply-side structural reform 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 Notes and references 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Supply-side economics 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Macroeconomic theory Not to be confused with Trickle-down economics .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject . The specific issue is: an over-emphasis on United States experience.

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs attention from an expert in economics . The specific problem is: Needs more academic or scholarly research, rather than newspaper articles.

WikiProject Economics may be able to help recruit an expert.

( March 2020 ) This article contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This "criticism" or "controversy" section may compromise the article's neutrality .

Please help integrate negative information into other sections or remove undue focus on minor aspects through discussion on the talk page .

( April 2025 ) Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Supply-side economics is a macroeconomic theory postulating that economic growth can be most effectively fostered by lowering taxes , decreasing regulation , and allowing free trade .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] According to supply-side economics theory, consumers will benefit from greater supply of goods and services at lower prices, and employment will increase.

[ 3 ] Supply-side fiscal policies are designed to increase aggregate supply , as opposed to aggregate demand , thereby expanding output and employment while lowering prices. Such policies are of several general varieties: Investments in human capital, such as education, healthcare, and encouraging the transfer of technologies and business processes, to improve productivity (output per worker). Encouraging globalized free trade via containerization is a major recent example.

Tax reduction, to provide incentives to work, invest and take risks. Lowering income tax rates and eliminating or lowering tariffs are examples of such policies.

Investments in new capital equipment and research and development (R&D), to further improve productivity. Allowing businesses to depreciate capital equipment more rapidly (e.g., over one year as opposed to 10) gives them an immediate financial incentive to invest in such equipment.

Reduction in government regulations, to encourage business formation and expansion.

[ 4 ] A basis of supply-side economics is the Laffer curve , a theoretical relationship between rates of taxation and government revenue .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The Laffer curve suggests that when the tax level is too high, lowering tax rates will boost government revenue through higher economic growth , though the level at which rates are deemed "too high" is disputed.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Critics also argue that several large tax cuts in the United States over the last 40 years have not increased revenue.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The term "supply-side economics" was thought for some time to have been coined by the journalist Jude Wanniski in 1975; according to Robert D. Atkinson , the term "supply side" was first used in 1976 by Herbert Stein (a former economic adviser to President Richard Nixon ) and only later that year was this term repeated by Jude Wanniski.

[ 14 ] The term alludes to ideas of the economists Robert Mundell and Arthur Laffer . The term is contrasted with demand-side economics .

Historical origins [ edit ] Robert Mundell popularized the theory of supply-side economics after developing the theory with Arthur Laffer in the 1970s.

[ 15 ] Supply-side economics developed in response to the stagflation of the 1970s .

[ 16 ] It drew on a range of non- Keynesian economic thought , including the Chicago School and New Classical School .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Bruce Bartlett , an advocate of supply-side economics, traced the school of thought's intellectual descent from the philosophers Ibn Khaldun and David Hume , satirist Jonathan Swift , political economist Adam Smith and United States Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton .

[ 19 ] In 2007, Bartlett stated: Today, hardly any economist believes what the Keynesians believed in the 1970s and most accept the basic ideas of supply-side economics – that incentives matter, that high tax rates are bad for growth, and that inflation is fundamentally a monetary phenomenon. Consequently, there is no longer any meaningful difference between supply-side economics and mainstream economics.

...

Today, supply-side economics has become associated with an obsession for cutting taxes under any and all circumstances. No longer do its advocates in Congress and elsewhere confine themselves to cutting marginal tax rates – the tax on each additional dollar earned – as the original supply-siders did. Rather, they support even the most gimmicky, economically dubious tax cuts with the same intensity. ... today it is common to hear tax cutters claim, implausibly, that all tax cuts raise revenue.

[ 20 ] Current day advocates of supply-side economic policies claim that lower tax rates produce macroeconomic benefits and emphasize this benefit rather than their traditional ideological Classical liberals opposition to taxation because they opposed government in general. Their traditional claim was that each man had a right to himself and his property and therefore taxation was immoral and of questionable legal grounding.

[ 21 ] Supply-side economists argued that the alleged collective benefit (i.e. increased economic output and efficiency) provided the main impetus for tax cuts. As in classical economics , supply-side economics proposed that production or supply is the key to economic prosperity and that consumption or demand is merely a secondary consequence. Early on, this idea had been summarized in Say's law of markets , which states: "A product is no sooner created, than it, from that instant, affords a market for other products to the full extent of its own value." or, in other words, production (supply) must first occur to enable economic activity or trade.

[ citation needed ] Supply-side economics rose in popularity among Republican Party politicians from 1977 onwards. Prior to 1977, Republicans were more split on tax reduction, with some worrying that tax cuts would fuel inflation and exacerbate deficits.

[ 22 ] In 1978, Jude Wanniski published The Way the World Works in which he laid out the central thesis of supply-side economics [ 23 ] and detailed the failure of high tax rate progressive income tax systems and United States monetary policy under Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter in the 1970s. Wanniski advocated lower tax rates and a return to some kind of gold standard , similar to the 1944–1971 Bretton Woods System that Nixon abandoned.

Three different Laffer curves : t* represents the rate of taxation at which maximal revenue is generated and the curve need not be single-peaked nor symmetrical.

Definition and principles [ edit ] James D. Gwartney and Richard L. Stroup provide a definition of supply-side economics as the belief that adjustments in marginal tax rates have significant effects on the total supply.

[ 24 ] Gwartney and Stroup said "that the supply-side argument provided the foundation for the Reagan tax policy, which led to significant reductions in marginal tax rates in the United States during the 1980s".

[ 24 ] Barry P. Bosworth's book, Tax incentives and economic growth, published in 1984, provided another definition by presenting supply-side economics from two perspectives: "A broad interest in the determinants of aggregate supply – the volume and quality of the capital and labor inputs and the efficiency with which they are used" [ 25 ] "A narrower focus on tax reductions as a means of increasing the supply of savings, investment, and labor." [ 25 ] Supply-side vs. previous approaches to economic policy [ edit ] Supply-side economics has originated as an alternative to Keynesian economics, which focused macroeconomic policy on management of final demand.

[ 26 ] Demand-side economics relies on a fixed-price view of the economy, where the demand plays a key role in defining the future supply growth, which also allows for incentive implications of investment.

[ 25 ] The Keynesian policy approaches focus on demand management as a major instrument to affect aggregate production and GNP, while Monetarism focuses on management of monetary aggregates and credit. Unlike supply-side economics, demand-side economics is based on the assumption that increases in GNP result from increased spending.

[ 27 ] Traditional policy approaches were challenged by the theory of supply-side economics in the Reagan Administration of the 1980s. It claims that fiscal policy may lead to changes in supply as well as in demand.

[ 28 ] So, when marginal tax rates are high, consumers pursue additional leisure and current consumption instead of pursuing current income and extra income in the future. Therefore, there is a decline in work effort and investment, which in turn causes a decrease of production and GNP, regardless of the total demand levels.

On these assumptions, supply side economists formulate the idea that a cut in marginal tax rates has a positive effect on economic growth.

Role of the marginal tax rates [ edit ] The main focus of supply-side economics is promotion of economic growth. In this regard, some studies have suggested to consider two relative prices.

[ which?

] The first one influences decisions of individuals on the distribution of their income between consumption and savings.

[ 29 ] : 36 The cost of individual's decision to assign a unit of income to either consumption or savings is a future value of the unit, which has been given up by choosing either to consume or to save. The unit of income value is defined by the marginal tax rates. Therefore, higher tax rates would decrease the cost of consumption, which would cause a fall in investment and savings. At the same time, lower tax rates would cause the investment and savings levels to rise, while the consumption levels would fall.

[ 27 ] The second price influences decisions of individuals on the distribution of their time between work and leisure.

[ 29 ] The cost of individual's decision to allocate a unit of time either to work or leisure stands for current income, which was given up by choosing either work or leisure. The cost also includes the future income, which was given up for leisure instead of enhancing the professional skills. The value of lost income is defined by the tax rate assigned to the additional income. Therefore, the increase in marginal tax rates leads to a decrease in the price of leisure. However, if the marginal tax rate decline, the cost of leisure increases.

[ 27 ] Both the amount of retained and taxed income is determined by the marginal tax rate.

[ 27 ] That is why, from a supply-side economist's standpoint, marginal tax rates play a significant role in determining the development of the economy. Due to crucial role in determining how much time workers will spend on work and leisure or how much income will be spent on consumption and for savings, supply-side economists insist on decreasing tax rates as they believe it could improve the growth rates of the economy.

Laffer curve [ edit ] Laffer curve illustrates a mathematical relationship between tax revenues and tax rates, which was popularized by economist Arthur B. Laffer in 1974.

[ 27 ] The Laffer Curve posits the existence of a maximum point when tax revenue is maximized at a specific (unknown) tax rate. Many interpret the Laffer Curve as higher tax rates can sometimes decrease the tax base, which will lead to the decrease in tax revenues even if the tax rates are high.

[ 24 ] Due to the effect exerted by taxes on the taxed income, the adjustment of tax rates may not lead to proportional changes in tax revenues. That is why, some supply-side economists insist decreasing high tax rates can result in an increase of tax revenues.

The Laffer curve embodies a postulate of supply-side economics: that tax rates and tax revenues are distinct, with government tax revenues the same at a 100% tax rate as they are at a 0% tax rate and maximum revenue somewhere in between these two values. Supply-siders argued that in a high tax rate environment lowering tax rates would result in either increased revenues or smaller revenue losses than one would expect relying on only static estimates of the previous tax base.

[ 30 ] This led supply-siders to advocate large reductions in marginal income and capital gains tax rates to encourage greater investment, which would produce more supply. Supply-sider Jude Wanniski and many others [ who?

] advocate a zero capital gains rate.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] History [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Reaganomics [ edit ] In the United States, commentators [ who?

] frequently equate supply-side economics with Reaganomics .

[ citation needed ] The administration of Republican president Ronald Reagan promoted its fiscal policies as being based on supply-side economics. Reagan made supply-side economics a household phrase and promised an across-the-board reduction in income tax rates and an even larger reduction in capital gains tax rates.

[ 33 ] During Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign , the key economic concern was double digit inflation , which Reagan described as "[t]oo many dollars chasing too few goods", but rather than the usual dose of tight money, recession and layoffs, with their consequent loss of production and wealth, he promised a gradual and painless way to fight inflation by "producing our way out of it".

[ 34 ] Switching from earlier monetary policy, Federal Reserve chair Paul Volcker implemented tighter monetary policies including lower money supply growth to break the inflationary psychology and squeeze inflationary expectations out of the economic system .

[ 35 ] Therefore, supply-side supporters argue that Reaganomics was only partially based on supply-side economics.

[ citation needed ] Congress under Reagan passed a plan that would slash taxes by $749 billion over five years. Critics claim that the tax cuts increased budget deficits while Reagan supporters credit them with helping the 1980s economic expansion and argued that the budget deficit would have decreased if not for massive increases in military spending.

[ better source needed ] [ 36 ] As a result, Jason Hymowitz cited Reagan—along with Jack Kemp —as a great advocate for supply-side economics in politics and repeatedly praised his leadership.

[ 37 ] Critics of Reaganomics claim it failed to produce much of the exaggerated gains some supply-siders had promised.

Paul Krugman later summarized the situation: "When Ronald Reagan was elected, the supply-siders got a chance to try out their ideas. Unfortunately, they failed." Although he credited supply-side economics for being more successful than monetarism which he claimed "left the economy in ruins", he stated that supply-side economics produced results which fell "so far short of what it promised", describing the supply-side theory as "free lunches".

[ 38 ] Clinton years [ edit ] Main article: Economic policy of the Bill Clinton administration The chart shows average federal tax rates paid by various levels of the income distribution. During the Clinton era, taxes on upper incomes were higher than during the Reagan era.

[ 39 ] Paul Krugman argued how higher taxes on higher income persons, combined with higher job creation under Clinton, represented a counter-example of the supply-side tax-cut doctrine.

[ 40 ] Krugman linked his own version of this chart to the preceding article, illustrating the average tax rate of the top 1%.

[ 41 ] Clinton signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 into law, which raised income taxes rates on incomes above $115,000, created additional higher tax brackets for corporate income over $335,000, removed the cap on Medicare taxes, raised fuel taxes and increased the portion of Social Security income subject to tax, among other tax increases.

[ 42 ] Economist Paul Krugman wrote in 2017 that Clinton's tax increases on the rich provided counter-example to the supply-side tax cut doctrine: "Bill Clinton provided a clear test, by raising taxes on the rich. Republicans predicted disaster, but instead the economy boomed, creating more jobs than under Reagan." [ 43 ] Supply-side economist Alan Reynolds argued that the Clinton era represented a continuation of a low tax policy (from the 1980s): In reality, tax policy was not unambiguously better in the eighties than in the nineties. The highest income tax rate was 50 percent from 1983 to 1986, but below 40 percent after 1993. And the capital gains tax was 28 percent from 1987 to [1997], but only 20 percent in the booming years of 1997-2000. On balance, there were good and bad things about both periods. But both the eighties and the nineties had much wiser tax policies than we had from 1968 to 1982.

[ 44 ] Kansas experiment [ edit ] Main article: Kansas experiment In May 2012, Sam Brownback , Governor of the state of Kansas , signed into law the "Kansas Senate Bill Substitute HB 2117", [ 45 ] [ 46 ] which cut the number of individual income tax brackets from three to two, and cut the top income tax rates from 6.45% and 6.25% to 4.9% and the bottom rate from 3.5% to 3%.

[ 47 ] [ citation needed ] It also eliminated the 7% tax on "pass-through" income, income that businesses – such as sole proprietorships , partnerships, limited liability companies , and subchapter S corporations – pass on to their owners instead of paying corporate income tax on, for the owners of almost 200,000 businesses [ 46 ] [ 48 ] : 1 [ 49 ] The law cut taxes by US$ 231 million in its first year, and cuts were projected to increase to US$ 934 million annually after six years.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The cuts were based on model legislation published by the conservative American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), [ 51 ] [ 52 ] and were supported by The Wall Street Journal , [ citation needed ] supply-side economist Arthur Laffer , [ 53 ] economics commentator Stephen Moore [ 54 ] and anti-tax leader Grover Norquist .

[ 55 ] The tax cuts have been called the "Kansas experiment", [ 48 ] and was described by the Brookings Institution as "one of the cleanest experiments for how tax cuts affect economic growth in the U.S." [ 56 ] Brownback compared his tax cut policies with those of Ronald Reagan , but also described them as "a real live experiment ... We'll see how it works." [ 47 ] [ 57 ] Brownback forecast his cuts would create an additional 23,000 jobs in Kansas by 2020, and was intended to generate rapid economic growth, which he said would be "like a shot of adrenaline into the heart of the Kansas economy." [ 46 ] [ 58 ] The Kansas Legislature's research staff warned of the possibility of a deficit of nearly US$ 2.5 billion by July 2018.

[ 49 ] By 2017, state revenues had fallen by hundreds of millions of dollars, [ 59 ] causing spending on roads, bridges, and education to be slashed, [ 60 ] [ 61 ] but instead of boosting economic growth, growth in Kansas remained consistently below average.

[ 62 ] A working paper by two economists at Oklahoma State University (Dan Rickman and Hongbo Wang) using historical data from several other states with economies structured similarly to Kansas found that the Kansas economy grew about 7.8% less and employment about 2.6% less than it would have had Brownback not cut taxes.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] In 2017, the Republican Legislature of Kansas voted to roll back the cuts, and after Brownback vetoed the repeal, overrode his veto.

[ 65 ] According to Max Ehrenfreund, economists generally agree that an explanation for the reduction instead of increase in economic growth from the tax cuts is that "any" benefits from tax cuts come over the long, not short run, but what does come in the short run is a major decline in demand for goods and services. In the Kansas economy cuts in state government expenditures cut incomes of state government "employees, suppliers and contractors" who spent much or most of their incomes locally. In addition, concern over the state's large budget deficits "might have deterred businesses from making major new investments".

[ 63 ] One problem Kansas encountered is that while studies have shown that tax cuts increase economic growth, the increased revenue from that growth at the new lower tax rates are only enough to make up for 10–30% of the tax cuts, meaning that to avoid deficits, spending cuts must also be made.

[ 48 ] [ 66 ] Trump years [ edit ] Main article: Economic policy of the Donald Trump administration Supply-side advocates Laffer and economics commentators Stephen Moore and Larry Kudlow played prominent roles in formulating Trump's economic policies by advising him on his tax cut , as well as encouraging him to lower trade barriers.

[ 67 ] Laffer and Moore wrote a 2018 book about the policy, Trumponomics , with a foreword by Kudlow. Economist Gregory Mankiw reviewed the book in Foreign Affairs , and characterized the statements around Trump's policies as " snake-oil economics".

[ 68 ] [ 11 ] He criticized the authors for un-apologetically parroting the president's claimed annual growth rates spawned by his tax cut to be 1–4%, when the highest reasonable estimates were around 0.5%, but also credits them for continuing to support the consensus view that free trade is good for all, against the president's mercantilist views.

[ 68 ] [ 11 ] He also criticized them for following a simplistic "economic growth will solve all problems" approach, when previous presidential economic advisors had been more nuanced, recognizing the unavoidable tradeoff between equity and efficiency in their approaches to managing the economy.

[ 11 ] Trump implemented individual and corporate income tax cuts which took effect in 2018. Rutgers economics professor Farrokh Langdana argued that the Trump tax cuts were an example of supply-side tax policy, citing a letter from economists long-associated with the supply-side theory describing them as such.

[ 69 ] Fiscal policy theory [ edit ] One benefit of a supply-side policy is that shifting the aggregate supply curve outward means prices can be lowered along with expanding output and employment. This is in contrast to demand-side policies (e.g., higher government spending), which even if successful tend to create inflationary pressures (i.e., raise the aggregate price level) as the aggregate demand curve shifts outward. Infrastructure investment is an example of a policy that has both demand-side and supply-side elements.

[ 4 ] Supply-side economics holds that increased taxation steadily reduces economic activity within a nation and discourages investment. Taxes act as a type of trade barrier or tariff that causes economic participants to revert to less efficient means of satisfying their needs. As such, higher taxation leads to lower levels of specialization and lower economic efficiency. The idea is said to be illustrated by the Laffer curve.

[ 70 ] Supply-side economists have less to say on the effects of deficits and sometimes cite Robert Barro 's work that states that rational economic actors will buy bonds in sufficient quantities to reduce long-term interest rates.

[ 71 ] [ who?

] Effect on economic growth and tax revenues [ edit ] Some contemporary economists do not consider supply-side economics a tenable economic theory, with Alan Blinder calling it an "ill-fated" and perhaps "silly" school on the pages of a 2006 textbook.

[ 72 ] Greg Mankiw , former chairman of President President George W. Bush 's Council of Economic Advisers , offered similarly sharp criticism of the school in the early editions of his introductory economics textbook. "Tax cuts rarely pay for themselves. My reading of the academic literature leads me to believe that about one-third of the cost of a typical tax cut is recouped with faster economic growth." [ 73 ] In a 1992 article for the Harvard International Review , James Tobin wrote: "The 'Laffer curve' idea that tax cuts would actually increase revenues turned out to deserve the ridicule." [ 74 ] Karl Case and Ray Fair wrote in Principles of Economics , "The extreme promises of supply-side economics did not materialize. President Reagan argued that because of the effect depicted in the Laffer curve, the government could maintain expenditures, cut tax rates, and balance the budget. This was not the case. Government revenues fell sharply from levels that would have been realized without the tax cuts." [ 75 ] Supply side proponents Trabandt and Uhlig argue that "static scoring overestimates the revenue loss for labor and capital tax cuts" and that " dynamic scoring " is a better predictor for the effects of tax cuts.

[ 76 ] A 1999 study by University of Chicago economist Austan Goolsbee examined major changes in high-income tax rates in the United States from the 1920s onwards. It concluded that there were only modest changes in the reported income of high-income individuals, indicating that the tax changes had little effect on how much people work.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] He concluded that the notion that governments could raise more money by cutting rates "is unlikely to be true at anything like today's marginal tax rates".

[ 77 ] In 2015, one study found that in the past several decades, tax cuts in the U.S. seldom recouped revenue losses and had minimal impact on GDP growth.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] A 2008 working paper found that in the case of Russia, "tax rate cuts can increase revenues by improving tax compliance." [ 81 ] The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics reports that estimates of revenue-maximizing tax rates have varied widely, with a mid-range of around 70%.

[ 82 ] According to a 2012 study, "the U.S. marginal top [tax] rate is far from the top of the Laffer curve." [ 83 ] A 2012 survey found a consensus among leading economists that reducing the US federal income tax rate would raise GDP but would not increase tax revenue.

[ 84 ] John Quiggin distinguishes between the Laffer curve and Laffer's analysis of tax rates. The Laffer curve was "correct but unoriginal", but Laffer's analysis that the United States was on the wrong side of the Laffer curve "was original but incorrect".

[ 85 ] 1920s tax cuts [ edit ] Proponents of supply-side economics have sometimes cited tax cuts enacted in the 1920s as evidence that tax cuts can increase tax revenue. According to the Cato Institute , after World War I, the highest tax bracket , which was for those earning over $100,000 a year (worth at least $1 million a year now), was over 70 percent.

[ 86 ] According to The Heritage Foundation , revenue acts of 1921 , 1924 and 1926 reduced this tax rate to less than 25 percent, yet tax revenues actually went up significantly.

[ 87 ] Tax historian Joseph Thorndike argues that the tax cuts helped "bolster" growth but did not "cover the full cost of those tax cuts".

[ 88 ] Revenue Act of 1964 [ edit ] Proponents of supply-side economics sometimes cite tax cuts enacted by President Lyndon B. Johnson with the Revenue Act of 1964 .

John F. Kennedy had the year prior advocated a drastic tax-rate cut in 1963 when the top income tax rate was 91%, arguing that "[t]ax rates are too high today and tax revenues too low, and the soundest way to raise revenues in the long run is to cut rates now".

[ 89 ] The CBO concluded in 1978 that the tax cuts reduced tax revenue by $12 billion and that only between $3 billion to $9 billion were recaptured due to bolstered economic growth. According to the CBO, "most of this rise [in revenues] was due to economic growth that would have taken place even without the tax cut." [ 88 ] At the same time, some studies have found a relatively robust response to tax cuts from the top 5% of tax returns.

[ 90 ] There has been identified an increase of 7.7% in revenues from the top 5%, from $17.17 billion US in 1963 to $18.49 billion in 1965. Hereby, the data have provided evidence that the group has been in the prohibitive part of the Laffer curve, because its input to total tax revenues have increased despite the tax rates decreasing significantly.

[ 90 ] Reaganomics [ edit ] Main article: Reaganomics Ronald Reagan gives a televised address from the Oval Office , outlining his plan for tax reductions in July 1981.

Supply-siders justified Reagan's tax cuts during the 1980s by claiming they would result in net increases in tax revenue, yet tax revenues declined (relative to a baseline without the cuts) due to Reagan's tax cuts, and the deficit ballooned during Reagan's term in office.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] The Treasury Department studied the Reagan tax cuts and concluded they significantly reduced tax revenues relative to a baseline without them.

[ citation needed ] [ 95 ] The 1990 budget by the Reagan administration concluded that the 1981 tax cuts had caused a reduction in tax revenue.

[ 88 ] Both CBO and the Reagan Administration forecast that individual and business income tax revenues would be lower if the Reagan tax cut proposals were implemented, relative to a policy baseline without those cuts, by about $50 billion in 1982 and $210 billion by 1986.

[ 96 ] FICA tax revenue increased because in 1983 FICA tax rates were increased from 6.7% to 7% and the ceiling was raised by $2,100. For the self-employed, the FICA tax rate went from 9.35% to 14%.

[ 97 ] The FICA tax rate increased throughout Reagan's term and rose to 7.51% in 1988 and the ceiling was raised by 61% through Reagan's two terms. Those tax hikes on wage earners, along with inflation, were the source of revenue gains in the early 1980s.

[ 98 ] It has been contended by some supply-side critics that the argument to lower taxes to increase revenues was a smokescreen for "starving" the government of revenues in the hope that the tax cuts would lead to a corresponding drop in government spending, but this did not turn out to be the case.

Paul Samuelson called this notion "the tape worm theory—the idea that the way to get rid of a tape worm is [to] stab your patient in the stomach".

[ 99 ] There is frequent confusion on the meaning of the term "supply-side economics" between the related ideas of the existence of the Laffer Curve and the belief that decreasing tax rates can increase tax revenues. Many supply-side economists doubt the latter claim while still supporting the general policy of tax cuts. Economist Gregory Mankiw used the term "fad economics" to describe the notion of tax rate cuts increasing revenue in the third edition of his 2007 Principles of Macroeconomics textbook in a section entitled "Charlatans and Cranks": An example of fad economics occurred in 1980, when a small group of economists advised Presidential candidate, Ronald Reagan, that an across-the-board cut in income tax rates would raise tax revenue. They argued that if people could keep a higher fraction of their income, people would work harder to earn more income. Even though tax rates would be lower, income would rise by so much, they claimed, that tax revenues would rise. Almost all professional economists, including most of those who supported Reagan's proposal to cut taxes, viewed this outcome as far too optimistic. Lower tax rates might encourage people to work harder and this extra effort would offset the direct effects of lower tax rates to some extent, but there was no credible evidence that work effort would rise by enough to cause tax revenues to rise in the face of lower tax rates. [...] People on fad diets put their health at risk but rarely achieve the permanent weight loss they desire. Similarly, when politicians rely on the advice of charlatans and cranks, they rarely get the desirable results they anticipate. After Reagan's election, Congress passed the cut in tax rates that Reagan advocated, but the tax cut did not cause tax revenues to rise.

[ 100 ] In 1986, Martin Feldstein – a self-described "traditional supply sider" who served as Reagan's chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors from 1982 to 1984 – characterized the "new supply siders" who emerged circa 1980: What distinguished the new supply siders from the traditional supply siders as the 1980s began was not the policies they advocated but the claims that they made for those policies ... The "new" supply siders were much more extravagant in their claims. They projected rapid growth, dramatic increases in tax revenue, a sharp rise in saving, and a relatively painless reduction in inflation. The height of supply side hyperbole was the "Laffer curve" proposition that the tax cut would actually increase tax revenue because it would unleash an enormously depressed supply of effort. Another remarkable proposition was the claim that even if the tax cuts did lead to an increased budget deficit, that would not reduce the funds available for investment in plant and equipment because tax changes would raise the saving rate by enough to finance the increased deficit ... Nevertheless, I have no doubt that the loose talk of the supply side extremists gave fundamentally good policies a bad name and led to quantitative mistakes that not only contributed to subsequent budget deficits but that also made it more difficult to modify policy when those deficits became apparent.

[ 26 ] Bush tax cuts [ edit ] Main article: Bush tax cuts During his presidency, President Bush signed the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 and Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 , which entailed significant tax cuts. In 2003, the Congressional Budget Office conducted a dynamic scoring analysis of tax cuts advocated by supply advocates, and found that the Bush tax cuts would not pay for themselves. Two of the nine models used in the study predicted a large improvement in the deficit over the next ten years resulting from tax cuts, but only by making the assumption that people would work harder from 2004 to 2014 because they believed that tax rates would increase again in 2014, and they wanted to make more money before the tax cuts expired.

[ 101 ] In 2006, the CBO released a study titled "A Dynamic Analysis of Permanent Extension of the President's Tax Relief".

[ 102 ] This study found that under the best possible scenario making tax cuts permanent would increase the economy "over the long run" by 0.7%. This study was criticized by many economists, including Harvard Economics Professor Greg Mankiw, who pointed out that the CBO used a very low value for the earnings-weighted compensated labor supply elasticity of 0.14.

[ 103 ] In a paper published in the Journal of Public Economics, Mankiw and Matthew Weinzierl noted that the current economics research would place an appropriate value for labor supply elasticity at around 0.5.

[ 104 ] The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that extending the Bush tax cuts beyond their 2010 expiration would increase the deficit by $1.8 trillion over 10 years.

[ 105 ] The CBO also completed a study in 2005 analyzing a hypothetical 10% income tax cut and concluded that under various scenarios there would be minimal offsets to the loss of revenue. In other words, deficits would increase by nearly the same amount as the tax cut in the first five years with limited feedback revenue thereafter.

[ 106 ] Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman agreed the tax cuts would reduce tax revenues and result in intolerable deficits, though he supported them as a means to restrain federal spending.

[ 107 ] Friedman characterized the reduced government tax revenue as "cutting their allowance".

Douglas Holtz-Eakin was a Bush administration economist who was appointed director of the Congressional Budget Office in 2003. Under his leadership, the CBO undertook a study of income tax rates which found that any new revenue from tax cuts paled in comparison to their cost.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] Dartmouth economics professor Andrew Samwick was the chief staff economist for the Bush Council of Economic Advisers from July 2003 to July 2004. Writing on his blog in 2007, Samwick urged his former colleagues in the Bush administration to avoid asserting that the Bush tax cuts paid for themselves, because "No thoughtful person believes it...Not a single one." [ 111 ] Trump tax cuts [ edit ] The New York Times reported in November 2018 that the Trump tax overhaul "has fattened the paychecks of most American workers, padded the profits of large corporations, and sped economic growth". Cautioning that "its still early but ten months after the law took effect, the promised 'supply side' bump is harder to find than the sugar-high stimulus." The writers explained that "It's highly unusual for deficits...to grow this much during periods of prosperity" and that "the fiscal health of the U.S. is deteriorating fast, as revenues have declined sharply" (nearly $200 billion or about 6%) relative to the CBO forecast prior to the tax cuts. Results for 2018 included: Contrary to claims the tax cuts would pay for themselves, the budget deficit rose to $779 billion in fiscal year 2018, up 17% versus the prior year.

Corporate tax revenues were down by one-third in fiscal year 2018.

Stock buyback activity increased significantly.

GDP growth, business investment and corporate profits increased.

A typical worker in a large company got a $225 raise or one-time bonus, due to the law.

Real wage growth (adjusted for inflation) was slightly slower in 2018 than 2017.

[ 112 ] Analysis conducted by the Congressional Research Service on the first-year effect of the tax cut found that little if any economic growth in 2018 could be attributed to it.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Growth in GDP, employment, worker compensation and business investment slowed during the second year following enactment of the tax cut, prior to the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Following the Trump tax cut, top White House economic advisor Larry Kudlow falsely asserted that federal revenues had increased about 10% since the tax cut, though they had actually declined.

[ 118 ] He also falsely asserted that the CBO had found the "entire $1.5 trillion tax cut is virtually paid for by higher revenues and better nominal GDP".

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] China's supply-side structural reform [ edit ] Beginning in 2012, China's economic performance entered a "new normal" in which the growth of the economy slowed to a medium pace for the first time since the broad economic reforms of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping . In response, Xi Jinping , General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party , announced supply-side structural reforms (SSSR) in 2015 in an effort to combat the slowing economic growth, moving away from the export-oriented economy and toward supply and production driven growth.

[ 122 ] The focus of the reforms correspond to increase in total factor productivity (TFP) through an increase in investment in technological improvements as a replacement for the labor and capital-intensive emphasis of the previous growth model.

China's supply-side structural reforms focus on the reduction of excess capacity across various economic sectors. The reform plan centers around four key areas: cutting excess industrial capacity, reducing leverage in the corporate sector, reducing stock of property inventories, and lowering costs for new enterprises.

[ 123 ] The former two areas corresponds to short-term initiatives related to the state-owned sectors, while the former initiatives correspond to longer-term solutions within the private sector.

[ 124 ] Cutting excess industrial capacity focuses heavily on sectors like coal , steel , and electricity generation. The targets for coal production reductions implemented by the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) amounted to 250 million tonnes per annum (Mta) in 2016 as well as a 100-150 Mta reduction in steel production capacity over a five-year period.

[ 123 ] The result in the steel industry was more pricing power for the remaining large firms, as well as higher profits due to the increase in price. The increase in profits due to excess capacity reductions has also led to an increased capacity of firms to settle outstanding debts and reduce leverage, part of the second pillar of China's SSSR. As part of the deleveraging initiative, the government also encouraged mergers and acquisitions , direct financing, and debt-to-equity swaps, resulting in the stabilization of corporate debt to GDP ratio. Additional reforms include increased incentives for private sector investment, development of modern service industries, and increasing public goods and services supply.

[ 123 ] The longer-term initiatives have also been accompanied by large-scale tax cuts as well as a transition from business tax to value-added tax (VAT) which produced positive results for service industry growth. Policies targeted toward new growth engine creation include Made in China 2025 and the Internet Plus agenda, both of which have been attributed in part to the rapid growth of China's industrial and innovation competitiveness.

China's supply-side structural reforms are ongoing and oriented toward the long term. The adjustments to the industrial sector as a result of the early reform policies have been attributed to a nominal increase in GDP growth. However, the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic impacted demand growth in China's domestic consumer market, which has slowed the effects of continued supply-side reforms.

[ 125 ] Criticism [ edit ] Supply side economics has been criticised for benefiting high income earners, as graph shows the change in top 1% income share against the change in top income tax rate from 1975–1979 to 2004–2008 for 18 OECD countries: the correlation between increasing income inequality and decreasing top tax rates is very strong.

[ 126 ] Critics of supply-side policies emphasize the growing federal deficits, increased income inequality and lack of growth.

[ 127 ] They argue that the Laffer curve only measures the rate of taxation, not tax incidence , which may be a stronger predictor of whether a tax code change is stimulative or dampening.

[ 128 ] Writing in 2010, John Quiggin said, "To the extent that there was an economic response to the Reagan tax cuts, and to those of George W. Bush twenty years later, it seems largely to have been a Keynesian demand-side response, to be expected when governments provide households with additional net income in the context of a depressed economy." [ 85 ] Cutting marginal tax rates can also be perceived as primarily beneficial to the wealthy, which some see as politically rather than economically motivated: [ 129 ] Back in 1980 George H. W. Bush famously described supply-side economics — the claim that cutting taxes on rich people will conjure up an economic miracle, so much so that revenues will actually rise — as "voodoo economic policy." Yet it soon became the official doctrine of the Republican Party, and still is. That shows an impressive level of commitment. But what makes this commitment even more impressive is that it's a doctrine that has been tested again and again — and has failed every time...In other words, supply-side economics is a classic example of a zombie doctrine: a view that should have been killed by the evidence long ago, but just keeps shambling along, eating politicians' brains.

— Paul Krugman [ 130 ] Mr.

David Stockman has said that supply-side economics was merely a cover for the trickle-down approach to economic policy—what an older and less elegant generation called the horse-and-sparrow theory: If you feed the horse enough oats, some will pass through to the road for the sparrows.

— John Kenneth Galbraith [ 131 ] According to studies that analyzed the tax cuts in 2001 (EGTRRA): the decrease in taxes have provided a generally positive impact on the future output from the effect of the lower tax rates on human capital accumulation , private saving and investment, labor supply; however, the tax cuts have produced adverse effects such as higher deficits and reduced national savings.

[ 80 ] Thus, Gale and Potter (2002) concluded that these tax cuts could not affect the GDP levels in any significant way in the next 10 years.

[ 132 ] See also [ edit ] Austerity – Economic policies intended to reduce government budget deficits Fiscal conservatism – Political and economic philosophy Gold standard – Monetary system based on the value of gold Mellonomics – Economic policies of Andrew Mellon Monetarism – School of thought in monetary economics Price elasticity of supply – Measure in economics Thatcherism – British conservative ideology from the 1980s onward Trickle-down economics – Pejorative economic and political term Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Neva Goodwin; Jonathan M. Harris; Julie A. Nelson; Brian Roach; Mariano Torras (4 March 2015).

Principles of Economics in Context .

Routledge . p. 286.

ISBN 978-1-317-46217-0 .

supply-side-economics: the macroeconomic theory ... .

^ Dwivedi (2010).

Macroeconomics, 3E .

Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 372.

ISBN 978-0-07-009145-0 .

The supply-side economics is the most recent macroeconomic thought.

^ Wanniski, Jude (1978).

The Way the World Works: How Economies Fail—and Succeed . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-09095-8 .

^ a b Chiang, Eric (2014).

CoreMacroeconomics (3rd ed.). Worth Publishers. p. 245.

ISBN 978-1-4292-7849-2 .

^ Campbell, John L. (1998).

"Institutional Analysis and the Role of Ideas in Political Economy" .

Theory and Society .

27 (3): 377– 409.

doi : 10.1023/A:1006871114987 .

ISSN 0304-2421 .

JSTOR 657900 .

S2CID 145064609 .

The Laffer curve became a powerful pedagogical symbol that many supply siders used when presenting their position.

^ Kyer, Ben L.; Maggs, Gary E. (1994). "A Macroeconomic Approach to Teaching Supply-Side Economics".

The Journal of Economic Education .

25 (1): 44– 48.

doi : 10.2307/1182895 .

ISSN 0022-0485 .

JSTOR 1182895 .

^ Kolb, Robert W. (27 March 2018).

The SAGE Encyclopedia of Business Ethics and Society . SAGE Publications. p. 3303.

ISBN 978-1-4833-8151-0 .

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory (1 January 2020).

Principles of Economics . Cengage Learning. pp.

161– 162.

ISBN 978-0-357-13380-4 .

^ "the U.S. marginal top rate is far from the top of the Laffer curve." Saez, Emmanuel; Slemrod, Joel ; Giertz, Seth (1 January 2009).

"The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review" .

Economics Department Faculty Publications .

^ “There is certainly some level of taxation at which cutting tax rates would be win-win. But few economists believe that tax rates in the United States have reached such heights in recent years; to the contrary, they are likely below the revenue-maximizing level” Mankiw, R. Gregory (11 December 2018).

"Snake-Oil Economics" . Foreign Affairs.

^ a b c d Mankiw, Gregory (1 February 2019).

"Snake-Oil Economics - The Bad Math Behind Trump's Policies" (PDF) .

One might reasonably argue that Trump's tax cuts will increase growth over the next decade by as much as half a percentage point per year. But that is a long way from the one- to four-percentage-point boost that the president and his associates have bragged of, and that Moore and Laffer quote without explanation, caveat, or apology.

^ "Once Again: The GOP Tax Cuts Are Not Paying for Themselves" .

The Fiscal Times, March 13, 2019 .

^ Komlos, John (2019).

"Reaganomics: A Watershed Moment on the Road to Trumpism" .

The Economists' Voice .

16 (1).

doi : 10.1515/ev-2018-0032 .

S2CID 159222280 .

^ Robert D. Atkinson (29 October 2007).

Supply-Side Follies: Why Conservative Economics Fails, Liberal Economics Falters, and Innovation Economics Is the Answer . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5107-7 .

^ "Robert Mundell, the intellectual father of supply-side economics, is dead at 88" .

Washington Examiner . 5 April 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2022 .

^ Case, Karl E. & Fair, Ray C. (1999).

Principles of Economics (5th ed.), p. 780. Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 0-13-961905-4 .

^ Schmidt, I.; Rittaler, J. B. (28 February 1989).

A Critical Evaluation of the Chicago School of Antitrust Analysis . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 9789024737925 – via Google Books.

^ Gandhi, Ved P.; Ebrill, Liam P.; Shome, Parthasrathi; Anton, Luis A. Manas; Modi, Jitendra R.; Sanchez-Ugarte, Fernando J.; Mackenzie, G. A. (15 June 1987).

Supply-Side Tax Policy: Its Relevance to Developing Countries . International Monetary Fund.

ISBN 9781455271962 – via Google Books.

^ Bartlett, Bruce.

"Supply-Side Economics: "Voodoo Economics' or Lasting Contribution?" (PDF) .

Laffer Associates: Supply-Side Investment Research (November 11, 2003). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 17 November 2008 .

^ Bartlett, Bruce (6 April 2007).

"How Supply-Side Economics Trickled Down" .

The New York Times .

^ Gray (1995).

Liberalism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 0-8166-2801-7 . pp. 26–27 ^ Burns, John W.; Taylor, Andrew J. (2000). "The Mythical Causes of the Republican Supply-Side Economics Revolution".

Party Politics .

6 (4): 419– 440.

doi : 10.1177/1354068800006004002 .

ISSN 1354-0688 .

S2CID 144473289 .

^ Gross, Neil; Medvetz, Thomas; Russell, Rupert (11 August 2011). "The Contemporary American Conservative Movement".

Annual Review of Sociology .

37 (1): 325– 354.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-soc-081309-150050 .

ISSN 0360-0572 .

Jude Wanniski, who wrote the supply-side economics bible, The Way the World Works (1978), while an AEI scholar-in-residence ^ a b c Gwartney, James D.; Stroup, Richard L. (1987).

Macroeconomics, 4th ed . Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. p. 253.

^ a b c Bosworth, Barry P. (1984).

Tax incentives and economic growth . Brookings Institution.

ISBN 0-8157-1035-6 .

OCLC 797160531 .

^ a b Feldstein, Martin (1986).

"Supply Side Economics: Old Truths and New Claims" .

The American Economic Review .

76 (2): 26– 30.

doi : 10.3386/w1792 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

JSTOR 1818729 .

S2CID 152585703 .

^ a b c d e Son, Hyung Chan (1990).

"Supply-side economics in the Republic of Korea" . Monterey, California: Naval Postgraduate School.

^ Fink, Richeard H., Supply-Side Economics , University Publications of America, 1982.

^ a b Roberts, Paul C., The Supply-Side Revolution , Harvard University, 1984.

^ Laffer, Arthur (1 June 2004).

"The Laffer Curve, Past, Present and Future" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on 1 December 2007 . Retrieved 11 December 2007 .

^ Wanniski, Jude "Taxing Capital Gains" .

Archived May 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Reynolds, Alan (July 1999).

"Capital gains tax: Analysis of reform options for Australia" (PDF) .

Hudson Institute . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2005.

^ (Karl Case and Ray Fair, 1999: pp. 781–2).

^ Case & Fair, pp. 781–2.

^ Malabre, Jr., pp. 170–1.

^ "Busting the Left's myths about Reaganomics" .

CapX . 22 June 2017.

^ Malabre, Jr., p. 188.

^ Malabre, Jr., p. 195.

^ "The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes, 2010" . The US Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 4 December 2013 . Retrieved 6 January 2014 .

^ "Zombies of Voodoo Economics" .

nytimes.com . 24 April 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2020 .

^ "Twitter post: Tax rate chart" . Paul Krugman. 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2020 .

^ "The Economic and Budget Outlook: Fiscal years 2000-2009" (PDF) .

cbo.gov . January 1999.

^ Krugman, Paul (24 April 2017).

"Opinion | Zombies of Voodoo Economics" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "Supply Side Economics After 30 years, Presentation at Vanderbilt University" . 23 January 2003 . Retrieved 5 March 2020 .

^ "Senate Substitute for HB 2117 by Committee on Taxation -- Reduction of income tax rates for individuals and determination of income tax credits; severance tax exemptions; homestead property tax refunds; food sales tax refunds" . Retrieved 29 October 2014 .

^ a b c "Kansas small-business owners say elimination of income tax is a big help" .

The Wichita Eagle . 24 May 2012. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ a b Brownback, Sam (28 May 2014).

"A Midwest Renaissance Rooted in the Reagan Formula" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 28 October 2014 .

^ a b c HOBSON, JEREMY; RUSSELL, DEAN; RAPHELSON, SAMANTHA (25 October 2017).

"As Trump Proposes Tax Cuts, Kansas Deals With Aftermath Of Experiment" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2017.

[Kenneth Kriz, a professor of public finance at Wichita State University, said] "Studies have shown that tax cuts tend to pay anywhere between 10 percent and 30 percent of their costs," he says. "So if we cut taxes by a trillion dollars, we're going to probably get an extra hundred billion back ... in extra revenues from economic growth. But that still leaves $700 [billion] to $900 billion in cuts that will have to be made. Those cuts also have an economic effect in drawing down the economy." ^ a b c "Brownback Signs Tax Cuts Law In Statehouse Ceremony" . KAKE News. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014 . Retrieved 29 October 2014 .

^ Cooper, Brad (23 May 2012).

"Brownback signs big tax cut in Kansas" .

Kansas City Star . Retrieved 10 October 2016 .

^ Rothschild, Scott (17 December 2013).

"Brownback says perception of ALEC influence is 'overblown' " .

Lawrence Journal-World .

^ Pilkington, Ed (20 November 2013).

"Obamacare faces new threat at state level from corporate interest group Alec" .

The Guardian .

^ Josh Barro (27 June 2014).

"Yes, if You Cut Taxes, You Get Less Tax Revenue" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 September 2014 .

^ Lowry, Bryan (2 May 2019).

"Stephen Moore, an adviser on Brownback's tax cuts, won't serve on Federal Reserve" .

The Kansas City Star . Retrieved 30 July 2023 .

^ "Norquist defends tax cuts despite Brownback woes in Kansas" .

The Hill . Retrieved 29 October 2014 .

^ Gale, William G. (11 July 2017).

"The Kansas tax cut experiment" .

Brookings Institution . Retrieved 20 November 2018 .

^ "Brownback gets heat for 'real live experiment' comment on tax cuts" . Lawrence Journal World . Retrieved 28 October 2014 .

^ "What Congressional Tax Cutters Can Learn From Kansas" .

Tax Policy Center . 29 November 2017.

^ Casselman, Ben; Koerth-Baker, Maggie; Barry-Jester, Anna Maria; Cheng, Michelle (9 June 2017).

"The Kansas Experiment Is Bad News For Trump's Tax Cuts" .

FiveThirtyEight . Retrieved 4 October 2017 .

^ "Kansas Legislature approves budget deal, after lawmakers deliver blistering critiques of state finances," Archived October 4, 2017, at the Wayback Machine May 2, 2016, Topeka Capital-Journal ^ "Kansas Republicans Sour on Their Tax-Cut Experiment" February 24, 2017, The Atlantic ^ Gleckman, Howard (7 June 2017).

"The Great Kansas Tax Cut Experiment Crashes And Burns" . Forbes . Retrieved 20 November 2018 .

^ a b Ehrenfreund, Max (15 June 2017).

"Wonkblog. Kansas's conservative experiment may have gone worse than people thought" . Washington Post . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Rickman, Dan S., Dan S.; Wang, Hongbo (9 June 2017).

"Two Tales of Two U.S. States: Regional Fiscal Austerity and Economic Performance" .

Munich Personal RePEc Archive . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Berman, Russell (7 June 2017).

"The Death of Kansas's Conservative Experiment" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 7 June 2017 .

^ Ehrenfreund, Max (8 June 2017).

"Kansas Republicans raise taxes, ending their GOP governor's 'real live experiment' in conservative policy" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2017.

Yet red states such as Indiana and North Carolina have successfully reduced taxes while maintaining a balanced budget, said Joe Henchman, an attorney at the right-leaning Tax Foundation in Washington. They have done so by reducing spending sufficiently to make up for the difference. "They didn't assume that the cuts would pay for themselves," Henchman said. "It's true that while tax cuts can boost economic activity, most tax cuts do not pay for themselves budgetarily." ^ Schreckinger, Ben (22 April 2019).

"Reagan's Supply-Side Warriors Blaze a Comeback Under Trump" .

POLITICO Magazine .

Members of the tight-knit group have shaped Trump's signature tax cut, helped install each other in posts with vast influence over the global economy, and are working to channel Trump's mercantilist instincts into pro-trade policies. ... The supply-siders began pushing Trump on trade, advising him to encourage a lowering of trade barriers on all sides, rather than raising them. Last June, Kudlow persuaded Trump to float the idea of the world governments eliminating all tariffs at a G-7 summit in Quebec.

^ a b Mankiw, N. Gregory (25 March 2019).

"Snake-Oil Economics" .

Foreign Affairs (January/February 2019) – via www.foreignaffairs.com.

^ "Supply-side economic theory powers Trump tax plan" .

Rutgers Business School-Newark and New Brunswick . 2 January 2018.

^ (Karl Case and Ray Fair, 1999: pp. 780–1).

^ Reynolds, Alan.

"The "Conventional" Hypothesis: Deficit Estimates, Savings Rates, Twin Deficits and Yield Curves" (PDF) .

Cato Institute . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 August 2009 . Retrieved 19 October 2010 .

^ Blinder, A. S. (2006). "Can fiscal policy improve macro-stabilization". In Kopcke, E.; Tootell, G. M. B.; Triest, R. K. (eds.).

The macroeconomics of fiscal policy . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. pp.

23– 62.

ISBN 0-262-11295-7 .

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory (2 June 2017).

"A Tax Cut Might Be Nice. But Remember the Deficit" .

The New York Times .

^ Tobin, J. (1992). "Voodoo curse".

Harvard International Review .

14 (4): 10.

^ Case, K. E.; Fair, R. C. (2007).

Principles of Economics (8th ed.). Upper Saddle Rive, NJ: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-228914-6 .

^ "Microsoft Word – SFB DP Frontpage.doc" (PDF) .

^ a b Goolsbee, Austan (1999).

"Evidence on the High-Income Laffer Curve from Six Decades of Tax Reform" (PDF) .

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity .

1999 (2): 1– 64.

doi : 10.2307/2534678 .

ISSN 0007-2303 .

JSTOR 2534678 .

^ "A new crop of candidates discovers the father of supply side economics" .

The Washington Post . 2015.

^ Barro, Josh (17 March 2015).

"Tax Cuts Still Don't Pay for Themselves" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 August 2016 .

^ a b Gale, William G.; Samwick, Andrew A. (9 September 2014), Effects of Income Tax Changes on Economic Growth (PDF) , Brookings Institution , retrieved 26 August 2016 ^ Papp, TK & Takáts, E.

"Tax rate cuts and tax compliance—the Laffer curve revisited" (PDF) . IMF Working Paper.

^ Fullerton, Don (2008). "Laffer curve". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.).

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2nd ed.). p.

839 .

doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.0922 .

ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5 .

^ Saez, Emmanuel; Slemrod, Joel; Giertz, Seth H. (2012).

"The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review" .

Journal of Economic Literature .

50 (1): 3– 50.

doi : 10.1257/jel.50.1.3 .

ISSN 0022-0515 .

JSTOR 23269968 .

S2CID 13169826 .

^ "Laffer Curve" .

IMG Forum . University of Chicago Booth School of Business . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ a b Quiggin, John (21 May 2012).

Zombie Economics . Princeton University Press. p. 142.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt7rg7m .

ISBN 978-1-4008-4208-7 .

^ de Rugy, Veronique (4 March 2003).

"1920s Income Tax Cuts Sparked Economic Growth and Raised Federal Revenues" .

Cato Institute .

^ Mitchell, Daniel.

"The Historical Lessons of Lower Tax Rates" .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on 11 April 2017.

^ a b c "History lesson: Do big tax cuts pay for themselves?" .

The Washington Post . 2017.

^ "Tax Cuts, King Dollar & Growth: From JFK to Reagan to Trump" .

National Review . 16 September 2016.

^ a b Henderson, David R., Are We All Supply-Siders Now?, Western Economic Association International, 1989.

^ "Can countries lower taxes and raise revenues?" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

^ "How the GOP tax overhaul compares to the Reagan-era tax bills" .

PBS NewsHour . 4 December 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

^ "How Reagan's Tax Cuts Fared" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 14 June 2020 .

^ Narizny, Kevin (2003).

"Both Guns and Butter, or Neither: Class Interests in the Political Economy of Rearmament" .

American Political Science Review .

97 (2): 203– 220.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055403000625 .

ISSN 1537-5943 .

S2CID 7487941 .

[Reagan] proposed a new paradigm, supply-side economics, that promised to increase revenue by decreasing taxes (Hibbs 1987, 280–87, 296– 326). Despite its questionable logic, the sheer novelty of the idea gave Reagan greater leeway in budgetary politics than the public normally would have accepted (Modigliani and Modigliani 1987; Peterson 1985)... He had only a brief window of opportunity before supply-side economics was discredited by staggering budget deficits ^ Treasury Department (September 2006) [2003].

"Revenue Effects of Major Tax Bills" (PDF) .

United States Department of the Treasury . Working Paper 81, Table 2 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ "An Analysis of President Reagan's Budget Revisions for Fiscal Year 1982-See Table 4" (PDF) .

cbo.gov . 25 March 1981.

^ "Annual maximum taxable earnings and contribution rates" (PDF) .

Social Security Administration .

^ The Reagan Tax Cuts: Lessons for Tax Reform – Joint Economic Committee Archived February 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Malabre, Jr., pp. 197–8.

^ Scheiber, Noam (8 April 2004).

"Can Greg Mankiw Survive Politics?" .

The New Republic . Archived from the original on 23 April 2008.

^ `Dynamic' Scoring Finally Ends Debate On Taxes, Revenue. By Alan Murray. Wall Street Journal. (Eastern edition). New York, N.Y.: April 1, 2003. p. A.4 ^ "Microsoft Word – treasury dyn anal report jul 24 10am II FINAL.doc" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2007.

^ "Greg Mankiw's Blog: CBO on Supply-side Economics" . Retrieved 30 July 2023 .

^ "Journal of Public Economics : Dynamic scoring: A back-of-the-envelope guide" (PDF) .

Journal of Public Economics .

90 : 1415– 1433.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2005.11.006 .

^ "An Analysis of the President's Budgetary Proposals for Fiscal Year 2008" (PDF) . 21 March 2007.

^ "Analyzing the Economic and Budgetary Effects of a 10 Percent Cut in Income Tax Rates" (PDF) . 1 December 2005.

^ Friedman, Milton (15 January 2003).

"What Every American Wants" .

Wall Street Journal .

^ Leonhardt, David (23 April 2008).

"Weighing a McCain Economist (Published 2008)" .

The New York Times .

^ "Analyzing the Economic and Budgetary Effects of a 10 Percent Cut in Income Tax Rates" .

Congressional Budget Office . 1 December 2005 . Retrieved 30 July 2023 .

^ Schor, Elana (15 November 2005).

"Holtz-Eakin to leave CBO" .

TheHill .

^ "A New Year's Plea" . Retrieved 30 July 2023 .

^ Tankersley, Jim; Phillips, Matt (12 November 2018).

"Trump's Tax Cut Was Supposed to Change Corporate Behavior. Here's What Happened" .

The New York Times .

^ "Trump tax cuts did little to boost economic growth in 2018, study says" .

CNBC . 29 May 2019.

^ Elis, Niv (28 May 2019).

"Trump's tax law had small effect on economy, wages: Study" .

The Hill .

^ Mutikani, Lucia (30 January 2020).

"U.S. economy misses Trump's 3% growth target in 2019" .

Reuters – via www.reuters.com.

^ Cox, Jeff (10 January 2020).

"Job market ends 2019 with disappointing 145,000 growth in payrolls" .

CNBC .

^ "US workers' compensation growth slowed a bit in 2019" .

AP NEWS . 31 January 2020.

^ Kiely, Eugene (12 March 2019).

"Larry Kudlow's Revenue Deception" .

^ Gore, D'Angelo.

"Fact check: CBO didn't say tax cuts were 'virtually paid for' " .

USA TODAY .

^ Rizzo, Salvador.

"Analysis | Larry Kudlow's claim that 'we have virtually paid for' Trump's tax cut" – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ "Defying Data, Kudlow Says Trump's Tax Cuts Covering Their Costs" .

Bloomberg.com . 11 April 2019 – via www.bloomberg.com.

^ Wang, Hai (2018).

"Exploring the Development Path of Supply-side Structural Reform of Sports Industry Under the New Normal" (PDF) .

Advances in Economics, Business and Management Research .

70 : 312– 316.

^ a b c Boulter, John (13 December 2018).

"China's Supply-side Structural Reform" . Reserve Bank of Australia . Retrieved 25 April 2023 .

^ Hyun, Sungbaek; Park, Minsuk; Park, Jinhee; Cho, Ko Un; Jin, Furong (15 July 2019).

"Evaluation and Implications of China's Supply-side Structural Reform" .

World Economy Brief .

9 (15).

^ "Supply-side reform gets greater boost" . State Taxation Administration of the People's Republic of China . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, Stefanie Stantcheva, NBER, Nov. 2011 ^ Gale, W. G. & Orszag, P. R. (9 May 2003).

"Bush's Tax Plan Slashes Growth" . The Brookings Institution . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ Holter; et al. (November 2014).

"How Does Tax Progressivity and Household Heterogeneity Affect Laffer Curves?" (PDF) . Penn Institute for Economic Research. Centre for Economic Policy Research . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

^ Krugman, Paul (23 December 2005).

"The Tax Cut Zombies" .

The New York Times .

^ Krugman, Paul (24 April 2017).

"Opinion | Zombies of Voodoo Economics (Published 2017)" .

The New York Times .

^ Galbraith, John Kenneth (4 February 1982).

"Recession Economics" .

New York Review of Books .

^ Gale, William G., and Samara Potter. 2002. “An Economic Evaluation of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act.” National Tax Journal 55 (1): 133-86.

Further reading [ edit ] Gwartney, James D. (2008).

"Supply-Side Economics" . In David R. Henderson (ed.).

Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty .

ISBN 978-0865976658 .

OCLC 237794267 .

Hope, David; Limberg, Julian (April 2022).

"The economic consequences of major tax cuts for the rich" .

Socio-Economic Review .

20 (2): 539– 559.

doi : 10.1093/ser/mwab061 .

Zidar, Owen (30 October 2018).

"Tax Cuts for Whom? Heterogeneous Effects of Income Tax Changes on Growth and Employment" (PDF) .

Journal of Political Economy .

127 (3): 1437– 1472.

doi : 10.1086/701424 .

ISSN 0022-3808 .

S2CID 158844554 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 June 2018 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

(working paper) v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side Notable macroeconomists François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw Critique Critique of political economy See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj8fc
Cached time: 20250818012431
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.139 seconds
Real time usage: 2.486 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14206/1000000
Revision size: 86253/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 473522/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 28059/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 485508/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.371/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22646348/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2071.528      1 -total
 43.18%  894.402      1 Template:Reflist
 16.71%  346.193      3 Template:Navbox
 14.67%  303.818     48 Template:Cite_web
 11.95%  247.512      9 Template:Excerpt
 10.38%  215.125      1 Template:Macroeconomics
  8.97%  185.843     32 Template:Cite_news
  8.50%  176.139     15 Template:Cite_book
  8.27%  171.255      8 Template:Annotated_link
  6.71%  138.976     18 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:174607:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818012431 and revision id 1306019757. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supply-side_economics&oldid=1306019757 " Categories : Supply-side economics 1976 neologisms Economic growth Schools of economic thought Tax Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2023 Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2022 Articles needing expert attention from March 2020 All articles needing expert attention Economics articles needing expert attention Articles with weasel words from April 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with criticism or controversy sections from April 2025 All articles with criticism or controversy sections All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2025 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Supply-side economics 26 languages Add topic

