Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Marxist film theory 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of film theory concerning Marxism This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Marxist film theory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Marxist film theory is an approach to film theory centered on concepts that make a political understanding of the medium possible.

[ 1 ] [ failed verification ] An individual studying a Marxist representation in a film, might take special interest in its representations of political hierarchy and social injustices .

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Sergei Eisenstein and many other Soviet filmmakers in the 1920s expressed ideas of Marxism through film. The Hegelian dialectic was considered best displayed in film editing through the Kuleshov Experiment and the development of montage .

[ 3 ] While this structuralist approach to Marxism and filmmaking was used, the more outspoken complaint that the Russian filmmakers had, was with the narrative structure of the United States cinema .

[ citation needed ] Eisenstein's solution was to shun narrative structure by eliminating the individual protagonist and tell stories where the action is moved by the group and the story is told through a clash of one image against the next (whether in composition, motion, or idea) so that the audience is never lulled into believing that they are watching something that has not been worked over.

[ 4 ] Eisenstein himself was accused by the Soviet authorities under Joseph Stalin of "formalist error", of highlighting form as a thing of beauty instead of portraying the worker nobly.

[ 4 ] French Marxist film makers, such as Jean-Luc Godard , employed radical editing and choice of subject matter as well as subversive parody to heighten class consciousness and promote Marxist ideas.

[ 5 ] Situationist film maker Guy Debord , author of The Society of the Spectacle , began his film In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni with a radical critique of the spectator who goes to the cinema to forget about their dispossessed daily life.

[ citation needed ] Situationist film makers produced a number of important films, where the only contribution by the situationist film cooperative was the sound-track.  In Can dialectics break bricks?

(1973), a Chinese Kung Fu film was transformed by redubbing into an epistle on state capitalism and Proletarian revolution. The intellectual technique of using capitalism's own structures against itself is known as détournement .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Karl Marx in film Screen theory , a Marxist-psychoanalytic film theory associated with the British journal Screen in the 1970s References [ edit ] ^ Mike Wayne (ed.), Understanding Film: Marxist Perspectives , Pluto Press, 2005, p. 24.

^ "Marxist Theory on Films" .

Film Theory . 2014-08-27 . Retrieved 2025-03-04 .

^ Shlapentokh, Dmitry; Shlapentokh, Vladimir (2021-12-08).

Soviet Cinematography 1918–1991 . New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780429338670 .

ISBN 978-0-429-33867-0 .

^ a b Bordwell, David (2020-10-08).

The Cinema of Eisenstein . New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003070801/cinema-eisenstein-david-bordwell .

ISBN 978-1-003-07080-1 .

^ "Godard: Images, Sounds, Politics" .

Goodreads . Retrieved 2024-04-22 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Forsyth, Scott (1997).

"Marxism, Film and Theory: From the Barricades to Postmodernism" .

Socialist Register .

33 : 265– 287.

ISSN 0081-0606 .

Kornbluh, Anne (2019).

Marxist Film Theory and Fight Club .

Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 9781501347320 .

James, David E.

(1989).

Allegories of Cinema . Princeton, N.J: Princeton Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-04755-3 .

v t e Film studies Approaches Analytic Cognitive film theory Historical poetics Linguistic film theory Neoformalism Classical Formalist film theory Continental Feminist film theory Film semiotics Marxist film theory Psychoanalytic film theory Screen theory Structuralist film theory Critical methods Auteur theory Schreiber theory Scholars David Bordwell Thomas Elsaesser Sergei Eisenstein Colin MacCabe Christian Metz Laura Mulvey Kristin Thompson Academic journals Cinema Journal Film Quarterly Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television Journal of Film and Video Journal of Popular Film & Television New Review of Film and Television Studies Screen The Velvet Light Trap Television & New Media This article related to film or motion picture terminology is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e This article about critical theory is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxist_film_theory&oldid=1304935340 " Categories : Marxist theory Film theory Film terminology stubs Critical theory stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2010 All articles needing additional references All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 All stub articles This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 02:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxist film theory 2 languages Add topic

