Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subgroups 2 Citation of entries 3 English chronicles 4 Cronista Toggle Cronista subsection 4.1 Cronista in the Middle Ages 5 Lists of chronicles Toggle Lists of chronicles subsection 5.1 Alphabetical list of notable chronicles 5.2 Rhymed chronicles 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Chronicle 58 languages Alemannisch Ænglisc العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical account of facts and events For other uses, see Chronicle (disambiguation) .

"Chronicler" redirects here; not to be confused with the Chronicler .

"Chronica" redirects here. For the album, see Chronica (album) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chronicle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chronicon Pictum , the "Illuminated Chronicle" from the royal Hungarian court from 1358 A chronicle ( Latin : chronica , from Greek χρονικά chroniká , from χρόνος , chrónos – "time") is a historical account of events arranged in chronological order, as in a timeline . Typically, equal weight is given for historically important events and local events, the purpose being the recording of events that occurred, seen from the perspective of the chronicler .  A chronicle which traces world history is a universal chronicle . This is in contrast to a narrative or history , in which an author chooses events to interpret and analyze and excludes those the author does not consider important or relevant.

The information sources for chronicles vary. Some are written from the chronicler's direct knowledge, others from witnesses or participants in events, still others are accounts passed down from generation to generation by oral tradition .

[ 1 ] Some used written material, such as charters , letters , and earlier chronicles.

[ 1 ] Still others are tales of unknown origin that have mythical status.

[ 1 ] Copyists also changed chronicles in creative copying, making corrections or in updating or continuing a chronicle with information not available to the original chronicler.

[ 1 ] Determining the reliability of particular chronicles is important to historians .

[ 1 ] Many newspapers and other periodical literature have adopted "chronicle" as part of their name.

Subgroups [ edit ] "It is well known that history, in the form of Chronicles, was a favourite portion of the literature of the middle ages. The annals of a country were usually kept according to the years of the sovereign's power, and not those of the Christian æra. The Chronicles compiled in large cities were arranged in like manner, with the years reckoned according to the annual succession of chief magistrates." – John Gough Nichols , critical edition foreword to Chronicle of the Grey Friars of London (1852) [ 2 ] Scholars categorize the genre of chronicle into two subgroups: live chronicles, and dead chronicles. A dead chronicle is one where the author assembles a list of events up to the time of their writing, but does not record further events as they occur. A live chronicle is where one or more authors add to a chronicle in a regular fashion, recording contemporary events shortly after they occur. Because of the immediacy of the information, historians tend to value live chronicles, such as annals , over dead ones.

[ citation needed ] The term often refers to a book written by a chronicler in the Middle Ages describing historical events in a country, or the lives of a nobleman or a clergyman, although it is also applied to a record of public events. The earliest medieval chronicle to combine both retrospective ( dead ) and contemporary ( live ) entries, is the Chronicle of Ireland , which spans the years 431 to 911.

[ 3 ] Chronicles are the predecessors of modern " time lines " rather than analytical histories. They represent accounts, in prose or verse, of local or distant events over a considerable period of time, both the lifetime of the individual chronicler and often those of several subsequent continuators . If the chronicles deal with events year by year, they are often called annals . Unlike the modern historian, most chroniclers tended to take their information as they found it, and made little attempt to separate fact from legend. The point of view of most chroniclers is highly localised, to the extent that many anonymous chroniclers can be sited in individual abbeys .

[ 4 ] It is impossible to say how many chronicles exist, as the many ambiguities in the definition of the genre make it impossible to draw clear distinctions of what should or should not be included. However, the Encyclopedia of the Medieval Chronicle lists some 2,500 items written between 300 and 1500 AD.

[ 5 ] Citation of entries [ edit ] Entries in chronicles are often cited using the abbreviation s.a.

, meaning sub anno (under the year), according to the year under which they are listed. For example, " ASC MS A, s.a. 855" means the entry for the year 855 in manuscript A of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle . The same event may be recorded under a different year in another manuscript of the chronicle, and may be cited for example as " ASC MS D, s.a. 857".

English chronicles [ edit ] The most important English chronicles are the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , started under the patronage of King Alfred in the 9th century and continued until the 12th century, and the Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland (1577–87) by Raphael Holinshed and other writers; the latter documents were important sources of materials for Elizabethan drama.

[ 6 ] Later 16th-century Scottish chronicles, written after the Reformation , shape history according to Catholic or Protestant viewpoints.

Cronista [ edit ] A cronista is a term for a historical chronicler, a role that held historical significance in the European Middle Ages . Until the European Enlightenment , the occupation was largely equivalent to that of a historian, describing events chronologically that were of note in a given country or region. As such, it was often an official governmental position rather than an independent practice. The appointment of the official chronicler often favored individuals who had distinguished themselves by their efforts to study, investigate and disseminate population -related issues. The position was granted on a local level based on the mutual agreements of a city council in plenary meetings. Often, the occupation was honorary, unpaid, and stationed for life. In modern usage, the term usually refers to a type of journalist who writes chronicles as a form of journalism or non-professional historical documentation.

[ 7 ] Cronista in the Middle Ages [ edit ] Before the development of modern journalism and the systematization of chronicles as a journalistic genre, cronista were tasked with narrating chronological events considered worthy of remembrance that were recorded year by year. Unlike writers who created epic poems regarding living figures, cronista recorded historical events in the lives of individuals in an ostensibly truthful and reality-oriented way.

[ 4 ] Even from the time of early Christian historiography, cronistas were clearly expected to place human history in the context of a linear progression, starting with the creation of man until the second coming of Christ , as prophesied in biblical texts .

[ 8 ] Lists of chronicles [ edit ] Babylonian Chronicles (loosely-defined set of 25 clay tablets) Burmese chronicles Cambodian Royal Chronicles (loosely-defined collection) List of collections of Crusader sources (most of them chronicles) List of Danish chronicles List of English chronicles List of Hungarian chronicles List of Rus' chronicles Muslim chronicles for Indian history Chronicles of Nepal Serbian chronicles Alphabetical list of notable chronicles [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chronicle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Chronicles of Flanders. Manuscript manufactured in Flanders, 2nd half of the 15th century. Manuscript preserved in the University Library of Ghent.

[ 9 ] History of Alam Aray Abbasi – Safavid dynasty Alamgirnama – Mughal Empire Alexandrian World Chronicle - Greek history of the world until 392 AD Altan Tobchi - Mongol Empire Anglo-Saxon Chronicle – England Annales Bertiniani – West Francia Annales Cambriae – Wales Annales Posonienses – Kingdom of Hungary Annales seu cronicae incliti Regni Poloniae – Poland Annals of Inisfallen – Ireland Annals of Lough Cé – Ireland Annals of the Four Masters – Ireland Annals of Spring and Autumn – China Annals of Thutmose III – Ancient Egypt The Annals of the Choson Dynasty – Korea Babylonian Chronicles – Mesopotamia Anonymous Bulgarian Chronicle – Bulgaria Barnwell Chronicle - England Bodhi Vamsa – Sri Lanka Books of Chronicles attributed to Ezra – Israel Buranji – Ahoms , Assam , India Bychowiec Chronicle Lithuania Cāmadevivaṃsa – Northern Thailand Culavamsa – Sri Lanka ( Chronica Polonorum ): see Gesta principum Polonorum Cheitharol Kumbaba – Manipur , India Chronica Gentis Scotorum Chronica Hungarorum – History of Hungary Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae – Poland Chronicle of 754 - Spain Chronicle (Crònica) by Ramon Muntaner – 13th/14th-century Crown of Aragon . Third and longest of the Grand Catalan Chronicles.

Chronicle of Finland ( Chronicon Finlandiae ) by Johannes Messenius – Finland Chronicle of Fredegar - France Chronicle of the Slavs – Europe Chronicle of Greater Poland – Poland Chronicle of Jean de Venette – France Chronicle of the Bishops of England ( De Gestis Pontificum Anglorum ) by William of Malmesbury Chronicles of Jerahmeel Chronicle of the Kings of Alba - Scotland Chronicle of the Kings of England ( De Gestis Regum Anglorum ) by William of Malmesbury Chronicles of Mann - Isle of Man Chronicon of Eusebius Chronicon Scotorum – Ireland Chronicon of Thietmar of Merseburg Chronicon Paschale - 7th century Greek chronicle of the world Chronicon Pictum – History of Hungary Chronographia – 11th century History of the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantium) by Michael Psellos Comentarios Reales de los Incas Conversion of Kartli – Georgia Cronaca [ 10 ] - Chronicle of Cyprus from the 4th up to the 15th century by Cypriot chronicler Leontios Machairas Cronaca fiorentina – Chronicle of Florence up to the end of the 14th Century by Baldassarre Bonaiuti Cronicae et gesta ducum sive principum Polonorum – Poland Crónica Mexicayotl — History of the Incas Croyland Chronicle – England Dawn-Breakers (Nabil's Narrative) – Baháʼí Faith and Middle East Dioclean Priest's Chronicle – Europe Dipavamsa – Sri Lanka Divan of the Abkhazian Kings – Georgia Epic of Sundiata - West Africa Epitome rerum Hungarorum – History of Hungary Eric's Chronicle – Sweden Eusebius Chronicle – Mediterranean and Middle East Fragmentary Annals of Ireland – Ireland Froissart's Chronicles – France and Western Europe Galician-Volhynian Chronicle – Ukraine Georgian Chronicles – Georgia Gesta Hungarorum – History of Hungary Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum – History of Hungary Gesta Normannorum Ducum – Normandy Gesta principum Polonorum Grandes Chroniques de France – France General Estoria by Alfonso X – c. 1275-1284 Castile , Spain .

Henry of Livona Chronicle – Eastern Europe Historia Ecclesiastica – Norman England Historia Scholastica by Petrus Comestor - 12th century France The Historie and Chronicles of Scotland , Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie História da Província Santa Cruz a que vulgarmente chamamos Brasil – Brazil History of the Prophets and Kings – Middle East and Mediterranean Hustyn Chronicle – Eastern Europe Jami' al-tawarikh by Rashid-al-Din Hamadani - Universal history Jans der Enikel – Europe and Mediterranean Jerome's Chronicle – Mediterranean and Middle East Jinakalamali – Northern Thailand Joannis de Czarnkow chronicon Polonorum – Poland Kaiserchronik – Central and southern Europe, Germany Kano Chronicle – Nigeria Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh by Sujan Rai - History of India Khwaday-Namag - History of Persia Kilwa Chronicle - East Africa Kojiki - Japan Lethrense Chronicle – Denmark Livonian Chronicle of Henry – Livonia Livonian Rhymed Chronicle – Livonia Libre dels Feyts – Book of the Deeds by James I of Aragon , first of the Grand Catalan Chronicles Madala Panji – Chronicle of the Jagannath Temple in Puri, India , related to the History of Odisha Mainz Anonymous Mahavamsa – Sri Lanka Maronite Chronicle – The Levant , anonymous annalistic chronicle in the Syriac language completed shortly after 664.

Manx Chronicle – Isle of Man Nabonidus Chronicle – Mesopotamia Nihon Shoki - Japan Novgorod First Chronicle – Novgorod Republic Nuova Cronica – Florence Nuremberg Chronicle Old Tibetan Chronicle - History of Tibet Parian Chronicle - Ancient Greece Paschale Chronicle – Mediterranean Pictish Chronicle - Scotland Primary Chronicle – Kievan Rus' Puranas – India Rajatarangini – Kashmir Roit and Quheil of Tyme – Scotland , Adam Abell Roskildense Chronicle – Denmark Royal Frankish Annals – Frankish Empire Scotichronicon – by the Scottish historian Walter Bower Shahnama-yi-Al-i Osman by Fethullah Arifi Çelebi – Ottoman empire (1300 ac – the end of Sultan Suleyman I 's reign) which is the fifth volume of it Süleymanname Skibby Chronicle – Danish Latin chronicle from the 1530s Solomon bar Simson Chronicle Swiss illustrated chronicles – Switzerland Timbuktu Chronicles – Mali Zizhi Tongjian – China Rhymed chronicles [ edit ] Rhymed or poetic chronicles, as opposed to prosaic chronicles, include: Rhymed Chronicle of 1682 [ uk ] Rhymed Chronicle of Armenia Minor Cronache aquilane [ it ] ("Chronicle of L'Aquila "), both in prose and verse form Brabantsche Yeesten ( c.

1315–1351) by Jan van Boendale (continued by an anonymous author) [ 11 ] Cornicke van Brabant (1415) by Hennen van Merchtenen [ 12 ] Cronijck van Brabant ( c.

1435–1460), anonymous, until 1430 [ 13 ] Rhymed Chronicle of Brunswick [ de ] Rhymed Chronicle of Cologne [ de ] by Gottfried Hagen Chronicle of Dalimil Danish Rhymed Chronicle [ da ] Chronicon Egmundanum [ nl ] Engelbrekt's Chronicle [ sv ] Erik's Chronicle Rhymed Chronicle of Flanders , part of the Comburg Manuscript [ nl ] . It is unique as all other surviving Dutch-language chronicles of Flanders were written in prose.

Die olde Freesche cronike (1474), anonymous history of Friesland until 1248 [ 14 ] Rhymed Chronicle of Gandersheim [ de ] Rhymed Chronicle of Holland by Melis Stoke Karl's Chronicle [ sv ] Rhymed Chronicle of Kastl ( Kastler Reimchronik ) Rhymed Chronicle of Klaas Kolijn [ nl ] , notorious 17th-century forgery pretending to be written in the 12th century Livonian Rhymed Chronicle Rhymed Chronicle of Mecklenburg by Ernest of Kirchberg Chronique métrique de Philippe le Bel or Chronique rimée (1316) by Geoffrey of Paris Chronique rimée ( c.

1250) by Philippe Mouskes New Prussian Chronicle by Wigand of Marburg Roman de Brut by Wace Spieghel Historiael by Jacob van Maerlant Sture's Chronicle [ sv ] Styrian Rhymed Chronicle [ de ] Rhymed Chronicle of Utrecht ( c.

1378) Rhyming Chronicle of Worringen [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Books of Chronicles Medieval Chronicle Society References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Elisabeth M. C. Van Houts, Memory and Gender in Medieval Europe: 900–1200 (Toronto; Buffalo: University of Toronto Press, 1999), pp. 19–20.

^ "Chronicle of the Grey Friars of London : Camden Society (Great Britain) : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming : Internet Archive" .

Internet Archive . Retrieved 18 June 2023 .

^ Flechner, Roy (2013).

"The Chronicle of Ireland: then and now" .

Early Medieval Europe .

21 (4): 422– 454.

doi : 10.1111/emed.12025 .

^ a b Kuijpers, Erika; Lenarduzzi, Carolina; Pollmann, Judith; Dekker, Theo; Lassche, Alie (2024).

"Profiling local chroniclers in the early modern Low Countries" .

Urban History : 1– 26.

doi : 10.1017/S0963926824000531 .

ISSN 0963-9268 .

^ Pollmann, Judith (2016).

"Archiving the Present and Chronicling for the Future in Early Modern Europe" .

Past & Present (Supplement 11): 231– 252.

doi : 10.1093/pastj/gtw029 .

ISSN 0031-2746 .

^ 'A Glossary of Literary Terms' – M.H. Abrams ^ Dadson, Trevor J. (1983).

The Genoese in Spain: Gabriel Bocángel Y Unzueta, 1603-1658 : a Biography (in Spanish). Tamesis.

ISBN 978-0-7293-0161-9 .

^ Richard W. Burgess, Studies in Eusebian and post-Eusebian Chronography, Stuttgart (1999).

^ "Kroniek van Vlaanderen, van de aanvang tot 1467" .

lib.ugent.be . Retrieved 2020-08-24 .

^ "Machairas, Leontios".

doi : 10.1163/9789004184640_emc_sim_01737 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Stein 2021 , pp. 300–301.

^ Stein 2021 , p. 301.

^ Stein 2021 , p. 309.

^ Carasso-Kok, M. (1981).

Repertorium van verhalende historische bronnen uit de middeleeuwen: heiligenlevens, annalen, kronieken en andere in Nederland geschreven verhalende bronnen . Bibliografische Reeks van het Nederlands Historisch Genootschap (in Dutch). Nijhoff. p. 170.

ISBN 978-90-247-9132-3 . Retrieved 8 October 2024 .

^ Avonds 1988 , p. 199.

External links [ edit ] Bémont, Charles (1911).

"Chronicle" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). pp.

298– 299.

Avonds, Piet (1988).

"Van Keulen naar Straatsburg. Jan van Heelu's rijmkroniek over de slag bij Woeringen (1288)" .

Literatuur: Tijdschrift over Nederlandse Letterkunde (in Dutch).

5 (1): 196– 204.

Stein, Robert (2021).

"Levend verleden: de Cronijck van Brabant" . In van Anrooij, W.; Verbij-Schillings, J. (eds.).

Werken van Gelre (in Dutch). Hilversum: Verloren. pp.

299– 315.

hdl : 1887/3247548 . Retrieved 27 June 2024 .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic 2 Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland İslâm Ansiklopedisi 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐4kbj6
Cached time: 20250816092702
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.865 seconds
Real time usage: 1.115 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9816/1000000
Revision size: 23961/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 436963/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11387/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 61/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93842/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.407/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25403359/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  804.548      1 -total
 25.97%  208.949      1 Template:Historiography
 25.65%  206.342      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 23.30%  187.483     21 Template:Navbox
 15.36%  123.558      1 Template:Reflist
 14.47%  116.429     49 Template:Ill
 11.02%   88.636      1 Template:Langx
  8.34%   67.097      2 Template:Cite_web
  8.16%   65.614      2 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.87%   63.322      3 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7507:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816092702 and revision id 1296411528. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronicle&oldid=1296411528 " Categories : Chronicles Medieval literature Works about history Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles needing additional references from June 2023 Articles that may contain original research from June 2023 All articles that may contain original research Dynamic lists Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 21:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronicle 58 languages Add topic

