Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description and genera Toggle Description and genera subsection 2.1 Stipitate hydnoid fungi 2.2 Resupinate hydnoid fungi 2.3 Additional hydnoid fungi 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Hydnoid fungi 10 languages Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français Latviešu Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of fungi The hedgehog fungus, Hydnum repandum The hydnoid fungi are a group of fungi in the Basidiomycota with basidiocarps (fruit bodies) producing spores on pendant, tooth-like or spine-like projections. They are colloquially called tooth fungi . Originally such fungi were referred to the genus Hydnum ("hydnoid" means Hydnum -like), but it is now known that not all hydnoid species are closely related.

History [ edit ] Hydnum was one of the original genera created by Linnaeus in his Species Plantarum of 1753. It contained all species of fungi with fruit bodies bearing pendant, tooth-like projections. Subsequent authors described around 900 species in the genus.

[ 1 ] With increasing use of the microscope, it became clear that not all tooth fungi were closely related and most Hydnum species were gradually moved to other genera. The Dutch mycologist Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus paid particular attention to the group, producing a series of papers reviewing the taxonomy of hydnoid fungi.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The original genus Hydnum is still current, but is now restricted to the type species , Hydnum repandum , and its relatives in the order Cantharellales . Other species originally described in Hydnum have been reassigned to various genera in various orders including the Agaricales , Auriculariales , Gomphales , Hymenochaetales , Polyporales , Russulales , Thelephorales and Trechisporales .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Description and genera [ edit ] The fruit bodies of hydnoid fungi are diverse, but all produce their spores on the surface of pendant, tooth-like or spine-like projections.

Stipitate hydnoid fungi [ edit ] Some terrestrial species producing fruit bodies with a pileus (cap) and stipe (stem) are collectively known as the stipitate hydnoid fungi and are often studied as a group because of their ecological similarity. The species concerned are now referred to the genera Bankera , Hydnellum , Phellodon , and Sarcodon . All are ectomycorrhizal , belong in the Thelephorales , and are considered to be indicator species of old, species-rich forests. In Europe, at least, many are of conservation concern and feature on national or regional red lists of threatened fungal species. In the United Kingdom the stipitate hydnoid fungi have been given Biodiversity Action Plan status [ 8 ] which has increased interest in the group and has generated funding to be put into survey work [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and other research.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Species of Hydnum and the related Sistotrema confluens ( Cantharellales ) are also mycorrhizal, but have different ecological requirements. Other stipitate hydnoid fungi are wood decomposing, such as some species of Beenakia (Gomphales), Climacodon (Polyporales) and Mycorrhaphium (Polyporales).

Resupinate hydnoid fungi [ edit ] The largest group of fungi formerly placed in the genus Hydnum are wood-rotting species, forming patch-like fruit bodies on dead attached branches, logs, stumps, and fallen wood. Species with small "teeth" (just a millimetre or so long) are sometimes described as "odontioid" (tooth-like). Species that form resupinate (effused) fruiting bodies are also considered part of the corticioid fungi . Genera that have hydnoid or odontioid representatives include Hydnochaete , Hyphodontia and Odonticium (Hymenochaetales), Dentipellis (Russulales), Dentocorticium , Mycoacia , Radulodon , Steccherinum (Polyporales) and Sarcodontia .

Additional hydnoid fungi [ edit ] Other hydnoid fungi include a group of conspicuous, wood-rotting species with long spines belonging to the genus Hericium (Russulales), often referred to as "tooth fungi".

[ 13 ] The ear-pick fungus and other species of Auriscalpium (Russulales) are hydnoid, as is the odd jelly fungus Pseudohydnum gelatinosum (Auriculariales).

The distinction between polypores and hydnoid fungi is not always clear—irregular, split pores can also be interpreted as teeth. Consequently, some species are considered hydnoid or poroid depending on the context (e.g.

Irpex lacteus ).

The Mealy Tooth, Hydnellum ferrugineum Dentate hymenophore of Hydnochaete olivacea Hydnoid-poroid hymenophore of Irpex lacteus The Bear's Head Tooth Fungus, Hericium americanum References [ edit ] ^ a b "Index Fungorum – Search Page" .

www.indexfungorum.org . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ Maas Geesteranus RA. (1960–1974). Notes on Hydnums I – IX, in Persoonia and Proceedings Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetenschappen ^ Maas Geesteranus RA. (1967). Quelques champignons hydnoides du Congo.

Bull. Jardin. Bot. Nat. Belg.

37 :77–107.

^ Maas Geesteranus RA. (1971).

Hydnaceous fungi of the eastern old world.

Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.

ISBN 0-7204-8222-4 ^ Maas Geesteranus RA. (1974). Studies in the genera Irpex and Steccherinum .

Persoonia 7 : 443–581.

^ Hibbett D et al. (2007) A higher-level phylogenetic classification of the Fungi .

Mycological Research 111 : 509–547.

^ Larsson K-H. (2007). Re-thinking the classification of corticioid fungi.

Mycological Research 111 : 1040–1063.

^ UK Biodiversity Action Plans "Action plan for Grouped plan for tooth fungi" . Archived from the original on 2008-10-08 . Retrieved 2009-01-05 .

^ Newton AC et al.

(2002). Status and distribution of stipitate hydnoid fungi in Scottish coniferous forests.

Biological Conservation 107 : 181–192.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2010-04-08 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Parfitt D.

et al.

(2007). Molecular and morphological discrimination of stipitate hydnoids in the genera Hydnellum and Phellodon .

Mycological Research 111 : 761–777.

^ van der Linde S.

et al.

(2008). A PCR-based method for detecting the mycelia of stipitate hydnoid fungi in soil.

J. Microbiol. Methods 75 : 40–46.

^ Pegler DN et al. (1997).

British chanterelles and tooth fungi . Kew: Royal Botanic Gardens.

ISBN 1-900347-15-6 .

External links [ edit ] Scottish stipitate hydnoid brochure [ permanent dead link ] Tooth Fungi at AmericanMushrooms.com Pinewood tooth fungi species profile Archived 2008-12-06 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hydnoid_fungi&oldid=1303037145 " Categories : Basidiomycota Fungal fruiting body types Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 19:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hydnoid fungi 10 languages Add topic

