Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview of Book Toggle Overview of Book subsection 1.1 Five Summarizing Essays 1.2 Particular Works and Authors 1.3 Further Essays on Symbolism in General 2 Reception 3 References Toggle the table of contents Language as Symbolic Action Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1966 book by Kenneth Burke Language as Symbolic Action Author Kenneth Burke Language English Publisher University of California Press Publication date 1966 Publication place United States Language as Symbolic Action: Essays on Life, Literature and Method is a book by Kenneth Burke , published in 1966 by the University of California Press .

[ 1 ] As indicated by the title, the book, Burke's 16th published work, consists of “many of Burke's essays which have appeared in widely diverse periodicals” and has thus been regarded as one of the most significant resources for studying and comprehending Burke ’s ideas.

[ 2 ] Overview of Book [ edit ] Language as Symbolic Action is divided into three parts:  (1) Five Summarizing Essays (2) Particular Works and Authors and (3) Further Essays on Symbolism in General.

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Five Summarizing Essays [ edit ] The first of Burke ’s five essays is the “ Definition of man ” which defines man as . . .the symbol-using (symbol-making, symbol-misusing) animal, inventor of the negative (or moralized by the negative), separated from his natural condition by instruments of his own making, goaded by the spirit of hierarchy (or moved by the sense of order), and rotten with perfection.

[ 3 ] The next chapter “Poetics in Particular, Language in General” returns to a discussion of perfection continued from the previous chapter.

Burke summarizes this chapter by stating: The poetic motive does indeed come to a head in the principle of perfection . . . But the principle of perfection should not be viewed in too simple a sense.  We should also use the expression ironically . . . the motive of perfection may extend to areas far beyond the confines of poetry and poetics.

[ 4 ] Osborn explains this concept further: “. . . a truly rigorous attempt to account for a single work on the grounds of poetics alone should force recognition that it is necessary to go beyond poetics-in-particular to language-in-general. . .” [ 5 ] Perfection, according to Burke and similar scholars, is a motive that exists both in literature and beyond, as an underlying human desire that drives much symbolic action.

The third and often-referenced chapter “ Terministic Screens ” makes use of many key terms of Burke's “dramatistic” approach to literary and rhetorical criticism.

Burke begins the chapter by explaining the “scientistic” and the “dramatistic.”  “‘A scientistic approach begins with questions of naming, or definition’(44).  A ‘dramatistic’ approach stresses ‘language as an aspect of ‘action,’ that is, symbolic action’(44).” [ 6 ] Burke explains that, through the concept of terministic screens , “any nomenclature necessarily directs the attention into some channels rather than others.”  This can be obvious, such as how different academic subjects direct the attention, or more subtle.  Burke illustrates the latter point with an example of how photos of the same objects using different color filters reflected and deflected his attention in different ways, depending on the filter (45).

[ 7 ] Terministic screens is significant to the process of rhetorical criticism, as well as understanding rhetoric , because terministic screens are a conduit to understanding reality.

Particular Works and Authors [ edit ] The 11 chapters comprising Part II engage in rhetorical criticism of, among others, Shakespeare ’s Antony and Cleopatra , the Oresteia , Faust , and William Carlos Williams .

Further Essays on Symbolism in General [ edit ] Part III consists of eight chapters.  One of the more significant of these is chapter six, entitled “Medium as Message.” Burke takes one of his peers, Marshall McLuhan , to task for focusing too much on the media rather than the symbolic resources of language.

Burke’s main criticism of McLuhan stems from his most memorable slogan and the undue emphasis put on medium.  “If the medium is the message, obviously the important thing is not what somebody says in a given medium, but what medium he uses, regardless of what he says. . . The medium is the message.  Hence, down with content analysis” (413).

[ 8 ] Burke continues the discussion on the relative importance of medium to message by acknowledging the relationship as significant and stating that certain content can be better delivered by or suited to a specific medium.

[ 9 ] Reception [ edit ] Burke ’s ideas, through these significant essays, have had widespread influence.  Burke scholar Nelson J. Smith III offered this review: “Much of what our current generation of rhetoricians accomplishes will be drawn from the preliminary and pioneer investigations into the sociology of ideology by Kenneth Burke.” [ 10 ] Frederick J. Hoffman also writes:  “[Burke’s] range and scope are truly remarkable. If there are predecessors and contemporaries in this respect, they are probably Remy de Gourmont. . .and Eric Auerbach. . . His fate is that of a man some years ahead of his time.” [ 11 ] The range of critical ideas and practices included in Language as Symbolic Action help scholars explore this breadth.

References [ edit ] ^ Blakesley, David and Clarke Rountree.  “Works by Kenneth Burke.” K.B. Journal .  2010. < "Works by Kenneth Burke | KB Journal" . Archived from the original on 2010-11-15 . Retrieved 2010-12-03 .

> ^ Smith, Nelson J. III.  “Review: [untitled].”  Philosophy & Rhetoric 1.3 (1968): 187.

^ Burke, Kenneth.  Language as Symbolic Action:  Essays on Life, Literature, and Method.  (Berkeley:  University of California Press, 1966) 16.

^ Burke 38-39.

^ Osborn, Neal J.  “Toward the Quintessential Burke.”  The Hudson Review 21.2 (1968): 320.

^ Wessels, Emanuelle, Justin Killian, and Sean Larson.  “Outlines of Kenneth Burke’s Writings: Language as Symbolic Action.”  Resources on Kenneth Burke. 12 May 2009. < http://www.comm.umn.edu/burke/LASA.html > ^ Wessels, Emanuelle, Justin Killian, and Sean Larson.  “Outlines of Kenneth Burke’s Writings: Language as Symbolic Action.”  Resources on Kenneth Burke. 12 May 2009. < http://www.comm.umn.edu/burke/LASA.html > ^ Wessels, Emanuelle, Justin Killian, and Sean Larson.  “Outlines of Kenneth Burke’s Writings: Language as Symbolic Action.”  Resources on Kenneth Burke. 12 May 2009. < http://www.comm.umn.edu/burke/LASA.html > ^ Wessels, Emanuelle, Justin Killian, and Sean Larson.  “Outlines of Kenneth Burke’s Writings: Language as Symbolic Action.”  Resources on Kenneth Burke. 12 May 2009. < http://www.comm.umn.edu/burke/LASA.html > ^ Smith, Nelson J. III.  “Review: [untitled].”  Philosophy & Rhetoric 1.3 (1968): 189.

^ Hoffman, Frederick J. “Review: Kenneth Burke’s Great Range.” Poetry 111.6 (1968): 418.

v t e Kenneth Burke Works The Rhetoric of Hitler's "Battle" (1939) A Grammar of Motives (1945) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) Concepts Definition of man Dramatism Dramatistic pentad Identification Modern rhetoric Terministic screen Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Language_as_Symbolic_Action&oldid=1300941754 " Categories : Philosophy of language literature Rhetoric works 1966 non-fiction books University of California Press books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 07:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Language as Symbolic Action Add languages Add topic

