Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Services 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ingram Content Group 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American service provider to the book publishing industry Ingram Content Group Founded 2009 Headquarters La Vergne , Tennessee , United States Key people John R. Ingram (Chairman) Shawn Morin (CEO) Services Book distribution Parent Ingram Industries Website ingramcontent .com Ingram Content Group is an American service provider to the book publishing industry, based in La Vergne, Tennessee . It is a subsidiary of Ingram Industries .

[ 1 ] Shawn Morin is CEO, and John R. Ingram is chairman of Ingram Industries .

History [ edit ] The Ingram Content Group was formed in 2009 when Ingram Lightning Group merged with Ingram Digital Group. Ingram Content Group's operating units are Ingram Book Company, Ingram International Inc., Ingram Library Services Inc., Ingram Publisher Services Inc., Ingram Periodicals Inc., Ingram Digital, Lightning Source Inc., Spring Arbor Distributors Inc., and Tennessee Book Company LLC.

[ citation needed ] During 1999 and 2000, Ingram Industries negotiated a sale to Barnes & Noble which was ultimately withdrawn after pressure from independent bookstores and the American Booksellers Association .

[ 2 ] In July 2006, Ingram Industries acquired VitalSource Technologies, Inc , [ 3 ] which it later sold to Francisco Partners in April 2021.

[ 4 ] In June 2014, the company, in conjunction with Hachette Book Group USA and Perseus Books Group , announced that Hachette would buy Perseus, and then sell that company's client services businesses to Ingram, with financial details undisclosed.

[ 5 ] On April 4, 2016, John Ingram stepped down as CEO, and was succeeded by Shawn Morin.

[ 6 ] In December 2018, it was reported that Ingram Content extended an offer to purchase book distributor Baker & Taylor 's retail and wholesale business from their parent company, Follett . As a result, Ingram informed the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) of the proposed deal, and a preliminary investigation was started. The FTC contacted leading book retailers, Amazon , and major and independent book publishers to help determine the impact, if any, from the sale.

[ 7 ] This deal fell through and Baker & Taylor left the retail book wholesale market after divesting some of its entertainment product distribution to Ingram Entertainment in January 2019. Baker & Taylor's departure left Ingram Book Company as the only major book wholesaler to retail stores in the United States.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Services [ edit ] The company has the industry's largest active book inventory with access to 7.5 million titles. The markets they serve include booksellers, librarians, educators and specialty retailers. Ingram employs approximately 3,000 people worldwide.

[ citation needed ] Ingram Content Group distributes to independent book stores throughout the United States, from warehouses in Oregon , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , and Indiana . It also operates a print-on-demand business, under the Lightning Source brand, with facilities in Tennessee, Pennsylvania, Ohio , California , United Kingdom , France and Australia . The company also provides full service distribution, including sales and marketing services via its Ingram Publisher Services division.

[ citation needed ] In addition to print distribution, Ingram also provides digital content services and distribution through CoreSource, VitalSource, and MyiLibrary.

[ citation needed ] In 2015, Ingram purchased Aer.io which allows websites, based in the US to sell books from the Ingram catalog.

[ 10 ] In June 2017, Ingram purchased Book Network International Limited, a book distributor based in Plymouth , U.K., from Rowman & Littlefield .

[ 11 ] Ingram subsequently formed Ingram Publisher Services UK (IPS UK) from these operations. Initially utilising the Plymouth facility, IPS UK relocated its primary UK warehousing and distribution operations to Milton Keynes, completing the move in 2020.

[ 12 ] In June 2022, Ingram entered into a partnership with bookseller/social media site, Tertulia, to sell its library of books.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] List of book distributors References [ edit ] ^ "Ingram Industries – Company Description – Hoover's" . Retrieved 2009-02-12 .

^ Segal, David (June 3, 1999).

"Barnes & Noble Drops Ingram Deal" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 17, 2019 .

^ "Ingram acquires digital content company" .

Nashville Business Journal .

^ Center, VitalSource Press.

"Ingram Content Group Announces Agreement for Francisco Partners to Acquire VitalSource Technologies" .

get.vitalsource.com . Retrieved 2021-12-11 .

^ "Perseus Books Group being acquired by Hachette" .

Publishers Weekly . Retrieved 20 September 2014 .

^ McGee, Jamie (April 4, 2016).

"Ingram Content Group names Shawn Morin CEO" .

The Tennessean . Retrieved March 10, 2019 .

^ Milliot, Jim; Rosen, Judith (December 4, 2018).

"Ingram In Rumored Bid to Buy B&T Retail Arm" .

Publishers Weekly . Retrieved March 10, 2019 .

^ "IBPA Works with Ingram Content Group as Baker & Taylor Exits Wholesale Business" .

Independent Book Publishers Association . May 9, 2019 . Retrieved 2023-12-05 .

^ Jarrad, Sydney (January 15, 2019).

"Ingram Entertainment Buys Baker & Taylor Entertainment Assets" . Retrieved December 5, 2023 .

^ "Ingram Content Group Acquires Aer.io" . Ingram Content Group. December 15, 2015. Archived from the original on 2019-10-14 . Retrieved 2019-06-12 .

^ Snyder, Eric (June 30, 2017).

"Ingram buys British distributor" .

Nashville Business Journal . Retrieved August 11, 2017 .

^ Mansfield, Kate (February 25, 2019).

"Ingram expands with new UK distribution centre" .

The Bookseller . Retrieved April 15, 2025 .

^ "Artsy Cofounder Launches Tertuila, A Unique Discovery App for Books" (Press release). June 7, 2022 . Retrieved 2023-12-05 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ingram_Content_Group&oldid=1296421335 " Categories : 2009 establishments in Tennessee Book publishing companies based in Tennessee Book distributors Companies based in Nashville, Tennessee Ingram family Publishing companies established in 2009 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ingram Content Group 1 language Add topic

