Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 State churches 1.2 Disestablishment 2 Current states with a state religion Toggle Current states with a state religion subsection 2.1 Buddhism 2.2 Christianity 2.2.1 Non-denominational Christianity 2.2.2 Catholicism 2.2.3 Eastern Orthodoxy 2.2.4 Protestantism 2.2.5 The Commonwealth 2.2.5.1 Anglicanism 2.2.5.2 Calvinism 2.2.6 Nordic countries 2.2.6.1 Lutheranism 2.2.7 Other/mixed 2.3 Islam 2.3.1 Other/mixed 2.4 Judaism 2.5 Political religions 2.6 Multiple religion recognition 3 Former state religions Toggle Former state religions subsection 3.1 Roman religion and Christianity 3.2 Han dynasty Confucianism 3.3 Yuan dynasty Buddhism 3.4 Golden Horde and Ilkhanate 3.5 Former state churches in British North America 3.6 Other states 4 Established churches and former state churches 5 Former confessional states Toggle Former confessional states subsection 5.1 Buddhism 5.2 Hinduism 5.3 Islam 5.4 Shinto 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents State religion 77 languages አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Qırımtatarca Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religion or creed endorsed by the state Confessional states Buddhism Eastern Orthodoxy Protestantism Catholicism Non-denominational Christianity Shia Islam Sunni Islam Non-denominational Islam Secular states Ambiguous states or no data Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e A state religion (also called official religion ) is a religion or creed officially endorsed by a sovereign state . A state with an official religion (also known as a confessional state ), while not a secular state , is not necessarily a theocracy . State religions are subject to advantageous treatment by official or government-sanctioned establishments of them, ranging from incentivising citizens to recognise and practice them through government endorsement to having public spending on the maintenance of church property and clergy be unrestricted, but the state does not need to be under the legislative control of the clergy as it would be in a theocracy.

Official religions have been known throughout human history in almost all types of cultures, reaching into the Ancient Near East and prehistory . The relation of religious cult and the state was discussed by the ancient Latin scholar Marcus Terentius Varro , under the term of theologia civilis ( lit.

' civic theology ' ). The first state-sponsored Christian denomination was the Armenian Apostolic Church , established in 301 CE.

[ 1 ] In Christianity , as the term church is typically applied to a place of worship for Christians or organizations incorporating such ones, the term state church is associated with Christianity as sanctioned by the government, historically the state church of the Roman Empire in the last centuries of the Empire's existence, and is sometimes used to denote a specific modern national branch of Christianity. Closely related to state churches are ecclesiae , which are similar but carry a more minor connotation.

In the Middle East , the majority of states with a predominantly Muslim population have Islam as their official religion, though the degree of religious restrictions on citizens' everyday lives varies by country. Rulers of Saudi Arabia use religious power, while Iran 's secular presidents are supposed to follow the decisions of religious authorities since the 1979 Islamic Revolution .

Turkey , which also has Muslim-majority population, became a secular country after Atatürk's Reforms , although unlike the Russian Revolution of the same time period, it did not result in the adoption of state atheism .

The degree to which an official national religion is imposed upon citizens by the state in contemporary society varies considerably; from high as in Saudi Arabia and Iran , to none at all as in Greenland , Denmark , England , Iceland , and Greece (in Europe, the state religion might be called in English, the established church ).

Types [ edit ] The degree and nature of state backing for denomination or creed designated as a state religion can vary. It can range from mere endorsement (with or without financial support) with freedom for other faiths to practice , to prohibiting any competing religious body from operating and to persecuting the followers of other sects.

[ 2 ] In Europe, competition between Catholic and Protestant denominations for state sponsorship in the 16th century evolved the principle Cuius regio, eius religio (states follow the religion of the ruler) embodied in the text of the treaty that marked the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. In England , Henry VIII broke with Rome in 1534, being declared the Supreme Head of the Church of England , [ a ] the official religion of England continued to be "Catholicism without the Pope" until after his death in 1547.

[ 4 ] In some cases, an administrative region may sponsor and fund a set of religious denominations; such is the case in Alsace-Moselle in France under its local law , following the pre-1905 French concordatory legal system and patterns in Germany .

[ 5 ] State churches [ edit ] Westminster Abbey is responsible directly to the British monarch . The Church of England is the established church in England.

A state church (or "established church") is a state religion established by a state for use exclusively by that state. In the case of a state church , the state has absolute control over the church, but in the case of a state religion , the church is ruled by an exterior body; for example, in the case of Catholicism, the Vatican has control over the church.

Disestablishment [ edit ] Further information: Secular state Disestablishment is the process of repealing a church's status as an organ of the state. In a state where an established church is in place, opposition to such a move may be described as antidisestablishmentarianism .

Current states with a state religion [ edit ] Buddhism [ edit ] Governments where Buddhism , either a specific form of it, or Buddhism as a whole, has been established as an official religion: Bhutan : The Constitution of Bhutan defines Tibetan Buddhism as the "spiritual heritage of Bhutan". The Constitution is based on Buddhist philosophy .

[ 6 ] It also mandates that the Druk Gyalpo (King) should appoint the Je Khenpo and Dratshang Lhentshog (The Commission for Monastic Affairs).

[ 7 ] Cambodia : The Constitution declared Theravada Buddhism as the official religion of the country.

[ 8 ] About 98% of Cambodia's population is Buddhist.

[ 9 ] Myanmar : Section 361 of the Constitution states that "The Union recognizes the special position of Theravada Buddhism as the faith professed by the great majority of the citizens of the Union." [ 10 ] The 1961 State Religion Promotion and Support Act requires the government to teach Buddhist lessons in schools, to give priority to Buddhist monasteries in founding of primary schools, to make Uposatha days holidays during Vassa months, to broadcast Buddhist sermons by State media on Uposatha days, and otherwise promote and support  Buddhism as State Religion.

[ 11 ] Sri Lanka : The constitution of Sri Lanka states under Chapter II, Article 9, "The Republic of Sri Lanka declares Theravada Buddhism as the state religion and accordingly it shall be the duty of the Head of State and Head of Government to protect and foster the Buddha Sasana ".

[ 12 ] In some countries, Buddhism is not recognized as a state religion, but holds special status: Thailand : Article 67 of the Constitution of Thailand states: The State should support and protect Buddhism [...] In supporting and protecting Buddhism, [...] the State should promote and support education and dissemination of dharmic principles of Theravada Buddhism [...], and shall have measures and mechanisms to prevent Buddhism from being undermined in any form. The State should also encourage Buddhists to participate in implementing such measures or mechanisms.

[ 13 ] Laos : According to the Lao Constitution, Buddhism is given special privilege in the country. The state respects and protects all the lawful activities of Buddhism.

[ 14 ] Mongolia : The Emblem of Mongolia has multiple Tibetan Buddhist symbols, including a Wheel of Dharma , a lotus, and the Three Jewels . The Buddha's Birthday is also a public holiday in Mongolia . Moreover, the 100 tögrög coin depicts Janraisig Temple, a Tibetan Buddhist monastery, on its obverse.

Kalmykia ( Russia ): The Kalmyk local government supports Tibetan Buddhism and also encourages Buddhist teachings and traditions. It also builds various Buddhist temples and sites. Various efforts are taken by the Government for the revival of Tibetan Buddhism in the republic.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Christianity [ edit ] Main articles: Christian state , Christian republic , Christianity and politics , Christian democracy , Christian nationalism , and Christendom The following states recognize some form of Christianity as their state or official religion or recognize a special status for it (by denomination): Non-denominational Christianity [ edit ] Papua New Guinea : On 12 March 2025, Parliament voted to amend the Constitution of Papua New Guinea to include in its preamble the words "[We] acknowledge and declare God, the Father; Jesus Christ, the Son; and Holy Spirit, as our Creator and Sustainer of the entire universe and the source of our powers and authorities, delegated to the people and all persons within the geographical jurisdiction of Papua New Guinea." [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Samoa : In June 2017, Parliament voted to amend the wording of Article 1 of the constitution, thereby making Christianity the state religion. Part 1, Section (1)(3) reads "Samoa is a Christian nation founded on God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit." The status of the religion had previously only been mentioned in the preamble, which Prime Minister Tuilaepa Aiono Sailele Malielegaoi considered legally inadequate.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Zambia : The preamble to the Zambian Constitution of 1991 declares Zambia to be "a Christian nation", while also guaranteeing freedom of religion.

[ 22 ] Catholicism [ edit ] Jurisdictions where Catholicism has been established as a state or official religion: Costa Rica : Article 75 of the Constitution of Costa Rica confirms that "The Catholic and Apostolic Religion is the religion of the State, which contributes to its maintenance, without preventing the free exercise in the Republic of other forms of worship that are not opposed to universal morality or good customs." [ 23 ] Vatican City State : It is an elective , theocratic (or episcopal ), absolute monarchy ruled by the Pope , who is also the Vicar of Christ .

[ 24 ] The highest state functionaries are all Catholic clergy of various national origins. It is the sovereign territory of the Holy See ( Latin : Sancta Sedes ) and the location of the Pope's official residence, referred to as the Apostolic Palace .

Liechtenstein : The Constitution of Liechtenstein describes the Catholic Church as the state religion and enjoying "the full protection of the State". The constitution does however ensure that people of other faiths "shall be entitled to practice their creeds and to hold religious services to the extent consistent with morality and public order".

[ 25 ] Malta : Article 2 of the Constitution of Malta declares that "the religion of Malta is the Catholic and Apostolic Religion".

[ 26 ] Monaco : Article 9 of the Constitution of Monaco describes the "Catholic, and apostolic religion" as the religion of the state.

[ 27 ] Jurisdictions that give various degrees of recognition in their constitutions to Roman Catholicism without establishing it as the State religion: Andorra : The Constitution of Andorra allows the Roman Catholic Church to practice freely and openly, and keeps a special relationship between the Church and the government, based on tradition. It also recognizes the Church’s organizations as legal entities, according to their own rules.

[ 28 ] The government appoints the Roman Catholic Bishop of Urgell, based in Catalonia, Spain, as one of two heads of state, alongside the President of France. Following the revised Education Law of April 2022, the Constitution bans the use of conspicuous religious symbols in public schools and is an attempt to secularize public education.

[ 29 ] Argentina : Article 2 of the Constitution of Argentina explicitly states that the government supports the Roman Catholic Apostolic Faith, but the constitution does not establish a state religion.

[ 30 ] Before its 1994 amendment, the Constitution stated that the President of the Republic must be a Roman Catholic.

El Salvador : Although Article 3 of the Constitution of El Salvador states that "no restrictions shall be established that are based on differences of nationality, race, sex or religion", Article 26 states that the state recognizes the Catholic Church and gives it legal preference.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Guatemala : The Constitution of Guatemala recognises the juridical personality of the Catholic Church . Other churches, cults, entities, and associations of religious character will obtain the recognition of their juridical personality in accordance with the rules of their institution.

[ 33 ] Italy : The Constitution of Italy does not establish a state religion, but recognizes the state and the Catholic Church as "independent and sovereign, each within its own sphere".

[ 34 ] The Constitution additionally reserves to the Catholic faith singular position in regard to the organization of worship, as opposed to all other confessions.

[ 35 ] Panama : The Constitution of Panama recognizes Catholicism as "the religion of the majority" of citizens but does not designate it as the official state religion.

[ 36 ] Paraguay : The Constitution of Paraguay recognizes the Catholic Church's role in the nation's historical and cultural formation.

[ 37 ] Peru : The Constitution of Peru recognizes the Catholic Church as an important element in the historical , cultural , and moral formation of Peru and lends it its cooperation.

[ 38 ] Poland : The Constitution of Poland states that "The relations between the Republic of Poland and the Roman Catholic Church shall be determined by international treaty concluded with the Holy See, and by statute." [ 39 ] Spain : The Constitution of Spain of 1978 abolished Catholicism as the official state religion, while recognizing the role it plays in Spanish society.

[ 40 ] The State allocates the 0.7% of the personal income tax corresponding to taxpayers who express their will to support the Catholic Church.

[ 41 ] Timor-Leste : While the Constitution of Timor-Leste enshrines the principles of freedom of religion and separation of church and state in Section 45 Comma 1, it also acknowledges "the participation of the Catholic Church in the process of national liberation" in its preamble (although this has no legal value).

[ 42 ] Eastern Orthodoxy [ edit ] The jurisdictions below give various degrees of recognition in their constitutions to Eastern Orthodoxy , but without establishing it as the state religion: Greece : The Church of Greece is recognized by the Greek Constitution as the prevailing religion in Greece.

[ 43 ] However, this provision does not give exclusivity of worship to the Church of Greece, while all other religions are recognized as equal and may be practiced freely.

[ 44 ] Bulgaria : In the Bulgarian Constitution, Eastern Orthodoxy is recognized as "the traditional religion" of the Bulgarian people, but the state itself remains secular.

[ 45 ] Cyprus : The Constitution of Cyprus states: "The Autocephalous Greek-Orthodox Church of Cyprus shall continue to have the exclusive right of regulating and administering its own internal affairs and property in accordance with the Holy Canons and its Charter in force for the time being and the Greek Communal Chamber shall not act inconsistently with such right." [ 46 ] [ b ] Finland : Both the Finnish Orthodox Church and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland have judicial ties to the state.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Georgia : The Georgian Orthodox Church has a constitutional agreement with the state, the constitution recognizing "the special role of the Apostolic Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia in the history of Georgia and its independence from the state".

[ 49 ] (See also Concordat of 2002 ) Protestantism [ edit ] The following states recognize some form of Protestantism as their state or official religion: The Commonwealth [ edit ] Anglicanism [ edit ] The Anglican Church of England is the established church in England as well as all three of the Crown Dependencies : England : The Church of England is the established church in England, but not in the United Kingdom as a whole.

[ 50 ] It is the only established Anglican church worldwide. The Anglican Church in Wales , the Scottish Episcopal Church and the Church of Ireland are not established churches and they are independent of the Church of England. The British monarch is the titular Supreme Governor of the Church of England . The 26 most senior bishops in the Church of England are Lords Spiritual and have seats in the House of Lords of the Parliament of the United Kingdom .

Guernsey : The Church of England is the established church in the Bailiwick of Guernsey , and the leader of the Church of England in the territory is the Dean of Guernsey .

[ 51 ] Isle of Man : The Church of England is the established church on the Isle of Man. The Bishop of Sodor and Man is an ex officio member of the Legislative Council (the upper house of Tynwald ).

[ 52 ] Jersey : The Church of England is the established church in Jersey , and the leader of the church on the island is the Dean of Jersey , a non-voting member of the States of Jersey .

Calvinism [ edit ] Scotland : The Church of Scotland is the national church , but not of the United Kingdom as a whole.

[ 53 ] While it is the national church, it 'is not State controlled' and the monarch is not the 'supreme governor' as in the Church of England.

[ 53 ] Tuvalu : The Church of Tuvalu is the state religion, although in practice this merely entitles it to "the privilege of performing special services on major national events".

[ 54 ] The Constitution of Tuvalu guarantees freedom of religion, including the freedom to practice, the freedom to change religion, the right not to receive religious instruction at school or to attend religious ceremonies at school, and the right not to "take an oath or make an affirmation that is contrary to his religion or belief".

[ 55 ] Nordic countries [ edit ] Lutheranism [ edit ] Jurisdictions where a Lutheran church has been fully or partially established as a state recognized religion include the Nordic States .

Denmark : Section 4 of the Constitution of Denmark confirms the Church of Denmark as the established church.

[ 56 ] Faroe Islands : The Church of the Faroe Islands is the state church of the Faroe Islands , an autonomous administrative division within the Danish Realm .

[ 57 ] Greenland : The Church of Denmark is the state church of Greenland , an autonomous administrative division within the Danish Realm.

[ 58 ] Iceland : The Constitution of Iceland confirms the Church of Iceland as the state church of Iceland.

[ 59 ] Jurisdictions that give various degrees of recognition in their constitutions to Lutheranism without establishing it as the state religion: Finland : The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland has a special relationship with the Finnish state, its internal structure being described in a special law, the Church Act.

[ 47 ] The Church Act can be amended only by a decision of the synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church and subsequent ratification by the Parliament of Finland. The Church Act is protected by the Constitution of Finland and the state cannot change the Church Act without changing the constitution. The church has the power to tax its members. The state collects these taxes for the church, for a fee. On the other hand, the church is required to give a burial place for everyone in its graveyards.

[ 47 ] The President of Finland also decides the themes for intercession days. The church does not consider itself a state church, as the Finnish state does not have the power to influence its internal workings or its theology, although it has a veto in those changes of the internal structure which require changing the Church Act. Neither does the Finnish state accord any precedence to Lutherans or the Lutheran faith in its own acts.

Norway : Until 2012, the Church of Norway was not a separate legal entity from the government. It was disestablished and became a national church , a legally distinct entity from the state with special constitutional status. The King of Norway is required by the Constitution to be a member of the Church of Norway, and the church is regulated by special canon law, unlike other religions.

[ 60 ] Sweden : The Church of Sweden was the state church of Sweden between 1527 when King Gustav Vasa broke all ties with Rome and 2000 when the state officially became secular. Much like in Finland, it does have a special relation to the Swedish state unlike any other religious organizations. For example, there is a special law that regulates certain aspects of the church [ 61 ] and the members of the royal family are required to belong to it in order to have a claim to the line of succession. A majority of the population still belongs to the Church of Sweden.

[ 62 ] Other/mixed [ edit ] Armenia : The Armenian Orthodox Church has a constitutional agreement with the State : "The Republic of Armenia shall recognise the exclusive mission of the Armenian Orthodox Holy Church, as a national church, in the spiritual life of the Armenian people, in the development of their national culture and preservation of their national identity." [ 63 ] Dominican Republic : The constitution of the Dominican Republic specifies that there is no state church and provides for freedom of religion and belief. A concordat with the Holy See designates Catholicism as the official religion and extends special privileges to the Catholic Church not granted to other religious groups. These include the legal recognition of church law, use of public funds to underwrite some church expenses, and complete exoneration from customs duties.

[ 64 ] Haiti : While Catholicism has not been the state religion since 1987, a 19th-century concordat with the Holy See continues to confer preferential treatment to the Catholic Church , in the form of stipends for clergy and financial support to churches and religious schools. The Catholic Church also retains the right to appoint certain amounts of clergy in Haiti without the government's consent.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Hungary : The preamble to the Hungarian Constitution of 2011 describes Hungary as "part of Christian Europe" and acknowledges "the role of Christianity in preserving nationhood", while Article VII provides that "the State shall cooperate with the Churches for community goals." However, the constitution also guarantees freedom of religion and separation of church and state.

[ 67 ] Nicaragua : The Nicaraguan Constitution of 1987 states that the country has no official religion, but defines "Christian values" as one of the "principles of the Nicaraguan nation".

[ 68 ] Portugal : Although Church and State are formally separate, the Catholic Church in Portugal still receives certain privileges.

[ 69 ] Islam [ edit ] Many Muslim-majority countries have constitutionally established Islam, or a specific form of it, as a state religion.

Proselytism (converting people away from Islam) is often illegal in such states.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Afghanistan : Officially, Afghanistan has continuously been an Islamic state under various constitutions since at least 1987.

[ 74 ] Since 2021, the Taliban has made Sunni Islam according to the Hanafi school official, and has discriminated systematically against the Shia minority .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Algeria : "Islam shall be the religion of the State." [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Bangladesh : Article (2A) of the Constitution of Bangladesh declares: "The state religion of the Republic is Islam, but the State shall ensure equal status and equal right in the practice of the Hindu, Buddhist, Christian and other religions." [ 80 ] Bahrain : "The religion of the State is Islam." [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Brunei : Article 3 of the Constitution of Brunei : "The official religion of Brunei Darussalam shall be the Islamic Religion ..." [ 83 ] Djibouti : Article 1 of the Constitution of Djibouti : "Islam is the Religion of the State." [ 84 ] Egypt : Article 2 of the Egyptian Constitution of 2014 : "Islam is the religion of the State".

[ 85 ] Iran : Article 12 of the Constitution of Iran : "The official religion of Iran is Islam and the Twelver Ja'fari school [in usul al-Dîn and fiqh], and this principle will remain eternally immutable." [ 86 ] Islam has been Iran's state religion since 1501 dating back to the Safavid dynasty and has continued ever since, excluding the period of breaks in the Pahlavi dynasty .

Iraq : Article 2 of the Constitution of Iraq : "Islam is the official religion of the State and is a foundation source of legislation ..." [ 87 ] Jordan : Article 2 of the Constitution of Jordan : "Islam is the religion of the State and Arabic is its official language." [ 88 ] Kuwait : Article 2 of the Constitution of Kuwait : "The religion of the State is Islam and Islamic Law shall be a main source of legislation." [ 89 ] Libya : Article 1 of the Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration : "Islam is the Religion of the State and the principal source of legislation is Islamic Jurisprudence (Shari'a)." [ 90 ] Malaysia : Article 3 of the Federal Constitution of Malaysia : "Islam is the religion of the Federation; but other religions may be practised in peace and harmony in any part of the Federation." [ 91 ] Maldives : Article 10 of the Maldives's Constitution of 2008 : "The religion of the State of the Maldives is Islam. Islam shall be the[sic] one of the bases of all the laws of the Maldives." [ 92 ] Mauritania : Article 5 of the Constitution of Mauritania : "Islam is the religion of the people and of the State." [ 93 ] Morocco : Article 3 of the Constitution of Morocco : "Islam is the religion of the State, which guarantees to all the free exercise of beliefs [cultes]." [ 94 ] Oman : Article 2 of the Constitution of Oman : "The religion of the State is Islam and Islamic Sharia is the basis for legislation." [ 95 ] Pakistan : Article 2 of the Constitution of Pakistan : "Islam shall be the State religion of Pakistan." [ 96 ] Palestine : Article 4 of the Basic Law of the State of Palestine : "Islam is the official religion in Palestine. Respect and sanctity of all other heavenly religions shall be maintained." [ 97 ] Qatar : Article 1 of the Constitution of Qatar : "Qatar is an independent sovereign Arab State. Its religion is Islam and Shari'a law shall be a main source of its legislations." [ 98 ] Saudi Arabia : Article 1 of the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia : "The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a sovereign Arab Islamic State. Its religion is Islam." [ 99 ] Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic : Article 2 of the Constitution of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic declares that Islam is the state religion and law origin.

[ 100 ] Somalia : Article 2 of the Provisional Constitution of the Federal Republic of Somalia : "Islam is the religion of the State." [ 101 ] United Arab Emirates : Article 7 of the Constitution of the United Arab Emirates : "Islam shall be the official religion of the Union." [ 102 ] Yemen : Article 2 of the Constitution of Yemen : "Islam is the religion of the state, and Arabic is its official language." [ 103 ] Other/mixed [ edit ] In some countries, Islam is not recognized as a state religion, but holds special status: Syria : The 2025 Interim Constitution of Syria carries much of the same context of religion as prior constitutions, albeit with a slight wording change regarding the influence of Islamic jurisprudence on legislation. The new constitution however does not explicitly designate a State Religion in the same way as various other Middle Eastern countries do. Article 3 states "The religion of the President of the Republic is Islam; Islamic jurisprudence is the principal source of legislation.

[ 104 ] Tajikistan : Although there is a separation of religion from politics, certain aspects of law also privilege Islam. One such law declares "Islam to be a traditional religion of Tajikistan, with more rights and privileges given to Islamic organizations than to religious groups of non-Muslim origin".

[ 105 ] Tunisia : Article 5 of the Constitution declares that "Tunisia is part of the Muslim world , and the state alone must work to achieve the goals of pure Islam in preserving honourable life of religious freedom". Islam has been given special privileges by the Constitution, though it is no longer the state religion.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Turkmenistan : The Constitution claims to uphold a secular system in which religious and state institutions are separate. However, in Turkmenistan, the state actively privileges a form of traditional Islam. The culture, including Islam, is a key facet, contributes to the Turkmen national identity. The state encourages the conceptualization of "Turkmen Islam".

[ 108 ] Uzbekistan : Since independence, Islam has taken on an altogether new role in the nation-building process in Uzbekistan. The government affords Islam in special status and declared it as a national heritage and a moral guideline.

[ 109 ] Judaism [ edit ] See also: Jewish state Israel : Since the Proclamation of Israeli independence in 1948 , Israel is defined in several of its laws as a " Jewish and democratic state " ( medina yehudit ve-demokratit ). However, the term " Jewish " is a polyseme that can describe the Jewish people as either an ethnic or a religious group . The debate about the meaning of the term "Jewish" and its legal and social applications is one of the most profound issues with which Israeli society deals. The problem of the status of religion in Israel, even though it is relevant to all religions, usually refers to the status of Judaism in Israeli society. Thus, even though from a constitutional point of view Judaism is not the state religion in Israel, its status nevertheless determines relations between religion and state and the extent to which religion influences the political center.

[ 110 ] The Law of Return , passed on 5 July 1950, gives the global Jewish diaspora the right to relocate to Israel and acquire Israeli citizenship . Section - (1) of that law declares that "Every Jew has the right to come to this country as an Oleh "('immigrant'). In the Law of Return, the State of Israel gave effect to the Zionist movement 's "credo" which called for the establishment of Israel as a Sovereign Jewish state with Democratic setups, ideals and values.

[ 111 ] The State of Israel supports religious institutions, particularly Orthodox Jewish ones, and recognizes the "religious communities" as carried over from those recognized under the British Mandate—in turn derived from the pre-1917 Ottoman system of millets . These are Jewish and Christian ( Eastern Orthodox , Latin Catholic , Gregorian-Armenian , Armenian-Catholic , Syriac Catholic , Chaldean , Melkite Catholic , Maronite Catholic , and Syriac Orthodox ). The fact that the Muslim population was not defined as a religious community does not affect the rights of the Muslim community to practice their faith. At the end of the period covered by the 2009 U.S. International Religious Freedom Report, several of these denominations were pending official government recognition; however, the Government has allowed adherents of not officially recognized groups the freedom to practice. In 1961, legislation gave Muslim Shari'a courts exclusive jurisdiction in matters of personal status. Three additional religious communities have subsequently been recognized by Israeli law: the Druze (prior under Islamic jurisdiction), the Evangelical Episcopal Church, and followers of the Baháʼí Faith .

[ 112 ] Political religions [ edit ] In some countries, there is a political ideology sponsored by the government that may be called political religion .

[ 113 ] Multiple religion recognition [ edit ] China : The government of China officially espouses state atheism , [ 114 ] and officially recognizes only five religions: Buddhism , Taoism , Islam , Christianity ( Catholicism and Protestantism ).

[ 115 ] Despite limitations on certain forms of religious expression and assembly, religion is not banned, and religious freedom is nominally protected under the Chinese constitution. Among the general Chinese population there is a wide variety of religious practices.

[ 116 ] The Chinese government's attitude to religion is one of skepticism and non-promotion.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] France : The local law in Alsace-Moselle accords official status to four religions in this specific region of France: Judaism , Roman Catholicism , Lutheranism and Calvinism . The law is a remnant of the Napoleonic Concordat of 1801 , which was abrogated in the rest of France by the law of 1905 on the separation of church and state . However, at the time, Alsace-Moselle had been annexed by Germany . The Concordat, therefore, remained in force in these areas, and it was not abrogated when France regained control of the region in 1918. Therefore, the separation of church and state, part of the French concept of Laïcité , does not apply in this region.

[ 120 ] Indonesia is officially a presidential republic and a unitary state that does not declare or designate a state religion. Officially, the government recognizes six religions: Islam , Protestantism , Catholicism , Buddhism , Hinduism , and Confucianism , [ 121 ] as well as traditional and indigenous beliefs.

[ 122 ] Pancasila comes from the Jakarta Charter whose first article was changed from "Divinity, with the obligation to carry out Islamic law for its adherents" to "the One Divinity", to respect other religions. The Constitution of Indonesia guarantees freedom of religion and the practice of other religions and beliefs, including traditional animistic beliefs.

Atheism , although not prosecuted, is discouraged by the state ideology of Pancasila . In addition, the province of Aceh receives a special status and a higher degree of autonomy, in which it may enact laws ( qanuns ) based on the Sharia and enforce it to its Muslim residents.

Lebanon : There are 18 officially recognized religious groups in Lebanon, each with its own family law legislation and set of religious courts.

[ 123 ] Under the terms of an agreement known as the National Pact between the various political and religious leaders of Lebanon, the president of the country must be a Maronite , the Prime Minister must be a Sunni , the Speaker of Parliament must be a Shia , and the Deputy Prime Minister must be Greek Orthodox .

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] Luxembourg is a secular state, but the Grand Duchy recognizes and supports several denominations, including the Catholic Church , Greek Orthodox , Russian Orthodox , Romanian Orthodox , Serbian Orthodox , Anglican and some Protestantism denominations as well as to Jewish congregations.

[ 127 ] Nepal is a secular nation, and secularism in Nepal under the interim constitution (Part 1, Article 4) is defined as "religious and cultural freedom, along with the protection of religion and culture handed down from time immemorial". That is, "the state government is bound for protecting and fostering Hindu religion" while maintaining "religious" and "cultural" freedom throughout the nation as fundamental rights.

Russia : Though a secular state under the constitution, Russia is often said to have Russian Orthodoxy as the de facto national religion, despite other minorities: "The Russian Orthodox Church is de facto privileged religion of the state, claiming the right to decide which other religions or denominations are to be granted the right of registration".

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] Islam in Russia is recognized under the law and by Russian political leaders as one of Russia's traditional religions, Islam is a part of Russian historical heritage , and is subsidized by the Russian government.

[ 135 ] The position of Islam as a major Russian religion, alongside Orthodox Christianity , dates from the time of Catherine the Great , who sponsored Islamic clerics and scholarship through the Orenburg Assembly .

[ 136 ] Singapore is officially a secular country and does not have a state religion, and has been named in one study as the "most religiously diverse nation in the world", with no religious group forming a majority.

[ 137 ] However, the government gives official recognition to twelve different religions, namely Buddhism , Confucianism , Christianity , Islam , Hinduism , Taoism , Sikhism , Shintoism , Judaism , Zoroastrianism , Jainism , and the Baháʼí Faith , [ 138 ] and Singapore's penal code explicitly prohibits "wounding religious feelings". The Jehovah's Witnesses and Unification Church are also banned in Singapore, as the government deems them to be a threat to national security.

Switzerland is officially secular at the federal level but 24 of the 26 cantons support both the Swiss Reformed Church and the Roman Catholic Church in various ways.

Turkey : The Republic of Turkey is officially a secular country . None of the past and the latest constitutions recognizes an official religion nor promotes any.

[ 139 ] But; the Directorate of Religious Affairs , an official state institution established by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in 1924, [ 140 ] expresses opinions only on religious matters regarding Sunni institutions.

[ 141 ] The directorate regulates the operation of the country's hundreds of thousands of registered mosques and employs local and provincial imams (who are civil servants) who are appointed and paid by the state, [ 142 ] whilst other sects of Islam with a sizeable minority such as Alevism are not being regulated nor being funded by the directorate.

[ 143 ] In addition, the Treaty of Lausanne explicitly guarantees the security and protection of both Greek and Armenian Orthodox Christian minorities and the Turkish-Jews . Their religious institutions are recognized officially by the state.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] Vietnam is officially atheist [ 146 ] (although sometimes also referred as atheist-Buddhist), [ 147 ] [ 148 ] but recognizes only 38 religious organizations and one dharma practice.

[ 149 ] Former state religions [ edit ] See also: Secular state Roman religion and Christianity [ edit ] Main articles: Roman imperial cult and Christianity as the Roman state religion Catholic Christianity, as opposed to Arianism and other ideologies deemed heretical , was declared to be the state religion of the Roman Empire on 27 February 380 [ 150 ] by the decree De fide catolica of Emperor Theodosius I .

[ 151 ] Han dynasty Confucianism [ edit ] In China, the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE) advocated Confucianism as the de facto state religion, establishing tests based on Confucian texts as an entrance requirement into government service—although, in fact, the "Confucianism" advocated by the Han emperors may be more properly termed a sort of Confucian Legalism or "State Confucianism". This sort of Confucianism continued to be regarded by the emperors, with a few notable exceptions, as a form of state religion from this time until the collapse of the Chinese monarchy in 1912. Note, however, there is a debate over whether Confucianism (including Neo-Confucianism ) is a religion or purely a philosophical system.

[ 152 ] Yuan dynasty Buddhism [ edit ] During the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty of China (1271–1368 CE), Tibetan Buddhism was established as the de facto state religion by the Kublai Khan , the founder of the Yuan dynasty. The top-level department and government agency known as the Bureau of Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs (Xuanzheng Yuan) was set up in Khanbaliq (modern Beijing ) to supervise Buddhist monks throughout the empire. Since Kublai Khan only esteemed the Sakya sect of Tibetan Buddhism, other religions became less important. Before the end of the Yuan dynasty, 14 leaders of the Sakya sect had held the post of Imperial Preceptor (Dishi), thereby enjoying special power.

[ 153 ] Golden Horde and Ilkhanate [ edit ] The Mongol rulers Ghazan of Ilkhanate and Uzbeg of Golden Horde converted to Islam in 1295 CE because of the Muslim Mongol emir Nawruz and in 1313 CE because of Sufi Bukharan sayyid and sheikh Ibn Abdul Hamid respectively. Their official favoring of Islam as the state religion coincided with a marked attempt to bring the regime closer to the non-Mongol majority of the regions they ruled. In Ilkhanate, Christian and Jewish subjects lost their equal status with Muslims and again had to pay the poll tax; Buddhists had the starker choice of conversion or expulsion.

[ 154 ] Former state churches in British North America [ edit ] Main article: Separation of church and state in the United States § State churches in British North America prior to the Revolution Other states [ edit ] The State of Deseret was an unrecognised provisional state of the United States, proposed in 1849, by Mormon settlers in Salt Lake City . The provisional state existed for slightly over two years, but attempts to gain recognition by the United States government floundered for various reasons. The Utah Territory which was then founded was under Mormon control, and repeated attempts to gain statehood met resistance, in part due to concerns that the principle of separation of church and state conflicted with the practice of members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints placing their highest value on "following counsel" in virtually all matters relating to their church-centered lives. The state of Utah was eventually admitted to the union on 4 January 1896, after the various issues had been resolved.

[ 155 ] Kingdom of Hawaii : From 1862 to 1893 the Church of Hawaii , an Anglican body, was the official state and national church of the Kingdom of Hawaii .

Japanese Empire : see details in the State Shintō article.

Netherlands : Article 133 of the 1814 Constitution stipulated the Sovereign Prince should be a member of the Reformed Church ; this provision was dropped in the 1815 Constitution.

[ 156 ] The 1815 Constitution also provided for a state salary and pension for the priesthood of established religions at the time (Protestantism, Catholicism and Judaism). This settlement, nicknamed de zilveren koorde (the silver cord), was abolished in 1983.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] Nepal was the world's only Hindu state until 2015, when the new constitution declared it a secular state .

Proselytizing remains illegal.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Ottoman Empire : the Millet system ( Turkish: [millet] ; Ottoman Turkish : ملت ) was the independent court of law pertaining to "personal law" under which a confessional community (a group abiding by the laws of Muslim Sharia , Christian Canon law , or Jewish Halakha ) was allowed to rule itself under its own laws.

Spain : Spain was traditionally a Catholic confessional state with the exception of the 1st and 2nd Republics , and currently is a non-confessional state.

Sudan had Islam as the official religion during the rule of Omar al-Bashir according to the Constitution of Sudan of 2005.

[ 162 ] It was declared a secular state in September 2020.

[ 163 ] Tunisia : Article 5 of the Constitution declares that "Tunisia is part of the Muslim world , and the state alone must work to achieve the goals of pure Islam in preserving honorable life of religious freedom". Although Islam has been given special privileges by the Constitution, it is no longer the state religion.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Tokugawa shogunate sanctioned Buddhism and Confucianism as the state religions.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] Buddhism became an arm of the shogunate, and temples were used for population registration. Distinctive schools of Japanese Buddhism such as Zen , Pure Land , and Nichiren structured Japanese religious life until the 19th century.

[ 166 ] Confucian Zhu Xi 's teaching became a major intellectual force, and the Four Books became available to virtually every educated person.

[ 167 ] Established churches and former state churches [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "State religion" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Country Church Denomination Disestablished Anhalt Evangelical State Church of Anhalt United Protestant 1918 Armenia Armenian Apostolic Church Oriental Orthodox 1921 Austria Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1918 Baden 1918 United Evangelical Protestant State Church of Baden United Protestant Bavaria Roman Catholic Church Catholic Protestant State Church in the Kingdom of Bavaria right of the Rhine Lutheran and Reformed United Protestant Evangelical Christian Church of the Palatinate United Protestant Barbados Church of England Anglican 1968 Bolivia Roman Catholic Church Catholic 2009 Brazil [ c ] 1890 Brunswick Evangelical Lutheran State Church in Brunswick Lutheran 1918 Bulgaria Bulgarian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1946 Central African Empire Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1979 Chile 1925 Colombia 1936 [ 168 ] Cuba 1902 Cyprus Church of Cyprus Eastern Orthodox 1977 [ d ] Czechoslovakia Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1920 Denmark Church of Denmark Lutheran — El Salvador Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1983 England Church of England Anglican — Ethiopia Ethiopian Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox 1974 Faroe Islands Church of the Faroe Islands Lutheran Elevated from a diocese of the Church of Denmark in 2007 (the two remain in close cooperation).

Finland Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland 1867 Finnish Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1917 France Cult of Reason N/A 1794 (established 1793) Cult of the Supreme Being 1794 (banned in 1802) Roman Catholic Church [ e ] Catholic 1905 Georgia Georgian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1921 Greece Church of Greece The Church is recognized by the Greek Constitution as the "prevailing religion" in Greece.

[ 43 ] Greenland Church of Denmark Lutheran Under discussion to be elevated from the Diocese of Greenland in the Church of Denmark to a state church for Greenland, similar to the Faroese Church .

Guatemala Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1871 Haiti 1987 Hawaii Church of Hawaii Anglican 1893 Hesse Evangelical Church in Hesse United Protestant 1918 Honduras Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1982 Hungary [ f ] 1946 Iceland Lutheran Evangelical Church Lutheran — Ireland [ g ] Church of Ireland Anglican 1871 Italy Roman Catholic Church Catholic 18 February 1984 (effective per 25 April 1985) [ 175 ] Liechtenstein [ 25 ] — Lippe Church of Lippe Reformed 1918 Lithuania Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1940 Lübeck Evangelical Lutheran Church in the State of Lübeck Lutheran 1918 Luxembourg Roman Catholic Church Catholic Not an official state church.

[ 176 ] Malta — Mecklenburg-Schwerin Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Mecklenburg-Schwerin Lutheran 1918 Mecklenburg-Strelitz Mecklenburg-Strelitz State Church Mexico Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1857 (reestablished from 1864 to 1867) Monaco — Netherlands Dutch Reformed Church Reformed 1795 Nicaragua [ h ] Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1893 [ 177 ] North Macedonia Macedonian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1921 Norway Church of Norway Lutheran 2012 (effective per 1 January 2017) [ i ] Oldenburg Evangelical Lutheran Church of Oldenburg 1918 Panama Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1904 Paraguay 1992 [ 183 ] Peru 1993 Philippines [ j ] 1898 Poland [ k ] 1947 Portugal [ l ] 1910 and 1976 Prussia (pre-1866 provinces) Evangelical State Church of Prussia's older Provinces (nine ecclesiastical provinces) United Protestant 1918 Prussia ( Province of Hanover ) Evangelical Reformed State Church of the Province of Hanover Reformed Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Hanover Lutheran Prussia ( Province of Hesse-Nassau , partially) Evangelical State Church of Frankfurt upon Main United Protestant Evangelical Church of Electoral Hesse Evangelical State Church in Nassau Prussia ( Province of Schleswig-Holstein ) Evangelical Lutheran Church of Schleswig-Holstein Lutheran Romania Romanian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1947 Russia Russian Orthodox Church 1917 Saxony Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Saxony Lutheran 1918 Schaumburg-Lippe Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Schaumburg-Lippe Scotland [ 184 ] Church of Scotland Presbyterian "The Kirk" remains the national church, with state control disclaimed since 1638. Not an established faith per the Church of Scotland Act 1921 .

Serbia Serbian Orthodox Church Eastern Orthodox 1920 Spain Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1978 Sweden Church of Sweden Lutheran 2000 Thuringia Church bodies in principalities which merged in Thuringia in 1920 1918 Tuvalu Church of Tuvalu Reformed — Uruguay Roman Catholic Church Catholic 1918 (effective since 1919) United States [ m ] none since 1776, which was made explicit in the Bill of Rights in 1792 N/A N/A [ n ] Waldeck Evangelical State Church of Waldeck and Pyrmont United Protestant 1918 Wales [ o ] Church of England Anglican 1920 Württemberg Evangelical State Church in Württemberg Lutheran 1918 Former confessional states [ edit ] The list of former confessional states only includes states that abolished their state religion themselves, not states with a state religion that were conquered, fell apart or otherwise disappeared.

Buddhism [ edit ] Country Denomination Disestablished Laos Theravada Buddhism 1975 [ 189 ] Thailand (Siam) 1932 Tokugawa Shogunate Japanese Buddhism 1868 Hinduism [ edit ] Country Disestablished Nepal 2008 ( de facto ) [ 190 ] 2015 ( de jure ) [ 190 ] Islam [ edit ] Country Denomination Disestablished Sudan Sunni Islam 2020 [ 191 ] Tunisia 2022 [ 106 ] Turkey 1928 [ p ] Shinto [ edit ] Country Denomination Disestablished Japan State Shinto 1947 ( de facto ) [ 193 ] See also [ edit ] Constitutional references to God Blasphemy law Ceremonial deism Church tax Civil religion Confessional state Divine rule Elite religion Institutional theory List of national legal systems Major religious groups Nonsectarian Phyletism Religious education Religious law Religious toleration Religious intolerance Religious supremacism Secular religion Secularism Secularity Secularization Separation of church and state Sociology of religion State atheism Status of religious freedom by country Secular state Notes [ edit ] ^ The headship was administrative and jurisdictional but did not include the potestas ordinis (the right to preach, ordain, administer the sacraments and rites of the Church which were reserved to the clergy).

[ 3 ] ^ The Constitution also states that "Any matter relating to divorce, judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights or to family relations of the members of the Greek-Orthodox Church, shall be cognizable by family courts each of which is composed: For a divorce trial, of three judges, one of which is a lawyer ecclesiastical officer appointed by the Greek Orthodox Church and presides over the Court and the other two of high professional and moral standard belonging to the Greek Orthodox Church are appointed by the Supreme Court among lawyers. If no ecclesiastical officer is appointed as above, the Supreme Court appoints the President of the Court as well." [ 46 ] ^ Brazilian Laws – the Federal Constitution – The Organization of State . V-brazil.com. Retrieved 5 May 2012. Brazil had Roman Catholicism as the state religion from the country's independence in 1822, until the fall of the Brazilian Empire . The new Republican government passed in 1890, Decree 119-A "Decreto 119-A" .

Prohibits federal and state authorities to intervene on religion, granting freedom of religion.

(still in force), instituting the separation of church and state in Brazilian law.

Positivist thinker Demétrio Nunes Ribeiro [ pt ] urged the new government to adopt this stance. The 1891 Constitution, the first under the Republican system of government, abolished privileges for any specific religion, reaffirming the separation. This has been the case as stated in Article XIX of the 1988 Constitution of Brazil currently in force. The Preamble, however, does refer to "God's protection" over the document's promulgation , but this is not considered a legal endorsement of belief in any deity.

^ After the death of President and Ethnarch Makarios III .

^ In France, the Concordat of 1801 made the Roman Catholic, Calvinist , and Lutheran churches, along with Judaism , into state-sponsored religions until the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State .

^ In Hungary, the constitutional laws of 1848 declared five established churches of equal status: the Roman Catholic , Calvinist , Lutheran , Eastern Orthodox and Unitarian Church. In 1868, the law was ratified again after the Ausgleich and in 1895 Judaism was added as the sixth established faith. In 1948, every distinction between the different denominations was abolished.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] ^ In the Kingdom of Ireland , the Church of Ireland was established in the Reformation .

[ 171 ] The Act of Union 1800 created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , with the United Church of England and Ireland established outside Scotland. The Irish Church Act 1869 demerged and disestablished the Church of Ireland, [ 171 ] and the island was partitioned in 1922 . The Republic of Ireland's 1937 constitution prohibits any established religion.

[ 172 ] Originally, it recognized the "special position" of the Roman Catholic Church "as the guardian of the Faith professed by the great majority of the citizens ", and recognized "the Church of Ireland , the Presbyterian Church in Ireland , the Methodist Church in Ireland , the Religious Society of Friends in Ireland, as well as Jewish Congregations and the other religious denominations existing in Ireland at the date of the coming into operation of this Constitution".

[ 173 ] These provisions were deleted in 1973 .

[ 174 ] ^ Article 47 of the Political Constitution of 1893 provided that "no legislation may be passed establishing or protecting any religion or prohibiting its free exercise." While the Constitution was promulgated in 1893, Article 161 thereof provided that it would not take effect until July 11, 1894.

^ Since 2012, the Constitution of Norway does not name Lutheranism as the state religion, and in 2017 the Church became an independent legal entity.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] However, Article 16 says "The Church of Norway [...] will remain the National Church of Norway and will as such be supported by the State." [ 181 ] The separation was official on 1 January 2017.

[ 178 ] [ 182 ] ^ The Philippines was among several possessions ceded by Spain to the United States in 1898; religious freedom was subsequently guaranteed in the archipelago by the American colonial government. This was codified in the Philippine Organic Act (1902) , section 5: "...

That no law shall be made respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, and that the free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall forever be allowed." A similarly-worded provision still exists in the present Constitution , promulgated in 1987. While neither a state nor national church, the Catholic Church in the Philippines remains the predominant faith of the people, still wielding considerable political and cultural influence.

^ Article 25 of the constitution states: "1. Churches and other religious organizations shall have equal rights. 2. Public authorities in the Republic of Poland shall be impartial in matters of personal conviction". Article 114 of the Polish March Constitution of 1921 declared the Roman Catholic Church to hold "the principal position among religious denominations equal before the law" (in reference to the idea of first among equals ). This was continuously enforced by Article 81 of the April Constitution of 1935 . The Soviet -backed PKWN Manifesto of 1944 reapplied the March Constitution, which remained in force until it was replaced by the Small Constitution of 1947 .

^ Until the end of the monarchy in 1910, Roman Catholicism was considered the state religion. From the 1940s until the promulgation of official secularism in the Portuguese Constitution of 1976 , it was a powerful institution under the Estado Novo regime that had ended in the 1975 Carnation Revolution .

[ citation needed ] ^ The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution explicitly forbids the federal government from enacting any law respecting a religious establishment, and thus bans either designating an official church nationwide, or interfering with State and local official churches—which were common when the First Amendment was enacted. It did not prevent state governments from establishing official churches.

Connecticut continued to do so until it replaced its colonial Charter with the Connecticut Constitution of 1818 ; Massachusetts retained an establishment of religion in general until 1833.

[ 185 ] Until its substitution by Article of Amendment XI in 1834, Article III of the Massachusetts constitution's bill of rights provided, "...

the legislature shall, from time to time, authorize and require, the several towns, parishes, precincts, and other bodies politic, or religious societies, to make suitable provision, at their own expense, for the institution of the public worship of God, and for the support and maintenance of public Protestant teachers of piety, religion and morality, in all cases where such provision shall not be made voluntarily." [ 186 ] The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution , ratified in 1868, makes no mention of religious establishment, but forbids the states to "abridge the privileges or immunities" of U.S. citizens, or to "deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law". In the 1947 case of Everson v. Board of Education , the Supreme Court of the United States held that this later provision incorporates the First Amendment's Establishment Clause as applying to the States, and thereby prohibits state and local religious establishments. The exact boundaries of this prohibition are still disputed, and are a frequent source of cases raised to the Supreme Court — especially as the Court must now balance, on a state level, First Amendment prohibitions on government establishment of official religions with the First Amendment prohibitions on government interference with the free exercise of religion. See school prayer for such a controversy in contemporary American politics.

All current State constitutions do mention a Creator, but include guarantees of religious liberty parallel to the First Amendment . The constitutions of eight states ( Arkansas , Maryland , Mississippi , North Carolina , Pennsylvania , South Carolina , Tennessee , and Texas ) also contain clauses that forbid atheists from holding public office.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] However, these clauses were held by the Supreme Court to be unenforceable in the 1961 case of Torcaso v. Watkins , where the Court ruled unanimously that such clauses constituted a religious test incompatible with the religious test prohibition in Article 6 Section 3 of the Constitution.

The Anglican Church of Hawaii was the state church of the Kingdom of Hawaii from 1862 until the monarchy was overthrown in 1893, with the islands formally annexed by the United States in 1898.

^ Some state legislatures required all its citizens to be members of a church and some had official churches, such as Congregationalism in some New England states (e.g.

Massachusetts ). This eventually ended in 1833 when Massachusetts was the last state to disestablish its church. See Separation of church and state in the United States .

^ The Church in Wales was split from the Church of England in 1920 by Welsh Church Act 1914 , and at the same time becoming disestablished.

^ The Turkish Constitution of 1924 was amended for the first time on 10 April 1928, including removing inter alia Article 2 and the provision of "Religion of the Turkish state is Islam".

[ 192 ] References [ edit ] ^ The Journal of Ecclesiastical History . p. 268 by Cambridge University Press, Gale Group, C.W. Dugmore ^ Shiffrin, Steven H. (26 August 2012).

The Religious Left and Church-State Relations . Princeton University Press. pp.

160– 161.

ISBN 978-1-4008-3383-2 .

^ Bray, Gerald.

Documents of the English Reformation James Clarke & Cº (1994), p. 114 ^ Neill, Stephen.

Anglicanism Penguin (1960), p. 61 ^ The concerned religious communities are the dioceses of Metz and of Strasbourg , the Lutheran EPCAAL and the Reformed EPRAL and the three Israelite consistories in Colmar, Metz and Strasbourg.

^ "Background" .

The Constitution of the Kingdom of Bhutan . Archived from the original on 15 July 2010 . Retrieved 28 January 2021 .

^ "Draft of Tsa Thrim Chhenmo" (PDF) . constitution.bt. 1 August 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2007 . Retrieved 18 October 2007 .

Article 3, Spiritual Heritage Buddhism is the spiritual heritage of Bhutan, which promotes the principles and values of peace, non-violence, compassion and tolerance.

The Druk Gyalpo is the protector of all religions in Bhutan.

It shall be the responsibility of religious institutions and personalities to promote the spiritual heritage of the country while also ensuring that religion remains separate from politics in Bhutan. Religious institutions and personalities shall remain above politics.

The Druk Gyalpo shall, on the recommendation of the Five Lopon s, appoint a learned and respected monk ordained in accordance with the Druk-lu , blessed with the nine qualities of a spiritual master and accomplished in ked-dzog , as the Je Khenpo .

His Holiness the Je Khenpo shall, on the recommendation of the Dratshang Lhentshog , appoint monks blessed with the nine qualities of a spiritual master and accomplished in ked-dzog as the Five Lopon s.

The members of the Dratshang Lhentshog shall comprise: (a) The Je Khenpo as Chairman; (b) The Five Lopon s of the Zhung Dratshang ; and (c) The Secretary of the Dratshang Lhentshog who is a civil servant.

The Zhung Dratshang and Rabdeys shall continue to receive adequate funds and other facilities from the State.

"Bhutan's Constitution of 2008" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org/ . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Constitution of Cambodia" . cambodia.org . Retrieved 13 April 2011 .

(Article 43).

^ "Cambodia" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency. 24 November 2021.

^ "Constitution of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar (2008)" .

Constitutional Tribunal of the Union . Archived from the original on 3 February 2023.

^ "၁၉၆၁ ခုနှစ်၊ နိုင်ငံတော်ဘာသာသာသနာချီးမြှောက်ထောက်ပံ့ရေးအက်ဥပဒေ" [1961 year, State Religion Promotion and Support Act].

Constitutional Tribunal of the Union, Law Library . Archived from the original on 25 October 2022 . Retrieved 25 October 2022 .

^ "Sri Lanka" .

^ "Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand" (PDF) .

ConstitutionNet . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Lao People's Democratic Republic's Constitution of 1991 with Amendments through 2003" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

Article 9: The State respects and protects all lawful activities of Buddhists and of followers of other religions, [and] mobilises and encourages Buddhist monks and novices as well as the priests of other religions to participate in activities that are beneficial to the country and people.

^ Sinclair, Tara (2008).

"Tibetan Reform and the Kalmyk Revival of Buddhism" .

Inner Asia .

10 (2): 241– 259.

doi : 10.1163/000000008793066713 .

ISSN 1464-8172 .

JSTOR 23615096 .

^ "Buddhism in Russia: challenges and choices in the post-Soviet period" .

ResearchGate . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Kalmykia: Few complaints over Kalmykia's state support for Buddhism" .

english.religion.info . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "PARLIAMENT PASSES AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION TO DECLARE PNG'S CHRISTIAN IDENTITY; SECTION 45 PROTECTING FREEDOM TO PRACTISE OTHER FAITHS REMAINS INTACT" .

Department of Prime Minister and National Executive Council . 11 April 2025 . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

^ "PNG parliament passes bill declaring god as 'creator and sustainer of the entire universe' " .

ABC Pacific . 13 March 2025 . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

^ Wyeth, Grant (16 June 2017).

"Samoa Officially Becomes a Christian State" .

The Diplomat .

^ Feagaimaaliʻi-Luamanu, Joyetter (8 June 2017).

"Constitutional Amendment Passes; Samoa Officially Becomes 'Christian State' " . Pacific Islands Report. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2017 .

^ Constitution of Zambia . Retrieved 19 October 2016.

^ "Costa Rica Constitution in English – Constitutional Law – Costa Rica Legal Topics" .

costaricalaw.com . Archived from the original on 6 September 2015.

^ "Vatican City" . Catholic-Pages.com. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2013 .

^ a b Constitution Religion at the Wayback Machine (archived 26 March 2009) (archived from the original on 2009-03-26).

^ "Constitution of Malta (Article 2)" . mjha.gov.mt.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Constitution de la Principaute at the Wayback Machine (archived 27 September 2011) (French): Art. 9., Principaute De Monaco: Ministère d'Etat (archived from the original on 2011-09-27).

^ Temperman, Jeroen (2010).

State–Religion Relationships and Human Rights Law: Towards a Right to Religiously Neutral Governance . Brill.

ISBN 978-9004181496 .

... guarantees the Roman Catholic Church free and public exercise of its activities and the preservation of the relations of special co-operation with the state in accordance with the Andorran tradition. The Constitution recognizes the full legal capacity of the bodies of the Roman Catholic Church which have legal status in accordance with their own rules.

^ "Andorra" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 26 April 2025 .

^ "Argentina's Constitution of 1853, Reinstated in 1983, with Amendments through 1994" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org .

"Argentina – Religión" .

argentina.gob.ar . Archived from the original on 8 October 2014.

^ "Google Translate" . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ "Constitution of the Republic of El Salvador (as Amended to 2003)" (PDF) . 3 January 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 January 2015.

^ "Guatemala's Constitution of 1985 with Amendments through 1993" (PDF) .

Constitution Project .

The juridical personality of the Catholic Church is recognized. The other churches, cults, entities, and associations of religious character will obtain the recognition of their juridical personality in accordance with the rules of their institution[,] and the Government may not deny it[,] aside from reasons of public order. The State will extend to the Catholic Church, without any cost, [the] titles of ownership of the real assets which it holds peacefully for its own purposes, as long as they have formed part of the patrimony of the Catholic Church in the past. The property assigned to third parties or those ^ "Constitution of the Italian Republic" (PDF) . Senato.it . Retrieved 6 June 2021 .

The State and the Catholic Church are independent and sovereign, each within its own sphere. Their relations are regulated by the Lateran pacts. Amendments to such Pacts which are accepted by both parties shall not require the procedure of constitutional amendments.

^ "Constitution of the Italian Republic" (PDF) . Senato.it . Retrieved 6 June 2021 .

All religious denominations are equally free before the law. Denominations other than Catholicism have the right to self-organisation according to their own statutes, provided these do not conflict with Italian law. Their relations with the State are regulated by law, based on agreements with their respective representatives.

^ Executive Summary – Panama , 2013 Report on International Religious Freedom , United States Department of State.

^ "Constitution of the Republic of Paraguay" .

The role played by the Catholic Church in the historical and cultural formation of the Republic is hereby recognized.

^ "Constitution of the Republic of Peru" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2015 . Retrieved 28 October 2009 .

Within an independent and autonomous system, the State recognizes the Catholic Church as an important element in the historical, cultural, and moral formation of Peru and lends it its cooperation. The State respects other denominations and may establish forms of collaboration with them.

^ "The Constitution of the Republic of Poland" . 2 April 1997.

The relations between the Republic of Poland and the Roman Catholic Church shall be determined by international treaty concluded with the Holy See, and by statute. The relations between the Republic of Poland and other churches and religious organizations shall be determined by statutes adopted pursuant to agreements concluded between their appropriate representatives and the Council of Ministers.

^ Constitución española (PDF) . BOE. Vol. 311. 29 December 1978. art, 14, 16 & 27.3.

BOE-A-1978-31229 . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

No religion shall have a state character. The public authorities shall take into account the religious beliefs of Spanish society and shall consequently maintain appropriate cooperation relations with the Catholic Church and other confessions.

^ "Renta 2023: ¿En qué consiste la casilla de la iglesia y la de fines sociales?" .

^ "Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste" (PDF) . Governo de Timor-Leste.

^ a b "Constitution of Greece" .

www.hri.org . Section II Relations of Church and State: Article 3 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "Constitution of Greece" .

www.hri.org . Part Two Individual and Social Rights: Article 13 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "The Bulgarian Constitution" . Parliament of Bulgaria . Retrieved 20 December 2011 .

^ a b "Cyprus's Constitution of 1960 with Amendments through 2013" (PDF) .

Constitution Project .

^ a b c Tschentscher, Axel Tschentscher.

"Finland Constitution" .

International Constitutional Law (ICL) . Section 76, The Church Act . Retrieved 2 April 2024 .

^ Salla Korpela (May 2005).

"The Church in Finland today" . Finland Promotion Board; Produced by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Department for Communications and Culture.

^ Constitution of Georgia Article 9 (1&2) and 73 (1a 1 ) ^ "The History of the Church of England" . The Archbishops' Council of the Church of England. Archived from the original on 21 February 2010 . Retrieved 24 May 2006 .

^ "About" .

Guernsey Deanery . Church of England.

^ Gell, Sir James.

"Gell on Manx Church" .

Isle of Man Online . IOM Online . Retrieved 7 February 2017 .

^ a b "Our structure" .

The Church of Scotland . 22 February 2010 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Refugees, United Nations High Commissioner for.

"Refworld – 2010 Report on International Religious Freedom – Tuvalu" . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ Constitution of Tuvalu, article 23.

^ "Denmark Constitution" .

www.servat.unibe.ch . Section 4, State Church . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Juergensmeyer, Mark; Roof, Wade Clark (2011).

Encyclopedia of Global Religion . Sage Publications. p. 390.

ISBN 978-1-4522-6656-5 .

^ "Constitution of Denmark – Section IV" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .

The Evangelical Lutheran Church shall be the Established Church of Denmark, and, as such, it shall be supported by the State.

^ "Constitution of the Republic of Iceland" .

www.government.is . Article 62 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "International Humanist and Ethical Union – State and Church move towards greater separation in Norway" . 26 June 2012 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ Riksdagsförvaltningen.

"Lag (1998:1591) om Svenska kyrkan Svensk författningssamling 1998:1998:1591 t.o.m. SFS 2009:1234 – Riksdagen" .

www.riksdagen.se (in Swedish) . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ Riksdagsförvaltningen.

"Successionsordning (1810:0926); Svensk författningssamling 1810:1810:0926 – Riksdagen" .

www.riksdagen.se (in Swedish) . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ "National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia" .

parliament.am .

^ "2011 Report on International Religious Freedom – Dominican Republic" .

Refworld . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "Haiti" . State.gov. 14 September 2007 . Retrieved 4 January 2014 .

^ "International Religious Freedom Report for 2015" . US State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Hungary's Constitution of 2011 . Retrieved 9 February 2016.

^ "Nicaragua's Constitution of 1987 with Amendments through 2014" (PDF) . Constitute Project . Retrieved 21 July 2022 .

^ "Concordat Watch – Portugal | Concordat (2004) : text" .

concordatwatch.eu .

^ "Saudi Arabia imposes death sentence for Bible smuggling" .

deathpenaltynews . 30 November 2014.

^ "Saudi Arabia's New Law Imposes Death Sentence for Bible Smugglers?" .

The Christian Post . 18 December 2014 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Saidi Arabia Imposes Death Sentence for Bible Smuggling" . Archived from the original on 8 April 2016 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Sheen J.

Freedom of Religion and Belief: A World Report.

(Routledge, 1997) p. 452.

^ "The Constitution of Afghanistan" (PDF) . Afghanistan. 1987. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2009 . Retrieved 30 July 2009 .

^ "Afghanistan Country focus" (PDF) .

European Union Agency for Asylum . January 2022 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ Kawa, Amin (18 December 2023).

"Taliban's Opposition to Islamic Sects; Nadeem: "All Afghans Are Followers of the Hanafi Denomination" " .

Hasht e Subh Daily . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ Siddique, Abubakar; Khosrow, Mansour (17 July 2023).

"Afghanistan's Shi'ite Minority Suffers 'Systematic Discrimination' Under Taliban Rule" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ Article 2 of the Algerian Constitution of 2016 ^ "Avant Projet de Revision de la Constitution" (PDF) .

ConstitutionNet (in French). 28 December 2015.

^ "The Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh | 2A. The state religion" .

bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ Article 2 of the Constitution of Bahrain : ^ "Bahrain's Constitution of 2002 with Amendments through 2012" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Brunei Darussalam's Constitution of 1959 with Amendments through 2006" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . 6 June 2017.

^ "Djibouti's Constitution of 1992 with Amendments through 2010" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . 6 June 2017.

^ Unofficial translation of the 2014 constitution ^ "Iran (Islamic Republic of)'s Constitution of 1979 with Amendments through 1989" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Iraqi Constitution" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 November 2016.

^ "The Constitution of The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan" . 1 January 1952. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013 . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Kuwait's Constitution of 1962, Reinstated in 1992" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Draft Constitutional Charter For the Transitional Stage" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Federal Constitution Incorporating all amendments up to P.U.(A) 164/2009" (PDF) . Laws of Malaysia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2017 . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Maldives's Constitution of 2008" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Mauritania's Constitution of 1991 with Amendments through 2012" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Morocco Draft Text of the Constitution Adopted at the Referendum of 1 July 2011" (PDF) .

ConstitutionNet . Buffalo, New York: William S. Hein & Co., Inc. 2011.

^ "Oman's Constitution of 1996 with Amendments through 2011" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Part I: "Introductory" " . Pakistani.org . Retrieved 4 June 2013 .

^ "Palestine Basic Law" .

www.mideastweb.org . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "The Constitution" . Archived from the original on 24 October 2004 . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Basic Law of Governance" .

The Embassy of The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia . Retrieved 2 April 2024 .

^ Shelley, Toby (2004).

Endgame in the Western Sahara: What Future for Africa's Last Colony . Zed Books. p. 174.

ISBN 978-1-84277-341-3 .

^ "The Federal Republic of Somalia Provisional Constitution" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "United Arab Emirates's Constitution of 1971 with Amendments through 2004" (PDF) .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "The Constitution of the Republic of Yemen As amended on 20 February 2001" (PDF) .

ConstitutionNet . Retrieved 29 October 2017 .

^ "Constitutional Declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic" .

Syrian Arab News Agency . Retrieved 13 March 2025 .

^ "Tajikistan: New Law on Religious Organizations" .

Library of Congress .

^ a b c "Why Tunisia abandoning Islam as a state religion?" .

GR . 24 June 2022.

^ a b "Factbox: What's in Tunisia's new constitution?" .

Reuters . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ "Religion and the Secular State in Turkmenistan - Silk Road Paper" .

Institute for Security and Development Policy .

^ Ohlsson, Henrik (12 December 2011).

"Islam and Secular State in Uzbekistan: State Control of Religion and its Implications for the Understanding of Secularity" .

Cahiers d'Asie centrale ( 19– 20): 485– 493 – via journals.openedition.org.

^ Trouble in Utopia: The Overburdened Polity of Israel , by Dan Horowitz and Moshe Lissak, pp. 51–52 ^ International Commission of Jurists https://www.icj.org › 2013/06PDF
The Law of Return, 5710-1950 1. Right of "aliya" Every Jew has the ...

^ "Israel and the occupied territories" . U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. 29 October 2009. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Gentile, Emilio (2006) [2001].

Le religioni della politica. Fra democrazie e totalitarismi [ Politics as Religion ]. Princeton University Press.

^ Dillon, Michael (2001).

Religious Minorities and China . Minority Rights Group International.

^ Rowan Callick.

Party Time: Who Runs China and How . Black Inc, 2013. p. 112 ^ a b French, Howard (3 March 2007).

"Religious surge in once-atheist China surprises leaders" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

^ "A surprising map of where the world's atheists live" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

^ "Party's secret directives on how to eradicate religion and ensure the victory of atheism" . Asian News . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

^ "China announces "civilizing" atheism drive in Tibet" .

BBC News . 12 January 1999 . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

^ "Church-state tie opens door for mosque" .

The New York Times . 7 October 2008 . Retrieved 2 November 2013 .

^ "Religion in Indonesia | Indonesia Investments" .

www.indonesia-investments.com . Retrieved 16 February 2023 .

^ "Kemendikbud serahkan KTP Penghayat Kepercayaan di Festival Budaya Solo" .

www.antaranews.com (in Indonesian). 18 July 2023 . Retrieved 23 March 2024 .

^ "Women in Personal Status Laws". Retrieved 26 March 2013.

^ R. Rabil (2011).

Religion, National Identity, and Confessional Politics in Lebanon: The Challenge of Islamism . Palgrave Macmillan US.

ISBN 978-0-230-33925-5 .

^ "Lebanon: New Mikati Government Faces Challenges" .

Congressional Research Service .

^ "Joseph Aoun: Lebanon's fifth army general-turned-president" .

en.majalla.com . Retrieved 19 February 2025 .

^ Jeroen Temperman (2010).

State-Religion Relationships and Human Rights Law: Towards a Right to Religiously Neutral Governance . Brill.

ISBN 978-9004181489 .

^ Bourdeaux, Michael (2003).

"Trends in Religious Policy" .

Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia . Taylor and Francis. pp.

46– 52.

ISBN 978-1857431377 .

^ "Russia's De-Facto State Religion" .

The Christian Post . 24 April 2008.

^ "Russian Orthodoxy now de facto state religion" .

The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles . 24 April 2008.

^ "The Russian Orthodox Church: from farce to tragedy?" .

openDemocracy . 3 May 2012.

^ Bennett, Brian P. (2011).

Religion and Language in Post-Soviet Russia .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1136736131 .

the Russian Orthodox Church has become de facto state Church ^ Gentleman, Amelia (7 January 2001).

"Backlash of faith shakes atheists" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 8 June 2023.

'It is only natural there has been a surge in interest in religion over the past decade, given the repression that went before,' Levinson said. 'But we are particularly concerned about the growing influence of the Russian Orthodox Church – which has become the de facto state religion – to the exclusion of all other convictions.' ^ "At Expense of All Others, Putin Picks a Church" .

The New York Times . 24 April 2008.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2023.

Just as the government has tightened control over political life, so, too, has it intruded in matters of faith. The Kremlin's surrogates in many areas have turned the Russian Orthodox Church into a de facto official religion ^ Bell, I (2002).

Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-85743-137-7 . Retrieved 27 December 2007 .

^ Azamatov, Danil D. (1998), "The Muftis of the Orenburg Spiritual Assembly in the 18th and 19th Centuries: The Struggle for Power in Russia's Muslim Institution", in Anke von Kugelgen; Michael Kemper; Allen J. Frank, Muslim culture in Russia and Central Asia from the 18th to the early 20th centuries, vol. 2: Inter-Regional and Inter-Ethnic Relations, Berlin: Klaus Schwarz Verlag, pp. 355–384, ^ Fisher, Max (15 April 2014).

"This map of the world's most religiously diverse countries may surprise you" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2023.

^ "Inter-Religious Organisation, Singapore" .

iro.sg .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2023.

^ "Turkish Constitution | Anayasa Mahkemesi" .

www.anayasa.gov.tr .

^ "Kurumsal" .

^ "Turkey may have reclaimed the leadership of Sunni Islam from Saudi Arabia" .

Middle East Monitor . 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 June 2021 .

^ "2008 Report on International Religious Freedom – Afghanistan" . United States Department of State. 19 September 2008 . Retrieved 2 July 2009 .

^ Akdemir, Ayşegül (31 December 2014).

"Alevis and the JDP: from cautious or neutral relations to open conflict" .

Eurasian Journal of Anthropology .

5 (2). Istanbul University: 63– 77.

ISSN 2166-7411 . Retrieved 29 August 2024 .

^ Burnett, Maria; Pulzetti, Maria; Young, Sean (11 December 2004).

"Turkey's Compliance with Its Obligations to the Ecumenical Patriachate and Orthodox Christian Minority" (PDF) . Yale Law School . Retrieved 29 August 2024 .

^ Committee of Ministers (10 August 1994).

THE SITUATION OF REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES IN EUROPE (Report). Council of Europe . Retrieved 29 August 2024 .

^ "9. Marxist-Leninist 'Scientific Atheism' as the Science of Religion" , Marxist-Leninist 'Scientific Atheism' and the Study of Religion and Atheism in the USSR , De Gruyter, pp.

359– 384, 31 December 1983, doi : 10.1515/9783110838589.359 , ISBN 978-3-11-083858-9 , retrieved 29 January 2021 ^ "Buddhism in Vietnam: An Education in Enlightenment" . 23 July 2015.

^ "Spiritual Guide: Religion in Vietnam" .

www.anywhere.com . 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2023 .

^ "Vietnam" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 27 January 2021 .

^ "The Theodosian Code" .

The Latin Library at Ad Fontes Academy . Ad Fontes Academy . Retrieved 23 November 2006 .

^ Halsall, Paul (June 1997).

"Theodosian Code XVI.i.2" .

Medieval Sourcebook: Banning of Other Religions . Fordham University. Archived from the original on 27 February 2007 . Retrieved 23 November 2006 .

^ "Sources on Confucian religiosity" .

^ History of civilizations of Central Asia.: A.D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century . Part two: The achievements, p. 59 ^ Medieval Persia 1040–1797 , David Morgan p. 72 ^ Struggle For Statehood Archived 10 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine Edward Leo Lyman , Utah History Encyclopedia ^ "Artikel 133: Vorst belijdt de christelijke hervormde Godsdienst – Nederlandse grondwet" . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ "Artikel 194: Traktementen, pensioenen en andere inkomsten – Nederlandse grondwet" . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ "Info" .

rug.nl .

^ "wetten.nl – Regeling – Wet beëindiging financiële verhouding tussen Staat en Kerk – BWBR0003640" . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ "Nepal Adopts New Constitution, Becomes a Secular State: 5 Facts" .

NDTV . 20 September 2015.

^ "The Constitution of Nepal" (PDF) .

wipo.int . 20 September 2015.

^ Constitution of Sudan , Article 5, paragraph 1 .

^ "Sudan ends 30 years of Islamic law by separating religion, state" .

gulfnews.com . 6 September 2020.

^ Yamagishi, Keiko (2016). Ferrari, Silvio; Cristofori, Rinaldo (eds.).

Law and Religion, An Overview . Vol. 1.

Routledge . p. 458.

ISBN 978-1-4094-3600-3 .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

The Tokugawa Shogunate had sanctioned Buddhism as a state religion.

^ Calabresi, Steven Gow (2021).

The History and Growth of Judicial Review . Vol. 2.

Oxford University Press . p. 116.

ISBN 9780190075750 .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

Confucianism, with its emphasis on harmony, was the prevailing "state religion", although it coexisted with Shintoism, a religion that worshipped nature gods and that was personified by the emperor.

^ Tucci, Giuseppe .

"Buddhism § Korea and Japan" .

britannica.com .

Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

^ Tu, Weiming .

"Confucianism § The Confucian revival" .

britannica.com .

Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

^ John Gunter, Inside Latin America (1941), p. 166 ^ Constitution of the Republic of Hungary at the Wayback Machine (archived 20 February 2008) (archived from the original on 2008-02-20) ^ The right of thought, the freedom of conscience and religion at the Wayback Machine (archived 23 May 2007) (archived from the original on 2007-05-23) ^ a b Livingstone, E.A.; Sparks, M. W. D.; Peacocke, R.W. (2013).

"Ireland" .

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 286.

ISBN 978-0199659623 .

^ "Constitution of Ireland" .

Irish Statute Book . Article 44 . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .

^ Keogh, Dermot; McCarthy, Andrew (1 January 2007).

The Making of the Irish Constitution 1937: Bunreacht Na HÉireann . Mercier Press. p. 172.

ISBN 978-1856355612 .

^ "Fifth Amendment of the Constitution Act, 1972" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .

^ Andrea Mammone; Giuseppe A. Veltri (2010).

Italy today: the sick man of Europe . Taylor & Francis. p.

168 (Note 1).

ISBN 978-0415561594 .

^ "Luxembourg" (PDF) .

^ "Constitución Política de Nicaragua 1893" .

www.enriquebolanos.org . Retrieved 15 February 2025 .

^ a b Offisielt frå statsrådet 27. mai 2016 regjeringen.no «Sanksjon av Stortingets vedtak 18. mai 2016 til lov om endringer i kirkeloven (omdanning av Den norske kirke til eget rettssubjekt m.m.) Lovvedtak 56 (2015–2016) Lov nr. 17 Delt ikraftsetting av lov 27. mai 2016 om endringer i kirkeloven (omdanning av Den norske kirke til eget rettssubjekt m.m.). Loven trer i kraft fra 1. januar 2017 med unntak av romertall I § 3 nr. 8 første og fjerde ledd, § 3 nr. 10 annet punktum og § 5 femte ledd, som trer i kraft 1. juli 2016.» ^ Rasmussen, Tarald; Bangstad, Sindre; Jacobsen, Knut A.; Groth, Bente (23 April 2018).

"religion i Norge" – via Store norske leksikon.

^ "2017 – et kirkehistorisk merkeår" .

Den norske kirke, Kirkerådet . 30 December 2017 . Retrieved 2 January 2017 .

^ The Constitution of Norway, Article 16 (English translation, published by the Norwegian Parliament) ^ Lovvedtak 56 (2015–2016) Vedtak til lov om endringer i kirkeloven (omdanning av Den norske kirke til eget rettssubjekt m.m.) Stortinget.no ^ Under the 1967 Constitution, Roman Catholicism was the state religion as stated in Article 6: "The Roman Catholic Apostolic religion is the state religion, without prejudice to religious freedom, which is guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. Official relations of the republic with the Holy See shall be governed by concordats or other bilateral agreements." The 1992 Constitution, which replaced the 1967 one, establishes Paraguay as a secular state, as mentioned in section (1) of Article 24: "Freedom of religion, worship, and ideology is recognized without any restrictions other than those established in this Constitution and the law. The State has no official religion." ^ The modern Church of Scotland has always disclaimed recognition as an "established" church while remaining the national church. The Church of Scotland Act 1921 formally recognised the Kirk's independence from the state.

^ James H. Hutson (2000).

Religion and the new republic: faith in the founding of America . Rowman & Littlefield. p.

22 .

ISBN 978-0847694341 .

^ "Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts" .

malegislature.gov . Retrieved 29 August 2024 .

^ "State Constitutions that Discriminate Against Atheists" . godlessgeeks.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2006 . Retrieved 27 April 2007 .

^ "Religious laws and religious bigotry – Religious discrimination in U.S. state constitutions" . religioustolerance.com . Retrieved 27 April 2007 .

^ "Laos Constitution 1947/1949" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 30 April 2022 .

^ a b ANP (15 September 2015).

"Nepal scheidt hindoe en staat" [Nepal separates Hindu and state].

Trouw (in Dutch) . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ Michael Atit (4 September 2020).

"Sudan's Government Agrees to Separate Religion and State" .

Voice of America . Retrieved 8 September 2020 .

^ beykent.edu.tr, TC Anayasaları, 1921, 1924, 1961 ve 1982 Anayasalarını karşılaştırılması Archived 24 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine (in Turkish) ^ "sjintô".

Encarta Encyclopedie Winkler Prins (in Dutch). Microsoft Corporation/Het Spectrum. 2002.

Further reading [ edit ] Rowlands, John Henry Lewis (1989).

Church, State, and Society, 1827–1845: the Attitudes of John Keble, Richard Hurrell Froude, and John Henry Newman . Worthing, Eng.: P. Smith [of] Churchman Publishing; Folkestone, Eng.: distr.

... by Bailey Book Distribution.

ISBN 1850931321 External links [ edit ] Professor Andreas TAKIS: "A State Religion Is Problematic for Both Church and State" — Caucasian Journal , 09.09.2024.

McConnell, Michael W. (April 2003).

"Establishment and Disestablishment at the Founding, Part I: Establishment of Religion" .

William and Mary Law Review .

44 (5): 2105. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.

v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Religion in politics General concepts Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism and Freemasonry Caesaropapism Civil religion Clericalism Clerical fascism Confessionalism Constitutional references to God Divine law Divine rule Engaged Spirituality Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Freedom of religion Humanism Identity politics Organized secularism Political religion Religious anarchism Religious anti-Masonry Religious anti-Zionism Religious communism Religious humanism Religious law Religious nationalism Religious pacifism Religion and peacebuilding Religious police Religious rejection of politics Religious segregation Religious separatism Religious socialism Religious views on same-sex marriage Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Secular religion Separation of church and state Spiritual left State atheism State religion Theocracy Theonomy Christianity and politics Blaine Amendment Christian anarchism Christian anti-communism Christian anti-Masonry Papal ban Christian anti-Zionism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christian environmentalism Evangelical environmentalism Christian fascism German Christians (movement) National Catholicism Positive Christianity Protestant Reich Church Christian feminism Mormon feminism Christian humanism Christian law Christian left Evangelical left Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian pacifism Christian peacemaking Christian reconstructionism Christian republic Christian right Christian socialism In Utah Christian state Christian Zionism Cisalpinism Dominion Theology Febronianism Gallicanism Liberation theology Maronite politics Phoenicianism Papal state Pillarisation Political Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the state In Argentina Sphere sovereignty Subsidiarity Temporal power Theodemocracy Ultramontanism Neo-ultramontanism Islam and politics Hui pan-nationalism Human Rights in Islam Imamate Islamic anarchism Islamic anti-Masonry Islamic anti-Zionism Islamic democracy Islamic fascism Islamic feminism Sharia law by country In Pakistan In South Asia Islamic pacifism Islamic republic Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic Zionism Islamism Criticism Islamization Khilafat Petro-Islam Political quietism Taliban Talibanization Two-nation theory Judaism and politics Halachic state Jewish anarchism Jewish anti-Zionism Haredim Jewish Autonomism Jewish democracy Jewish fascism Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Jewish feminism Jewish law Jewish left Jewish pacifism Jewish political movements Jewish right Jewish secularism Jewish socialism Bundism Poale Zion Zionism Religious World Agudath Israel Hinduism and politics Akhand Bharat Hindu feminism Gandhism Hindu law Hindu modernism Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Rashtra Panun Kashmir Bangabhumi Hindu revolution Hindu revivalism Hindu environmentalism Integral humanism Indigenous Aryans Rama Rajya Saffronisation Shuddhi Uniform civil code Buddhism and politics Buddhist anti-communism Buddhist feminism Buddhist law Buddhist modernism Buddhist nationalism 969 Movement Nichirenism Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Secular Buddhism Other American civil religion Disestablishmentarianism Imperial cult Ancient Rome Gottgläubig Khalistan movement Neopaganist feminism Religious aspects of Nazism Cult of personality State Shinto v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_religion&oldid=1305168190 " Categories : Religion and politics Separation of church and state Religious discrimination Religious nationalism Religious policy Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from April 2024 Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text Pages with Turkish IPA Articles containing Ottoman Turkish (1500-1928)-language text Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 13:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents State religion 77 languages Add topic

