Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Awards and recognition 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Epoch (American magazine) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American literary magazine For the Russian magazine, see Epoch (Russian magazine) .

Epoch The cover of an Epoch magazine edition Editor Michael Koch Categories Literary magazine Frequency Triannual Publisher Cornell University Founded 1947 ; 78 years ago ( 1947 ) Country United States Based in Ithaca, New York Language English Website www .epoch .cornell .edu ISSN 0145-1391 Epoch is a triannual American literary magazine founded in 1947 and published by Cornell University . It has published well-known authors and award-winning work including stories reprinted in The Best American Short Stories series and poems later included in The Best American Poetry series .

[ 1 ] It publishes fiction, poetry, essays, graphic art, and sometimes cartoons and screenplays, but no literary criticism or book reviews .

[ 1 ] Epoch is staffed by faculty and graduate students from the English Department creative writing program, and edited by Michael Koch.

Epoch appears in September, January, and May, with issues generally running 128 to 160 pages.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The magazine was established in 1947 [ 2 ] by Baxter Hathaway, who arrived at Cornell University the year before to start a creative writing program. Initially, the magazine was a literary quarterly staffed by the English department.

[ 1 ] A story from the magazine's first volume was reprinted in Best American Short Stories and all of the fiction from that volume was cited in the anthology. In the 1950s and 1960s, Epoch featured the first published fiction of Thomas Pynchon and Don DeLillo , and early stories by Philip Roth , Stanley Elkin , and Joyce Carol Oates .

[ 1 ] Some other poets and writers who have appeared in the magazine are Jacob M. Appel , [ 3 ] Annie Dillard , Rick DeMarinis , [ 4 ] Jayne Anne Phillips , Ron Hansen , Andre Dubus , Amy Hempel , Lee K. Abbott , Charles Simic , Leslie Scalapino , Harriet Doerr , Denis Johnson , Ron Hansen , [ 5 ] John L'Heureux , Jorie Graham , Micah Perks , and Rick Bass .

[ 6 ] Awards and recognition [ edit ] The magazine claims that "all" the major anthologies have reproduced its work, including Best American Essays , The Pushcart Prize: Best of the Small Presses , Prize Stories: The O. Henry Awards , Editor's Choice Awards , Best of the West , and New Stories from the South.

[ 1 ] The periodical also won the first O. Henry Award for best magazine of 1997.

[ 6 ] Some stories from Epoch that have been reprinted in anthologies had been picked out of the slush pile by MFA students.

[ 6 ] According to the Cornell Chronicle , Shannon Ravenel, editor of the anthology New Stories from the South: The Year's Best , said of Epoch , "It's the best. [...] Epoch is just consistently excellent." [ 6 ] C. Michael Curtis, a senior editor at The Atlantic Monthly , said he considers Epoch "one of the top literary magazines in the country in terms of the consistent quality of the writing that appears there." Curtis worked on the magazine staff as a graduate student from 1959 to 1963.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Epoch magazine Web page , Retrieved February 5, 2007 Archived December 9, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Top 50 Literary Magazine" .

EWR . Retrieved August 17, 2015 .

^ Volume 64, No 3, 2015 ^ Volume 62, No 1, 2013 ^ Volume 55, No. 2, 2006 ^ a b c d e Epoch Harmon, Joshua, "Epoch's anniversary will be celebrated by noted alumni from its pages", article in The Cornell Chronicle , September 25, 1997, Retrieved February 5, 2007 External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epoch_(American_magazine)&oldid=1280549630 " Categories : 1947 establishments in New York (state) Cornell University publications Literary magazines published in the United States Magazines established in 1947 Magazines published in New York (state) Triannual magazines published in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epoch (American magazine) Add languages Add topic

