Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Genesis 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 Associated features 2.2 Wall cloud vs. shelf cloud 3 Supercell and tornado significance 4 Other usages of the term 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wall cloud 10 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Latviešu Lombard Polski Português Simple English کوردی Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cloud formation occurring at the base of a thunderstorm This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wall cloud" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Wall cloud ( Murus ) A rain-free base with a wall cloud lowering in the foreground and precipitation in the background. Taken in Needmore, Texas .

Abbreviation Cb mur.

Symbol Genus Cumulonimbus ( heap, rain ) Species Calvus Capillatus Variety None Altitude 500-16,000 m (2,000-52,000 ft) Classification Family C (Low-level) Appearance A dark cloud feature that protrudes from the base of a cumulonimbus more popularly known as a wall cloud.

Precipitation Very common nearby, but not under : Rain , Snow , Snow pellets or Hail , heavy at times A wall cloud ( murus [ 1 ] or pedestal cloud ) is a large, localized, persistent, and often abrupt lowering of cloud that develops beneath the surrounding base of a cumulonimbus cloud and from which tornadoes sometimes form.

[ 2 ] It is typically beneath the rain-free base (RFB) [ 3 ] portion of a thunderstorm , and indicates the area of the strongest updraft within a storm. Rotating wall clouds are an indication of a mesocyclone in a thunderstorm; most strong tornadoes form from these. Many wall clouds do rotate; however, some do not.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Genesis [ edit ] Position of Wall cloud under a supercell storm.

Wall clouds are formed by a process known as entrainment , when an inflow of warm, moist air rises and converges , overpowering wet, rain -cooled air from the normally downwind downdraft . As the warm air continues to entrain the cooler air, the air temperature drops, and the dew point increases (thus the dew point depression decreases). As this air continues to rise, it becomes more saturated with moisture, which results in additional cloud condensation , sometimes in the form of a wall cloud. Wall clouds may form as a descending of the cloud base or may form as rising scud comes together and connects to the storm's cloud base.

Structure [ edit ] Wall clouds can be anywhere from a fraction of 1 mi (1.6 km) wide to over 5 mi (8 km) across. Wall clouds form in the inflow region, on the side of the storm coinciding with the direction of the steering winds (deep layer winds through the height of the storm). In the Northern Hemisphere wall clouds typically form at the south or southwest end of a supercell. This is in the rear of the supercell near the main updraft and most supercells move in a direction with northeasterly components, for supercells forming in northwest flow situations and moving southeastward, the wall cloud may be found on the northwest or back side of such storms. Rotating wall clouds are visual evidence of a mesocyclone.

Associated features [ edit ] A wall cloud with tail cloud .

Some wall clouds have a feature similar to an "eye", as in a mesoscale convective vortex .

Attached to many wall clouds, especially in moist environments, is a cauda [ 6 ] ( tail cloud ), a tail-like band of cloud extending from the wall cloud toward the precipitation core.

[ 7 ] It can be thought of as an extension of the wall cloud in that the tail cloud is connected to the wall cloud and condensation forms for a similar reason.

[ citation needed ] Cloud elements may be seen to be moving into the wall cloud, as it is also an inflow feature.

[ 7 ] Most movement is horizontal, but some rising motion is also often apparent at the junction between the tail cloud and the wall cloud.

[ 7 ] Some wall clouds also have a band of cloud fragments encircling the top of the wall cloud where it meets the ambient cloud base; this feature is a collar cloud .

[ 8 ] Another accessory cloud is the flumen , commonly known as the beaver's tail .

[ 6 ] It is formed by the warm, humid inflow of a strong thunderstorm, and is often mistaken for tornadoes.

[ 6 ] Although the presence of a flumen is associated with tornado risk, [ citation needed ] the flumen does not rotate.

[ 6 ] Wall cloud vs. shelf cloud [ edit ] A shelf cloud over Enschede , Netherlands Many storms contain shelf clouds , which are often mistaken for wall clouds since an approaching shelf cloud appears to form a wall made of clouds and may contain turbulent motions.

[ 5 ] Wall clouds are inflow clouds and tend to slope inward, or toward the precipitation area of a storm. Shelf clouds, on the other hand, are outflow clouds that jut outward from the storm, often as gust fronts . Also, shelf clouds tend to move outward away from the precipitation area of a storm.

Shelf clouds most often appear on the leading edge of a thunderstorm as they are formed by condensation from the cool outflow of the storm that lifts warmer air in the ambient environment (at the outflow boundary ). When present in a supercell thunderstorm these shelf clouds on the leading edge of a storm are associated with the forward flank downdraft (FFD). Shelf clouds in supercells also form with the rear flank downdraft (RFD), although these tend to be more transitory and smaller than shelf clouds on the forward side of a storm.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] A wall cloud will usually be at the rear of the storm, though small, rotating wall clouds (a feature of a mesovortex ) can occur within the leading edge (typically of a quasi-linear convective system (QLCS) or squall line ) on rare occasion.

[ 5 ] Supercell and tornado significance [ edit ] A schematic of classic supercell features. See also: LP and HP supercells A tornadic wall cloud with RFD clear slot .

The wall cloud feature was first identified by Ted Fujita and as associated with tornadoes in tornadic storms following a detailed site investigation of the 1957 Fargo tornado .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In the special case of a supercell thunderstorm, but also occasionally with intense multicellular thunderstorms such as the QLCS above, the wall cloud will often be seen to be rotating. A rotating wall cloud is the area of the thunderstorm that is most likely to produce tornadoes, and the vast majority of intense tornadoes.

Tornadogenesis is most likely when the wall cloud is persistent with rapid ascent and rotation. The wall cloud typically precedes tornadogenesis by ten to twenty minutes but may be as little as one minute or more than an hour. Often, the degree of ascent and rotation increase markedly shortly before tornadogenesis, and sometimes the wall cloud will descend and "bulk" or "tighten". Tornadic wall clouds tend to have strong, persistent, and warm inflow air. This should be sensible at the surface if one is in the inflow region; in the Northern Hemisphere, this is typically to the south and southeast of the wall cloud. Large tornadoes tend to come from larger, lower-wall clouds closer to the back of the rain curtain (providing less visual warning time to those in the path of an organized storm).

Although it is rotating wall clouds that contain most strong tornadoes, many rotating wall clouds do not produce tornadoes. Absent the co-position of a low-level boundary with an updraft, tornadoes very rarely occur without a sufficiently buoyant rear flank downdraft (RFD), which usually manifests itself visually as a drying out of clouds, called a clear slot or notch . The RFD initiates the tornado, occludes around the mesocyclone, and when it wraps completely around, cuts off the inflow causing death of the low-level mesocyclone (or "tornado cyclone") and tornadolysis. Therefore, in most cases, the RFD is responsible for both the birth and the death of a tornado.

Usually, but not always, the dry slot occlusion is visible (assuming one's line of sight is not blocked by precipitation) throughout the tornado life cycle. The wall cloud withers and will often be gone by the time the tornado dissipates. If conditions are favorable, then, often even before the original tornado lifts, another wall cloud and occasionally a new tornado may form downwind of the old wall cloud, typically to the east or the southeast in the Northern Hemisphere (east or northeast in the Southern Hemisphere). This process is known as cyclic tornadogenesis and the resulting series of tornadoes as a tornado family .

The rotation of wall clouds is usually cyclonic ; anticyclonic wall clouds may occur with anti-mesocyclones or with mesovortices on the leading edge of a QLCS (Again, this relationship is reversed in the Southern Hemisphere).

[ 13 ] Other usages of the term [ edit ] The dense cumulonimbus cloud cover of the eyewall of an intense tropical cyclone may also be referred to as a wall cloud or eyewall cloud.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Lifted condensation level (LCL) References [ edit ] ^ Sutherland, Scott (March 23, 2017).

"Cloud Atlas joins the digital age while adding a dozen new cloud types" .

The Weather Network . Pelmorex Media . Retrieved 13 August 2025 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "Definition of Wall Cloud" .

A Comprehensive Glossary of Weather . Retrieved 2013-01-21 .

^ Branick, Mike L. (1996).

NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS SR-145: A Comprehensive Glossary of Weather Terms for Storm Spotters . National Weather Service.

OCLC 39732655 .

^ Branick, Mike L. (1996).

NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS SR-145: A Comprehensive Glossary of Weather Terms for Storm Spotters . National Weather Service.

OCLC 39732655 .

^ a b c Chance Hayes, National Weather Service Wichita, Kansas. "Storm Fury on the Plains." Storm Spotter Training. 4H Building, Salina, Kansas. 22 Feb. 2010. Lecture.

^ a b c d Sutherland, Scott (March 23, 2017).

"Cloud Atlas leaps into 21st century with 12 new cloud types" .

The Weather Network . Pelmorex Media. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 24 March 2017 .

^ a b c "Cauda | International Cloud Atlas" . July 20, 2021. Archived from the original on 2021-07-20.

^ Branick, Michael L. (1996).

NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS SR-145: A Comprehensive Glossary of Weather Terms for Storm Spotters . National Weather Service.

OCLC 39732655 .

^ Drummond, David.

"Advanced Module" .

Skywarn Storm Spotter Guides . Archived from the original on 2004-01-11 . Retrieved 2014-06-01 .

^ "The Tornado" .

Thunderstorms and Severe Weather . the University of Texas. 29 Jun 1998 . Retrieved 2014-06-01 .

^ Fujita, T.

(1959).

"A detailed analysis of the Fargo tornadoes of June 20, 1957" .

U.S. Wea. Bur. Res. Paper 42 : 15.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2024.

^ Forbes, Gregory S.

; H.B. Bluestein (2001).

"Tornadoes, Tornadic Thunderstorms, and Photogrammetry: A Review of the Contributions by T. T. Fujita" .

Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc .

82 (1): 73– 96.

Bibcode : 2001BAMS...82...73F .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0477(2001)082<0073:TTTAPA>2.3.CO;2 .

^ Stull, Roland B. (2000).

Meteorology for Scientists and Engineers (2nd ed.). Thomson Learning.

ISBN 9780534372149 .

^ "Glossary of NHC Terms" . National Hurricane Center . Retrieved 2014-06-01 .

Wall clouds ( University of Illinois ) Lemon, Leslie R.

; C. A. Doswell (1979).

"Severe Thunderstorm Evolution and Mesocyclone Structure as Related to Tornadogenesis" .

Mon. Wea. Rev .

107 (9): 1184– 97.

Bibcode : 1979MWRv..107.1184L .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0493(1979)107<1184:STEAMS>2.0.CO;2 .

Atkins, Nolan T.

; E. M. Glidden; T. M. Nicholson (2014).

"Observations of Wall Cloud Formation in Supercell Thunderstorms during VORTEX2" .

Mon. Wea. Rev .

142 (12): 4823– 38.

Bibcode : 2014MWRv..142.4823A .

doi : 10.1175/MWR-D-14-00125.1 .

Markowski, Paul ; Yvette Richardson; M. Kumjian; A. Anderson-Frey; G. Jimenez; B. Katona; A. Klees; R. Schrom; Dana Tobin (2015).

"Comments on "Observations of Wall Cloud Formation in Supercell Thunderstorms during VORTEX2" " .

Mon. Wea. Rev .

143 (10): 4278– 81.

Bibcode : 2015MWRv..143.4278M .

doi : 10.1175/MWR-D-15-0126.1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wall clouds .

"Wall cloud" .

Glossary of Meteorology . AMS.

v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wall_cloud&oldid=1305750974 " Categories : Accessory clouds Cumulus Severe weather and convection Tornadogenesis Microscale meteorology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 22:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wall cloud 10 languages Add topic

