Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Jean Goujon 21 languages Беларуская Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Magyar مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French sculptor For the French cyclist, see Jean Goujon (cyclist) .

Jean Goujon Statue of Jean Goujon by Bernard Seurre , located on the exterior of the Louvre Born c. 1510 probably Normandy Died c. 1565, ~55 years old probably Bologna Nationality French Known for sculptor, architect Notable work Fountain of the Innocents , Caryatids of the Louvre Jean Goujon ( c.

1510 – c.

1565 ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was a French Renaissance sculptor and architect.

Biography [ edit ] His early life is little known; he was probably born in Normandy and may have traveled in Italy.  He worked at the church of Saint-Maclou, his earliest documented work, [ 3 ] and the Rouen Cathedral , in 1541-42, where he executed the monument to Louis de Brézé, seigneur d'Anet , before arriving in Paris, where he collaborated with the architect Pierre Lescot at the church of Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois about 1544, working on the pulpit, which was dismantled in the mid-eighteenth century.

[ 4 ] In 1544-1547 he was occupied with considerable works at the Château d’Ecouen for the connétable de Montmorency . He became "sculptor to the king" ( Henry II of France ) in 1547 and in the next years was occupied at the Château of Anet . He was then imprisoned at Ecouen in 1555.

[ 5 ] His most famous works are the sculptural decorations made in collaboration with Lescot for the western extension of the Louvre , 1555-62.  A fine representative of Mannerism in France, Goujon's figures are elongated, sensual and fluid; his drapery work reveals knowledge of Greek sculpture, though certainly not at first hand.  He is also responsible for engravings for Jean Martin's 1547 translation of Vitruvius and for work on the Château of Ecouen , for the Montmorency family.  In 1562, Goujon left France for religious reasons (he was a Huguenot ).

The purity and gracefulness of his style were disseminated throughout France by engravings by artists of the School of Fontainebleau and had an influence in the decorative arts.  His reputation was slightly eclipsed at the end of the century by more mannered tendencies, but was appreciated by French Classicism .

Goujon was a Protestant; he escaped the French Wars of Religion by exiling himself in Italy in 1562. He probably died in Bologna , where he is last documented in 1563 as a member of a group of Huguenot refugees.

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] His most famous works include: Fountain of the Innocents (1547–1550) - Goujon sculpted the six nymphs that decorate this public fountain designed by Pierre Lescot .  The fountain is currently located - in a much truncated form - in the Les Halles section of Paris ; original bas-reliefs are located at the Louvre Caryatids (1550–1551) - for the musician's platform in the Louvre , these are highly reminiscent of the Erechtheum in Athens .

Allegories on the facade of the Louvre (1549-155) - these are found in the Cour Carrée (or "square courtyard") of the Louvre The Four Seasons ( illustrations ) made for the courtyard façade of the hôtel of Jacques de Ligeris, now housing the Musée Carnavalet , Paris.

To Goujon is usually attributed the engravings of the French version of Francesco Colonna 's Songe de Poliphile (1546), based on the engravings of the original edition (which may be due to the studio of Mantegna ).

The famous Fountain of Diana (Diana with a Stag) (c. 1549) Louvre , designed for Diane de Poitiers for the Château d'Anet , was long believed to be by Goujon or his workshop. It is now thought more likely to have been the work of Germain Pilon .

[ 6 ] Gallery [ edit ] Stone reliefs of nymphs from the Fontaine des Innocents Caryatides , Salle des Caryatides at the Louvre (1550–51) Allegory of War , central pediment of the Lescot Wing of the Louvre The Four Seasons (c.1547) Musée Carnavalet, Paris See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jean Goujon .

French art French sculpture References [ edit ] ^ a b Thirion, Jacques (1996). "Goujon, Jean" in The Dictionary of Art , edited by Jane Turner; vol. 13, pp. 225–227. London: Macmillan. Reprinted 1998 with minor corrections: ISBN 9781884446009 .

^ A. de Montaiglon, documentary articles in Gazette des Beaux-Arts , 30 (1884), pp. 377-394, and 31 (1885), pp. 5-21, noted by Stein 1890:6, states Goujon died after 1572.

^ Goujon executed two columns beneath the organs, and bas-reliefs on doors.

^ Goujon's bas-reliefs are conserved at the Musée du Louvre .

^ The attribution to Goujon of the Maison de Diane de Poitiers (bearing the date 1554) at Ecouen was made by Henri Stein, 1890, based on the document that placed Goujon at Ecouen, imprisoned under orders of the bailli of 27 September 1555 ^ Blunt, Anthony ; Beresford, Richard (1999).

Art and Architecture in France, 1500–1700 , 5th edition, pp. 80–81. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300077483 .

External links [ edit ] "Goujon, Jean" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 282.

Works by Jean Goujon at the Art Renewal Center Imago Mundi: Jean Goujon Henri Stein, "Jean Goujon et la maison de Diane de Poitiers à Écouen", Annales de la Société historique et archéologique du Gâtinais 7 (1889), Paris 1890 Lister, Reginald , "Jean Goujon : his life and work" (1903) London: Duckworth Jean Goujon in American public collections, on the French Sculpture Census website v t e The Louvre and Tuileries Musée du Louvre Branch museums The Louvre-Lens The Louvre Abu Dhabi Palais du Louvre Sections in detail Louvre Castle Lescot Wing Pavillon du Roi Petite Galerie of the Louvre Grande Galerie Pavillon de Flore Cour Carrée Pavillon de l'Horloge Galerie d'Apollon Salon Carré Pavillon de Marsan Louvre Colonnade Napoleon III's Louvre expansion Escalier Daru Grand Louvre Louvre Pyramid Carrousel du Louvre Louvre Inverted Pyramid Architects Raymond du Temple Pierre Lescot Pierre II Chambiges Louis Métezeau Jacques Androuet II Du Cerceau Jacques Lemercier Louis Le Vau François d'Orbay Claude Perrault Ange-Jacques Gabriel Jacques-Germain Soufflot Maximilien Brebion Auguste Cheval de Saint-Hubert Jean-Arnaud Raymond Charles Percier Pierre-François-Léonard Fontaine Félix Louis Jacques Duban Louis-Tullius-Joachim Visconti Hector-Martin Lefuel Edmond Jean Baptiste Guillaume Gaston Redon Victor-Auguste Blavette Camille Lefèvre Albert Ferran I. M. Pei Palais des Tuileries Sections in detail Pavillon de Flore Pavillon de Marsan Théâtre des Tuileries Architects Philibert de l'Orme Jean Bullant Louis Le Vau Jardin des Tuileries Sections in detail Musée de l'Orangerie Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume Architects André Le Nôtre ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Museum of Modern Art People Trove Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean_Goujon&oldid=1164471557 " Categories : 1510s births Architects from Rouen French architectural sculptors 16th-century French sculptors 16th-century French architects French male sculptors 16th-century deaths Huguenots Calvinist and Reformed artists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 9 July 2023, at 10:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean Goujon 21 languages Add topic

