Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Launch 2 Taken offline 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents PubMed Central Canada 2 languages العربية Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian national digital repository PubMed Central Canada ( PMC Canada ) was a Canadian national digital repository of peer-reviewed health and life sciences literature.

[ 1 ] It operated from 2010 to 2018. It joined Europe PubMed Central (formerly UK PubMed Central) as a member of the PubMed Central International network.

[ 2 ] PMC Canada was a partnership between the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Canada Institute for Scientific and Technical Information (NRC-CISTI, the Canadian National Science Library), and the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM).

[ 3 ] PMC Canada included an interface in both English and French, to support the use of Canada's two official languages.  PubMed Central Canada provided free access to content, and was one of the locations where CIHR researchers could deposit their peer-reviewed research articles, in order to meet with the open-access requirements of the CIHR Policy on Access to Research Outputs.

[ 4 ] Launch [ edit ] The initial version of PubMed Central Canada launched in October 2009.  The launch was timed to coincide with Open Access Week.  The full launch of PMC Canada, including a manuscript submission system for CIHR researchers, was April 28, 2010.

[ 5 ] Taken offline [ edit ] On February 23, 2018, PubMed Central Canada (PMC Canada) was taken offline permanently.

[ 6 ] No author manuscripts were deleted, and the approximately 2,900 manuscripts authored by researchers funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) in the archive were copied to the National Research Council 's Digital Repository over the coming months. These manuscripts along with all other content will also remain publicly searchable on PubMed Central and Europe PubMed Central , meaning such manuscripts will continue to be compliant with the Tri-Agency Open Access Policy on Publications.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ PubMed Central Canada.

"About PubMed Central Canada" . Archived from the original on 2012-06-03 . Retrieved 2012-07-25 .

^ "PMC International" .

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine .

^ Fogelman, M (Jan–Feb 2010).

"Pubmed Central® Canada is Launched" .

NLM Tech Bull (372): e1 . Retrieved 2012-08-29 .

^ Government of Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research (15 August 2006).

"CIHR Policy on Access to Research Outputs - CIHR" . Cihr-irsc.gc.ca . Retrieved 2012-08-29 .

^ Government of Canada, National Research Council (2010-04-28).

"Canada joins international network providing free access to health research" . Retrieved 2021-04-29 .

^ "PubMed Central Canada taken offline in February 2018" .

Canadian Institutes of Health Research . 18 December 2017 . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ Tri-Agency Open Access Policy on Publications .

External links [ edit ] Official website CIHR and CISTI: Developing a Canadian PMC Repository (PDF) - presentation by Geoff Hynes to CHLA 2008 HLWIKI International: PubMed Central Canada (PMCC) v t e Open access History Timeline Concepts Gratis versus libre Subscription business model Subscribe to Open Paywall Copyright transfer agreement Academic journal Scientific journal Manuscript Preprint Postprint Article processing charge Predatory publishing Statements Budapest Open Access Initiative Berlin Declaration Bethesda Statement DORA Durham Statement Geneva Declaration NIH Public Access Policy Research Works Act Strategies Self-archiving Open-access mandate Open-access repository Hybrid open-access journal Delayed open-access journal Projects and organizations The Cost of Knowledge Creative Commons Directory of Open Access Books [ ca ; es ] Directory of Open Access Journals Initiative for Open Citations Open Access Scholarly Publishing Association OpenAIRE Open Archives Initiative Open Knowledge Foundation Open Society Foundations Plan S Public Library of Science Public Knowledge Project Registry of Open Access Repositories Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition SciELO Sci-Hub By country Australia Austria Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Greece Hungary India Republic of Ireland Italy Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Spain Sweden Ukraine Other Access to Knowledge movement Access2Research List of open-access journals Open content Open data Open education Open government Open hardware Open knowledge Open science Open source Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=PubMed_Central_Canada&oldid=1249684587 " Categories : Internet properties established in 2010 Internet properties disestablished in 2018 2010 establishments in Canada 2018 disestablishments in Canada Medical research organizations Biological databases Bibliographic databases and indexes Open-access archives Full-text scholarly online databases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 October 2024, at 08:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents PubMed Central Canada 2 languages Add topic

