Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Contributions to electrostatics 3 Legacy 4 Works 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Euler 14 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Português Română Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 18th-century Swiss mathematician and astronomer Johann Euler Born ( 1734-11-27 ) 27 November 1734 St. Petersburg , Russian Empire Died 17 September 1800 (1800-09-17) (aged 65) St. Petersburg , Russian Empire Father Leonhard Euler Johann Albrecht Euler (27 November 1734 [ 1 ] – 17 September 1800) was a Swiss-Russian astronomer and mathematician who made contributions to electrostatics . The eldest son of the renowned mathematician Leonhard Euler , he served as professor of physics at the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Saint Petersburg and later as secretary of conferences overseeing the Academy's correspondence. His work Disquisitio de Causa Physica Electricitatis represented one of the earliest attempts to mathematize electrical theory through a mechanical framework based on compressible, elastic aether .

Biography [ edit ] Also known as Johann Albert Euler or John-Albert Euler , Johann Albrecht Euler was the first child born to the great Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), who had emigrated (for the first time) to Saint-Petersburg on 17 May 1727. His mother was Katharina Gsell (1707–1773) whose maternal grandmother was the famous scientific illustrator Maria Sibylla Merian (1647–1717). Katharina married Leonhard Euler on 7 January 1734, and Johann Albert would be the eldest of their 13 children (only 5 of whom survived childhood).

[ 1 ] He spent his youth in Berlin from 1741 to 1766, after which he returned to Russia and was appointed Professor of Physics at the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Saint Petersburg in 1766. From 1769, he served as secretary of conferences, overseeing the Academy’s correspondence.

[ 2 ] Contributions to electrostatics [ edit ] In 1754, Euler composed Disquisitio de Causa Physica Electricitatis (published 1757), in which he advanced a mechanical theory of electricity based on a compressible, elastic aether . Drawing on methods from hydrodynamics and differential calculus , he formulated equations linking the density and velocity of ether flowing through the pores of charged bodies, thereby providing a quantitative account of attraction and repulsion phenomena. Euler interpreted electrification as the expulsion of ether from a body's pores, with positive and negative states determined by the relative elasticity of ether inside the body compared to the surrounding medium. His approach represents one of the earliest attempts to mathematise electrical theory prior to the development of the action at a distance framework later formalised by Coulomb .

[ 2 ] Legacy [ edit ] Although Euler's mechanistic and mathematical treatment of electricity was innovative, it attracted little contemporary attention—partly because it did not address the emerging phenomena of the Leyden jar and because he was based outside the principal research centres in London and Paris. Nevertheless, his work stands as a pioneering example of applying rigorous mathematical analysis to electrostatics and influenced subsequent debates on the nature of physical interactions in the late eighteenth century.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] "Disquisitio de causa physica electricitatis".

Dissertationes selectae Jo. Alberti Euleri, Paulli Frisii et Laurentii Beraud (in Latin). St. Saint-Pétersbourg et Lucques: Vincentium Junctinium. 1757.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Calinger, Ronald (3 December 2019).

Leonhard Euler: Mathematical Genius in the Enlightenment . Princeton University Press. pp.

88– 89.

ISBN 978-0-691-19640-4 .

^ a b c Nardi, Lucas Marcelo Cavalari; Silva, Cibelle Celestino (2021).

"A matematização dos estudos elétricos antes de Coulomb: as contribuições de Johann Euler no século XVIII, acompanhada de uma tradução comentada de seu Recherches sur la Cause Physique de l'Electricité" .

Revista Brasileira de Ensino de Física (in Portuguese).

43 : e20200396.

doi : 10.1590/1806-9126-rbef-2020-0396 .

External links [ edit ] J. A. Euler's math genealogy L. Euler's students L. Euler's descendants The Eulers v t e Leonhard Euler Euler–Lagrange equation Euler–Lotka equation Euler–Maclaurin formula Euler–Maruyama method Euler–Mascheroni constant Euler–Poisson–Darboux equation Euler–Rodrigues formula Euler–Tricomi equation Euler's continued fraction formula Euler's critical load Euler's formula Euler's four-square identity Euler's identity Euler's pump and turbine equation Euler's rotation theorem Euler's sum of powers conjecture Euler's theorem Euler equations (fluid dynamics) Euler function Euler method Euler numbers Euler number (physics) Euler–Bernoulli beam theory Namesakes Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Euler&oldid=1288700543 " Categories : 1734 births 1800 deaths Scientists from Saint Petersburg People from Sankt-Peterburgsky Uyezd 18th-century Swiss mathematicians Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Full members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Swiss emigrants to the Russian Empire 18th-century mathematicians from the Russian Empire Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2025 Use Oxford spelling from April 2025 Articles with hCards CS1 Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 09:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Euler 14 languages Add topic

