Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Work 2.2 Netherlands 2.3 Return to England 2.4 Death 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 Religious tolerance 3.2 Slavery and child labour 3.3 Animals 3.4 Government 3.4.1 Accumulation of wealth 4 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 4.1 Economics 4.1.1 On price theory 4.1.2 Monetary thoughts 4.1.3 Theory of value and property 4.2 The human mind 4.2.1 The self 4.2.2 Dream argument 4.3 Religion 4.3.1 Religious beliefs 4.3.2 Philosophy from religion 5 Library Toggle Library subsection 5.1 Manuscripts, books and treatises 6 Writing Toggle Writing subsection 6.1 List of major works 6.2 Major posthumous manuscripts 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Notes 8.2 Citations 8.3 Sources 9 External links Toggle External links subsection 9.1 Works 9.2 Resources Toggle the table of contents John Locke 146 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 贛語 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher and physician (1632–1704) For other people named John Locke, see John Locke (disambiguation) .

John Locke Portrait of John Locke (1697) Commissioner for Trade and Plantations In office 15 May 1696 – 28 June 1700 Appointed by William III Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Matthew Prior Secretary and Treasurer to the Council for Trade and Foreign Plantations In office 14 October 1673 – 21 December 1674 Appointed by Anthony Ashley Cooper Preceded by Benjamin Worsley Succeeded by Position abolished Secretary to the Lords Proprietors of Carolina In office 1668–1671 Appointed by Anthony Ashley Cooper Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Position abolished Personal details Born ( 1632-08-29 ) 29 August 1632 Wrington , Somerset, England Died 28 October 1704 (1704-10-28) (aged 72) High Laver , Essex, England Political party Whig Education Christ Church, Oxford ( BA , 1656; MA , 1658; MB , 1675) Philosophical work Era Age of Enlightenment Region Western philosophy School Empiricism Foundationalism [ 2 ] Conceptualism [ 3 ] Indirect realism [ 4 ] Correspondence theory of truth [ 5 ] Ideational theory of meaning [ 6 ] Corpuscularianism [ 7 ] Social contract Natural law Liberalism Classical liberalism Institutions University of Oxford [ 1 ] Royal Society Main interests Metaphysics , epistemology , political philosophy , philosophy of mind , philosophy of education , economics Notable ideas List Consciousness Consent of the governed Inverted spectrum Labor theory of property Law of opinion Lockean proviso Molyneux's problem Argument from ignorance [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Natural rights (rights of life , liberty and property ) [ 10 ] Primary/secondary quality distinction Semeiotike (the doctrine of signs) Social contract Sortal State of nature Tabula rasa Signature Part of a series on John Locke Social contract Limited government Tabula rasa State of nature Right to property Labor theory of property Lockean proviso Argument from consciousness Works (listed chronologically) Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina A Letter Concerning Toleration Two Treatises of Government An Essay Concerning Human Understanding Some Thoughts Concerning Education Of the Conduct of the Understanding People Robert Filmer 1st Earl of Shaftesbury Related topics Empiricism Classical liberalism Polish Brethren v t e John Locke's portrait by Godfrey Kneller , National Portrait Gallery, London John Locke ( / l ɒ k / ; 29 August 1632 ( O.S.

) – 28 October 1704 ( O.S.

)) [ 11 ] was an English philosopher and physician, widely regarded as one of the most influential of the Enlightenment thinkers and commonly known as the "father of liberalism ".

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Considered one of the first of the British empiricists , following the tradition of Francis Bacon , Locke is equally important to social contract theory. His work greatly affected the development of epistemology and political philosophy . His writings influenced Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau , and many Scottish Enlightenment thinkers, as well as the American Revolutionaries . His contributions to classical republicanism and liberal theory are reflected in the United States Declaration of Independence .

[ 15 ] Internationally, Locke's political-legal principles continue to have a profound influence on the theory and practice of limited representative government and the protection of basic rights and freedoms under the rule of law.

[ 16 ] Locke's philosophy of mind is often cited as the origin of modern conceptions of personal identity and the psychology of self , figuring prominently in the work of later philosophers, such as Rousseau, David Hume , and Immanuel Kant . He postulated that, at birth, the mind was a blank slate, or tabula rasa . Contrary to Cartesian philosophy based on pre-existing concepts, he maintained that we are born without innate ideas , and that knowledge is instead determined only by experience derived from sense perception , a concept now known as empiricism.

[ 17 ] Locke is often credited for describing private property as a natural right , arguing that when a person—metaphorically— mixes their labour with nature , resources can be removed from the common state of nature .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Early life Locke was born on 29 August 1632, in a small thatched cottage by the church in Wrington , Somerset, about 12 miles (19 km) from Bristol . He was baptised the same day, as both of his parents were Puritans . Locke's father, also named John, was an attorney who served as clerk to the Justices of the Peace in Chew Magna , [ 20 ] and as a captain of cavalry for the Parliamentarian forces during the early part of the English Civil War . His mother was Agnes Keene. Soon after Locke's birth, the family moved to the market town of Pensford , about seven miles south of Bristol, where Locke grew up in a rural Tudor house in Belluton .

In 1647, Locke was sent to the prestigious Westminster School in London under the sponsorship of Alexander Popham , a member of Parliament and John Sr.'s former commander. At the age of 16 he was at school just half a mile away from the execution of Charles I ; however, the boys were not allowed to go and watch. After completing studies at Westminster, he was admitted to Christ Church , Oxford , in the autumn of 1652 at the age of 20. The dean of the college at the time was John Owen , vice-chancellor of the university. Although a capable student, Locke was irritated by the undergraduate curriculum of the time. He found the works of modern philosophers, such as René Descartes , more interesting than the classical material taught at the university. Through his friend Richard Lower , whom he knew from the Westminster School, Locke was introduced to medicine and the experimental philosophy being pursued at other universities and in the Royal Society , of which he eventually became a member.

[ 21 ] Locke was awarded a bachelor's degree in February 1656 and a master's degree in June 1658.

[ 1 ] He obtained a bachelor of medicine in February 1675, [ 22 ] having studied the subject extensively during his time at Oxford. In addition to Lower, he worked with such noted scientists and thinkers as Robert Boyle , Thomas Willis , and Robert Hooke . In 1666, he met Anthony Ashley Cooper, Lord Ashley , who had come to Oxford seeking treatment for a liver infection. Ashley was impressed with Locke and persuaded him to become part of his retinue. At Oxford, he was exposed to the writings of Islamic scholars, such as Ibn Tufayl 's Hayy ibn Yaqdhan translated by Edward Pococke , who influenced his perspectives on philosophy and tabula rasa .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Career Work Locke had been looking for a career and in 1667, moved into Ashley's home at Exeter House in London, to serve as his personal physician. In London, Locke resumed his medical studies under the tutelage of Thomas Sydenham . Sydenham had a major effect on Locke's natural philosophical thinking—an effect that would become evident in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding .

Locke's medical knowledge was put to the test when Ashley's liver infection became life-threatening. Locke coordinated the advice of several physicians and was probably instrumental in persuading Ashley to undergo surgery (then life-threatening in itself) to remove the cyst. Ashley survived and prospered, crediting Locke with saving his life. During this time, Locke served as Secretary of the Board of Trade and Plantations and Secretary to the Lords Proprietors of Carolina , which helped to shape his ideas on international trade and economics.

[ 27 ] Ashley, as a founder of the Whig movement, exerted great influence on Locke's political ideas. Locke became involved in politics when Ashley became Lord Chancellor in 1672 (Ashley being created 1st Earl of Shaftesbury in 1673). Following Shaftesbury's fall from favour in 1675, Locke spent some time travelling across France as a tutor and medical attendant to Caleb Banks .

[ 28 ] He returned to England in 1679 when Shaftesbury's political fortunes took a brief positive turn. Around this time, most likely at Shaftesbury's prompting, Locke composed the bulk of the Two Treatises of Government . While it was once thought that Locke wrote the Treatises to defend the Glorious Revolution of 1688, recent scholarship has shown that the work was composed well before this date.

[ 29 ] The work is now viewed as a more general argument against absolute monarchy (particularly as espoused by Robert Filmer and Thomas Hobbes ) and for individual consent as the basis of political legitimacy . Although Locke was associated with the influential Whigs , his ideas about natural rights and government are considered quite revolutionary for that period in English history.

Netherlands Locke fled to the Netherlands in 1683 in the company of Shaftesbury , under strong suspicion of involvement in the Rye House Plot , although there is little evidence to suggest that he was directly involved in the scheme. While in the Netherlands, he lived under the pen-name dr. Van Linden.

[ 30 ] The philosopher and novelist Rebecca Newberger Goldstein argues that during his five years in Holland, Locke chose his friends "from among the same freethinking members of dissenting Protestant groups as Spinoza 's small group of loyal confidants [Baruch Spinoza had died in 1677], Locke almost certainly met men in Amsterdam who spoke of the ideas of that renegade Jew who ... insisted on identifying himself through his religion of reason alone." While she says that "Locke's strong empiricist tendencies" would have "disinclined him to read a grandly metaphysical work such as Spinoza's Ethics , in other ways he was deeply receptive to Spinoza's ideas, most particularly to the rationalist's well thought out argument for political and religious tolerance and the necessity of the separation of church and state." [ 31 ] Among the friends he made in the Netherlands are Van Leeuwenhoek and Van Limborch, the leader of the Remonstrants .

[ 30 ] In the Netherlands, Locke had time to return to his writing, spending a great deal of time working on the Essay Concerning Human Understanding and composing the Letter on Toleration.

Return to England Locke did not return home until after the Glorious Revolution . Locke accompanied Mary II back to England in 1689. The bulk of Locke's publishing took place upon his return from exile—his aforementioned Essay Concerning Human Understanding , the Two Treatises of Government and A Letter Concerning Toleration all appearing in quick succession. Locke's close friend Lady Masham invited him to join her at Otes, the Mashams' country house in Essex. Although his time there was marked by variable health from asthma attacks, he nevertheless became an intellectual hero of the Whigs. During this period, he discussed matters with such figures as John Dryden and Isaac Newton .

Death Engraved memorial plaque at Oxford After a lengthy period of poor health, [ 32 ] Locke died on 28 October 1704, and is buried in the churchyard of All Saints' Church in High Laver , near Harlow in Essex, where he had lived in the household of Sir Francis Masham since 1691.

[ 33 ] Locke never married nor had children. Events that happened during Locke's lifetime include the English Restoration , the Great Plague of London , the Great Fire of London , the Glorious Revolution and war against France including the Battle of Blenheim just before his death. He did not live long enough to see the Act of Union of 1707 , but the thrones of England and Scotland were held in personal union throughout his lifetime.

Constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy were in their infancy during Locke's time. Locke has an engraved floor memorial plaque at Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford .

[ 34 ] Philosophy Portrait of John Locke by John Greenhill (died 1676) In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Locke's Two Treatises were rarely cited. Historian Julian Hoppit said of the book "except among some Whigs, even as a contribution to the intense debate of the 1690s it made little impression and was generally ignored until 1703 (though in Oxford in 1695 it was reported to have made 'a great noise')." [ 35 ] John Kenyon , in his study of British political debate from 1689 to 1720, has remarked that Locke's theories were "mentioned so rarely in the early stages of the [Glorious] Revolution, up to 1692, and even less thereafter, unless it was to heap abuse on them" and that "no one, including most Whigs, [was] ready for the idea of a notional or abstract contract of the kind adumbrated by Locke".

[ 36 ] : 200 In contrast, Kenyon adds that Algernon Sidney 's Discourses Concerning Government were "certainly much more influential than Locke's Two Treatises.

" [ i ] [ 36 ] : 51 In the 50 years after Queen Anne's death in 1714, the Two Treatises were reprinted only once (except in the collected works of Locke). However, with the rise of American resistance to British taxation, the Second Treatise of Government gained a new readership; it was frequently cited in the debates in both America and Britain. The first American printing occurred in 1773 in Boston.

[ 37 ] Locke exercised a profound influence on political philosophy , in particular on modern liberalism.

Michael Zuckert has argued that Locke launched liberalism by tempering Hobbesian absolutism and clearly separating the realms of Church and State . He had a strong influence on Voltaire , who called him " le sage Locke". His arguments concerning liberty and the social contract later influenced the written works of Thomas Jefferson . One passage from the Second Treatise is reproduced verbatim in the Declaration of Independence, the reference to a "long train of abuses". Concerning Locke, Jefferson wrote: [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Bacon , Locke and Newton ... I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences.

Locke's influence may have been even more profound in the realm of epistemology . Locke redefined subjectivity , or the self , leading intellectual historians such as Charles Taylor and Jerrold Seigel to argue that Locke's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1689/90) marks the beginning of the modern Western conception of the self .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Locke's theory of association heavily influenced the subject matter of modern psychology . At the time, Locke's recognition of two types of ideas, simple and complex —and, more importantly, their interaction through association—inspired other philosophers, such as David Hume and George Berkeley , to revise and expand this theory and apply it to explain how humans gain knowledge in the physical world.

[ 43 ] Locke thought the state's borders and the functioning and enforcement of the existence of the state and its constitution were metaphysically tied to "the natural rights of the individual", and this inspired future liberal politicians and philosophers .

[ 44 ] Religious tolerance See also: Toleration § Locke John Locke by Richard Westmacott , University College London Writing his Letters Concerning Toleration (1689–1692) in the aftermath of the European wars of religion , Locke formulated a classic reasoning for religious tolerance , in which three arguments are central: [ 45 ] earthly judges, the state in particular, and human beings generally, cannot dependably evaluate the truth-claims of competing religious standpoints; even if they could, enforcing a single 'true religion' would not have the desired effect, because belief cannot be compelled by violence; coercing religious uniformity would lead to more social disorder than allowing diversity.

With regard to his position on religious tolerance, Locke was influenced by Baptist theologians like John Smyth and Thomas Helwys , who had published tracts demanding freedom of conscience in the early 17th century.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Baptist theologian Roger Williams founded the colony of Rhode Island in 1636, where he combined a democratic constitution with unlimited religious freedom. His tract, The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience (1644), which was widely read in the mother country, was a passionate plea for absolute religious freedom and the total separation of church and state .

[ 50 ] Freedom of conscience had had high priority on the theological, philosophical, and political agenda, as Martin Luther refused to recant his beliefs before the Diet of the Holy Roman Empire at Worms in 1521, unless he would be proved false by the Bible.

[ 51 ] Slavery and child labour Locke's views on slavery were multifaceted. Although he wrote against slavery in general, Locke was an investor and beneficiary of the slave-trading Royal Africa Company . While secretary to the Earl of Shaftesbury , Locke also participated in drafting the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina , which established a quasi-feudal aristocracy and gave Carolinian planters absolute power over their enslaved chattel property; the constitutions pledged that "every freeman of Carolina shall have absolute power and authority over his negro slaves". Philosopher Martin Cohen observes that Locke, as secretary to the Council of Trade and Plantations and a member of the Board of Trade , was "one of just half a dozen men who created and supervised both the colonies and their iniquitous systems of servitude".

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] According to American historian James Farr, Locke never expressed any thoughts about his contradictory opinions of slavery, which Farr ascribes to his personal involvement in the Atlantic slave trade .

[ 54 ] Locke's positions on slavery have been described as hypocritical, and laying the foundation for the Founding Fathers to hold similarly contradictory thoughts regarding freedom and slavery.

[ 55 ] Historian Holly Brewer argues that Locke's role in the Constitution of Carolina has been exaggerated and that he was merely paid to revise and make copies of a document that had already been partially written before he became involved; she compares Locke's role to a lawyer writing a will.

[ 56 ] She states that Locke was paid in Royal African Company stock in lieu of money for his work as a secretary for a governmental sub-committee, and that he sold the stock after a few years.

[ 57 ] Brewer likewise argues that Locke actively worked to undermine slavery in Virginia while heading a Board of Trade created by William of Orange following the Glorious Revolution . He specifically attacked colonial policy granting land to slave owners and encouraged the baptism and Christian education of the children of enslaved Africans to undercut a major justification of slavery—that they were heathens who possessed no rights.

[ 58 ] In his Two Treatises of Government , Locke provided a justification for slavery that could never  be met, thus rendering invalid all forms of slavery that existed. Moreover, because slavery is invalid, there is a moral injunction to try to throw off and escape from it.

[ citation needed ] Locke also supported child labour , which was an intrinsic part of all pre-industrial societies.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] In his "Essay on the Poor Law", he discusses the education of the poor; he laments that "the children of labouring people are an ordinary burden to the parish, and are usually maintained in idleness, so that their labour also is generally lost to the public till they are 12 or 14 years old".

[ 61 ] : 190 Therefore, he suggests the setting up of "working schools" for poor children in each parish in England so that they will be "from infancy [three years old] inured to work".

[ 61 ] : 190 He goes on to outline the economics of these schools, arguing not only that they will be profitable for the parish, but also that they will instil a good work ethic in the children.

[ 61 ] : 191 Animals Locke rejected the Cartesian view that animals are mere automata without consciousness. In his Essay Concerning Human Understanding , he argued that animals possess some cognitive faculties, particularly perception and memory, though not abstraction or reasoning in the human sense. Locke maintained that perception is present "in some degree, in all sorts of animals", including even oysters and cockles, though he described their sensations as "dull". He further held that animals are capable of retaining ideas, but he denied them the capacity for forming abstract or general ideas, which he regarded as a defining feature of human cognition .

[ 62 ] Locke used these observations to challenge René Descartes animal machine doctrine and to support the possibility that matter could think, if God so willed. This hypothesis, that God might superadd thought to matter, allowed Locke to argue that mental faculties could be distributed in varying degrees among animals and humans. While Locke sometimes used these arguments rhetorically against theological opponents, he was cautious about committing to the immateriality or immortality of animal souls . Instead, he suggested that attributing mental faculties to animals did not necessitate belief in their immortality, thereby avoiding the theological implications Descartes sought to escape by denying animal sentience altogether.

[ 62 ] Government See also: Two Treatises of Government Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Locke's political theory was founded upon that of social contract . Unlike Thomas Hobbes , Locke believed that human nature is characterised by reason and tolerance . Like Hobbes, Locke believed that human nature allows people to be selfish. This is apparent with the introduction of currency. In a natural state , all people were equal and independent, and everyone had a natural right to defend their "life, health, liberty, or possessions".

[ 63 ] : 198 Most scholars trace the phrase " Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness " in the American Declaration of Independence to Locke's theory of rights, [ 64 ] although other origins have been suggested.

[ 65 ] Like Hobbes, Locke assumed that the sole right to defend in the state of nature was not enough, so people established a civil society to resolve conflicts in a civil way with help from government in a state of society. However, Locke never refers to Hobbes by name and may instead have been responding to other writers of the day.

[ 66 ] Locke also advocated governmental separation of powers and believed that revolution is not only a right but an obligation in some circumstances. These ideas would come to have profound influence on the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States .

Accumulation of wealth See also: Lockean proviso According to Locke, unused property is wasteful and an offence against nature, [ 67 ] but, with the introduction of "durable" goods , men could exchange their excessive perishable goods for those which would last longer and thus not offend the natural law . In his view, the introduction of money marked the culmination of this process, making possible the unlimited accumulation of property without causing waste through spoilage.

[ 68 ] He includes gold or silver as money because they may be "hoarded up without injury to anyone", [ 69 ] as they do not spoil or decay in the hands of the possessor. In his view, the introduction of money eliminates limits to accumulation. Locke stresses that inequality has come about by tacit agreement on the use of money, not by the social contract establishing civil society or the law of land regulating property. Locke was aware of a problem posed by unlimited accumulation, but did not consider it his task. He just implies that government would function to moderate the conflict between the unlimited accumulation of property and a more nearly equal distribution of wealth; he does not identify which principles that government should apply to solve this problem. However, not all elements of his thought form a consistent whole. For example, the labour theory of value in the Two Treatises of Government stands side by side with the demand-and-supply theory of value developed in a letter he wrote titled Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money . Moreover, Locke anchors property in labour but, in the end, upholds unlimited accumulation of wealth.

[ 70 ] Ideas This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United Kingdom Schools Classical Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Whiggist Conservative Muscular Economic Green Neo Radical Social Principles Capitalism Civil and political rights Due process Economic freedom Environmentalism Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Laissez-faire Natural law Rule of law Social justice Welfare state History English Civil War Glorious Revolution Anti-Corn Law League Victorian era Chartism 1905–1915 liberal government Liberal welfare reforms Intellectuals Acton Arnold Bentham Berlin Beveridge Burke Byron Chesterton Collingwood Fawcett Freeden Green Hammond (Barbara) Hammond (John Lawrence) Hayek Hobhouse Keynes Locke Macaulay Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Muir Paine Priestley Ricardo Shelley Smith Spencer Taylor Mill Trevelyan (George) Trevelyan (George Macaulay) Wilson Wollstonecraft Politicians Asquith Bass Bright Burke Cable Campbell-Bannerman Chamberlain Clegg Cobden Fox Gladstone Hunt Jenkins Kennedy Lloyd George Mill (John Stuart) Muir Naoroji Rosebery Simon Steel Thorpe Parties Active Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Liberal Democrats Scottish Liberal Democrats Defunct Liberal Party Peelite Radicals Social Democratic Party Whigs Media The Economist Financial Times The Guardian The Independent The Sunday Times The Times Related topics Centrism Centre-left Centre-right Conservatism in the United Kingdom Liberal conservatism Politics of the United Kingdom Scottish Liberals for Independence Socialism in the United Kingdom Liberal socialism Liberalism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Economics On price theory Locke's general theory of value and price is a supply-and-demand theory, set out in a letter to a member of parliament in 1691, titled Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money .

[ 71 ] In it, he refers to supply as quantity and demand as rent : "The price of any commodity rises or falls by the proportion of the number of buyers and sellers ... that which regulates the price ... [of goods] is nothing else but their quantity in proportion to their rent." The quantity theory of money forms a special case of this general theory. His idea is based on "money answers all things" ( Ecclesiastes ) or "rent of money is always sufficient, or more than enough" and "varies very little". Locke concludes that, as far as money is concerned, the demand for it is exclusively regulated by its quantity, regardless of whether the demand is unlimited or constant. He also investigates the determinants of demand and supply. For supply , he explains the value of goods as based on their scarcity and ability to be exchanged and consumed . He explains demand for goods as based on their ability to yield a flow of income. Locke develops an early theory of capitalisation , such as of land, which has value because "by its constant production of saleable commodities it brings in a certain yearly income". He considers the demand for money as almost the same as demand for goods or land: it depends on whether money is wanted as medium of exchange . As a medium of exchange, he states that "money is capable by exchange to procure us the necessaries or conveniences of life", and for loanable funds "it comes to be of the same nature with land by yielding a certain yearly income ... or interest".

Monetary thoughts Locke distinguishes two functions of money: as a counter to measure value , and as a pledge to lay claim to goods . He believes that silver and gold, as opposed to paper money , are the appropriate currency for international transactions. Silver and gold, he says, are treated to have equal value by all of humanity and can thus be treated as a pledge by anyone, while the value of paper money is only valid under the government which issues it.

Locke argues that a country should seek a favourable balance of trade , lest it fall behind other countries and suffer a loss in its trade. Since the world money stock grows constantly, a country must constantly seek to enlarge its own stock. Locke develops his theory of foreign exchanges, by which in addition to commodity movements, there are also movements in country stock of money, and movements of capital determine exchange rates . He considers the latter less significant and less volatile than commodity movements. As for a country's money stock, if it is large relative to that of other countries, he says it will cause the country's exchange to rise above par, as an export balance would do.

Locke prepares estimates of the cash requirements for different economic groups ( landholders , labourers, and brokers). In each group he posits that the cash requirements are closely related to the length of the pay period. He argues the brokers—the middlemen —whose activities enlarge the monetary circuit and whose profits eat into the earnings of labourers and landholders, have a negative influence on both personal and the public economy to which they supposedly contribute.

[ 72 ] Theory of value and property Locke uses the concept of property in both broad and narrow terms: broadly, it covers a wide range of human interests and aspirations; more particularly, it refers to material goods . He argues that property is a natural right that is derived from labour . In Chapter V of his Second Treatise , Locke argues that the individual ownership of goods and property is justified by the labour exerted to produce such goods—"at least where there is enough [land], and as good, left in common for others" (para. 27)—or to use property to produce goods beneficial to human society.

[ 73 ] Locke states in his Second Treatise that nature on its own provides little of value to society, implying that the labour expended in the creation of goods gives them their value. From this premise, understood as a labour theory of value , [ 73 ] Locke developed a labour theory of property , whereby ownership of property is created by the application of labour. In addition, he believed that property precedes government and government cannot "dispose of the estates of the subjects arbitrarily".

Karl Marx later critiqued Locke's theory of property in his own social theory.

[ 74 ] The human mind The self Locke defines the self as "that conscious thinking thing, (whatever substance, made up of whether spiritual, or material, simple, or compounded, it matters not) which is sensible, or conscious of pleasure and pain, capable of happiness or misery, and so is concerned for itself, as far as that consciousness extends".

[ 75 ] He does not wholly ignore "substance", writing that "the body too goes to the making the man".

[ 76 ] In his Essay , Locke explains the gradual unfolding of this conscious mind. Arguing against both the Augustinian view of man as originally sinful and the Cartesian position, which holds that man innately knows basic logical propositions, Locke posits an 'empty mind', a tabula rasa , which is shaped by experience, sensations and reflections being the two sources of all our ideas .

[ 77 ] He states in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding : This source of ideas every man has wholly within himself; and though it be not sense, as having nothing to do with external objects, yet it is very like it, and might properly enough be called 'internal sense.' [ 78 ] Locke's Some Thoughts Concerning Education is an outline on how to educate this mind. Drawing on thoughts expressed in letters written to Mary Clarke and her husband about their son, [ 79 ] he expresses the belief that education makes the man—or, more fundamentally, that the mind is an "empty cabinet": [ 80 ] I think I may say that of all the men we meet with, nine parts of ten are what they are, good or evil, useful or not, by their education.

Locke also wrote that "the little and almost insensible impressions on our tender infancies have very important and lasting consequences".

[ 80 ] He argues that the " associations of ideas " that one makes when young are more important than those made later because they are the foundation of the self ; they are, put differently, what first mark the tabula rasa . In his Essay , in which both these concepts are introduced, Locke warns, for example, against letting "a foolish maid" convince a child that "goblins and sprites" are associated with the night, for "darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas, and they shall be so joined, that he can no more bear the one than the other".

[ 81 ] This theory came to be called associationism , going on to strongly influence 18th-century thought, particularly educational theory , as nearly every educational writer warned parents not to allow their children to develop negative associations. It also led to the development of psychology and other new disciplines with David Hartley 's attempt to discover a biological mechanism for associationism in his Observations on Man (1749).

Dream argument Locke was critical of Descartes's version of the dream argument , with Locke making the counter-argument that people cannot have physical pain in dreams as they do in waking life.

[ 82 ] Religion Religious beliefs Some scholars have seen Locke's political convictions as being based from his religious beliefs.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] Locke's religious trajectory began in Calvinist trinitarianism , but by the time of the Reflections (1695) Locke was advocating not just Socinian views on tolerance but also Socinian Christology .

[ 86 ] However Wainwright (1987) notes that in the posthumously published Paraphrase (1707) Locke's interpretation of one verse, Ephesians 1 :10, is markedly different from that of Socinians like Biddle , and may indicate that near the end of his life Locke returned nearer to an Arian position, thereby accepting Christ's pre-existence.

[ 87 ] [ 86 ] Locke was at times not sure about the subject of original sin , so he was accused of Socinianism, Arianism, or Deism .

[ 88 ] Locke argued that the idea that "all Adam ' s Posterity [are] doomed to Eternal Infinite Punishment, for the Transgression of Adam " was "little consistent with the Justice or Goodness of the Great and Infinite God", leading Eric Nelson to associate him with Pelagian ideas.

[ 89 ] However, he did not deny the reality of evil. Man was capable of waging unjust wars and committing crimes. Criminals had to be punished, even with the death penalty.

[ 90 ] With regard to the Bible, Locke was very conservative. He retained the doctrine of the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures.

[ 46 ] The miracles were proof of the divine nature of the biblical message. Locke was convinced that the entire content of the Bible was in agreement with human reason ( The Reasonableness of Christianity , 1695).

[ 91 ] [ 46 ] Although Locke was an advocate of tolerance, he urged the authorities not to tolerate atheism , because he thought the denial of God's existence would undermine the social order and lead to chaos.

[ 92 ] That excluded all atheistic varieties of philosophy and all attempts to deduce ethics and natural law from purely secular premises.

[ 93 ] In Locke's opinion the cosmological argument was valid and proved God's existence. His political thought was based on Protestant Christian views.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Additionally, Locke advocated a sense of piety out of gratitude to God for giving reason to men.

[ 95 ] Philosophy from religion Locke's concept of man started with the belief in creation.

[ 96 ] Like philosophers Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf , Locke equated natural law with the biblical revelation .

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] Locke derived the fundamental concepts of his political theory from biblical texts, in particular from Genesis 1 and 2 ( creation ), the Decalogue , the Golden Rule , the teachings of Jesus, and the letters of Paul the Apostle .

[ 100 ] The Decalogue puts a person's life, reputation and property under God's protection. Locke's philosophy on freedom is also derived from the Bible. Locke derived from the Bible basic human equality (including equality of the sexes ), the starting point of the theological doctrine of Imago Dei .

[ 101 ] To Locke, one of the consequences of the principle of equality was that all humans were created equally free and therefore governments needed the consent of the governed.

[ 102 ] Locke compared the English monarchy's rule over the British people to Adam's rule over Eve in Genesis, which was appointed by God.

[ 103 ] Following Locke's philosophy, the American Declaration of Independence founded human rights partially on the biblical belief in creation. Locke's doctrine that governments need the consent of the governed is also central to the Declaration of Independence.

[ 104 ] Library Manuscripts, books and treatises Locke's signature in Bodleian Locke 13.12. Photo taken at the Bodleian Library, Oxford.

Locke was an assiduous book collector and notetaker throughout his life. By his death in 1704, Locke had amassed a library of more than 3,000 books, a significant number in the seventeenth century.

[ 105 ] Unlike some of his contemporaries, Locke took care to catalogue and preserve his library, and his will made specific provisions for how his library was to be distributed after his death. Locke's will offered Lady Masham the choice of "any four folios, eight quartos and twenty books of less volume, which she shall choose out of the books in my Library." [ 106 ] Locke also gave six titles to his "good friend" Anthony Collins , but Locke bequeathed the majority of his collection to his cousin Peter King (later Lord King) and to Lady Masham's son, Francis Cudworth Masham.

[ 106 ] Francis Masham was promised one "moiety" (half) of Locke's library when he reached "the age of one and twenty years." [ 106 ] The other "moiety" of Locke's books, along with his manuscripts, passed to his cousin King.

[ 106 ] Over the next two centuries, the Masham portion of Locke's library was dispersed.

[ 107 ] The manuscripts and books left to King, however, remained with King's descendants (later the Earls of Lovelace ), until most of the collection was bought by the Bodleian Library, Oxford in 1947.

[ 108 ] Another portion of the books Locke left to King was discovered by the collector and philanthropist Paul Mellon in 1951.

[ 108 ] Mellon supplemented this discovery with books from Locke's library which he bought privately, and in 1978, he transferred his collection to the Bodleian.

[ 108 ] One of Locke's famous books on politics, Two Treatises of Government , written and published in his lifetime The holdings in the Locke Room at the Bodleian have been a valuable resource for scholars interested in Locke, his philosophy, practices for information management, and the history of the book. Many of the books still contain Locke's signature, which he often made on the pastedowns of his books. Many also include Locke's marginalia . The printed books in Locke's library reflected his various intellectual interests as well as his movements at different stages of his life. Locke travelled extensively in France and the Netherlands during the 1670s and 1680s, and during this time he acquired many books from the continent. Only half of the books in Locke's library were printed in England, while close to 40% came from France and the Netherlands.

[ 109 ] These books cover a wide range of subjects. According to John Harrison and Peter Laslett, the largest genres in Locke's library were theology (23.8% of books), medicine (11.1%), politics and law (10.7%), and classical literature (10.1%).

[ 110 ] The Bodleian library currently holds more than 800 of the books from Locke's library.

[ 108 ] These include Locke's copies of works by several of the most influential figures of the seventeenth century, including The Quaker William Penn : An address to Protestants of all perswasions (Bodleian Locke 7.69a) The explorer Francis Drake : The world encompassed by Sir Francis Drake (Bodleian Locke 8.37c) The scientist Robert Boyle : A discourse of things above reason (Bodleian Locke 7.272) The bishop and historian Thomas Sprat : The history of the Royal-Society of London (Bodleian Locke 9.10a) In addition to books owned by Locke, the Bodleian possesses more than 100 manuscripts related to Locke or written in his hand. Like the books in Locke's library, these manuscripts display a range of interests and provide different windows into Locke's activity and relationships. Several of the manuscripts include letters to and from acquaintances like Peter King (MS Locke b. 6) and Nicolas Toinard [ fr ] (MS Locke c. 45).

[ 111 ] MS Locke f. 1–10 contain Locke's journals for most years between 1675 and 1704.

[ 111 ] Some of the most significant manuscripts include early drafts of Locke's writings, such as his Essay Concerning Human Understanding (MS Locke f. 26).

[ 111 ] The Bodleian also holds a copy of Robert Boyle's General History of the Air with corrections and notes Locke made while preparing Boyle's work for posthumous publication (MS Locke c. 37 ).

[ 112 ] Other manuscripts contain unpublished works. Among others, MS. Locke e. 18 includes some of Locke's thoughts on the Glorious Revolution , which Locke sent to his friend Edward Clarke but never published.

[ 113 ] One of the largest categories of manuscript at the Bodleian comprises Locke's notebooks and commonplace books . The scholar Richard Yeo calls Locke a "Master Note-taker" and explains that "Locke's methodical note-taking pervaded most areas of his life." [ 114 ] In an unpublished essay "Of Study," Locke argued that a notebook should work like a "chest-of-drawers" for organising information, which would be a "great help to the memory and means to avoid confusion in our thoughts." [ 115 ] Locke kept several notebooks and commonplace books, which he organised according to topic. MS Locke c. 43 includes Locke's notes on theology, while MS Locke f. 18–24 contain medical notes.

[ 111 ] Other notebooks, such as MS c. 43, incorporate several topics in the same notebook, but separated into sections.

[ 111 ] Page 1 of Locke's unfinished index in Bodleian Locke 13.12. Photo taken at the Bodleian Library, Oxford.

These commonplace books were highly personal and were designed to be used by Locke himself rather than accessible to a wide audience.

[ 116 ] Locke's notes are often abbreviated and are full of codes which he used to reference material across notebooks.

[ 117 ] Another way Locke personalised his notebooks was by devising his own method of creating indexes using a grid system and Latin keywords.

[ 118 ] Instead of recording entire words, his indexes shortened words to their first letter and vowel. Thus, the word "Epistle" would be classified as "Ei".

[ 119 ] Locke published his method in French in 1686, and it was republished posthumously in English in 1706. Some of the books in Locke's library at the Bodleian are a combination of manuscript and print. Locke had some of his books interleaved, meaning that they were bound with blank sheets in-between the printed pages to enable annotations. Locke interleaved and annotated his five volumes of the New Testament in French, Greek, and Latin (Bodleian Locke 9.103–107). Locke did the same with his copy of Thomas Hyde's Bodleian Library catalogue (Bodleian Locke 16.17), which Locke used to create a catalogue of his own library.

[ 120 ] Writing List of major works 1689.

A Letter Concerning Toleration .

1690.

A Second Letter Concerning Toleration 1692.

A Third Letter for Toleration 1689/90.

Two Treatises of Government (published throughout the 18th century by London bookseller Andrew Millar by commission for Thomas Hollis ) [ 121 ] 1689/90.

An Essay Concerning Human Understanding 1691.

Some Considerations on the consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money 1693.

Some Thoughts Concerning Education 1695.

The Reasonableness of Christianity, as Delivered in the Scriptures 1695.

A Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity Major posthumous manuscripts 1660.

First Tract of Government (or the English Tract ) c.

1662.

Second Tract of Government (or the Latin Tract ) 1664.

Questions Concerning the Law of Nature .

[ 122 ] 1667.

Essay Concerning Toleration 1706.

Of the Conduct of the Understanding 1707.

A paraphrase and notes on the Epistles of St. Paul to the Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, Ephesians See also Liberalism portal List of liberal theorists References Notes ^ Kenyon (1977) adds: "Any unbiassed study of the position shows in fact that it was Filmer, not Hobbes, Locke or Sidney, who was the most influential thinker of the age" (p. 63).

Citations ^ a b Uzgalis, William (1 May 2018) [2 September 2001].

"John Locke" . In E. N. Zalta (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

^ Fumerton, Richard (2000).

"Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2018 . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ Bostock, David (2009).

Philosophy of Mathematics: An Introduction . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 43.

All of Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume supposed that mathematics is a theory of our ideas , but none of them offered any argument for this conceptualist claim, and apparently took it to be uncontroversial.

^ Yolton, John W.

(2000).

Realism and Appearances: An Essay in Ontology . Cambridge University Press. p. 136.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "The Correspondence Theory of Truth" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2020.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2014 . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ Grigoris Antoniou; John Slaney, eds. (1998).

Advanced Topics in Artificial Intelligence . Springer. p. 9.

doi : 10.1007/BFb0095035 .

^ Vere Claiborne Chappell , ed. (1994).

The Cambridge Companion to Locke . Cambridge University Press. p. 56.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Hansen, Hans V.; Pinto, Robert C., eds. (1995).

Fallacies: classical and contemporary readings . University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 978-0271014166 .

OCLC 30624864 .

^ Locke, John (1690).

"Book IV, Chapter XVII: Of Reason" .

An Essay Concerning Human Understanding .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2015 .

^ Locke, John (1690).

Two Treatises of Government (10th ed.): Chapter II, Section 6 .

Project Gutenberg .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2019 . Retrieved 5 May 2018 .

^ Grave tablet from 1705 : ... That he was born on the 29th of August in the year of our Lord 1632, and that he died on the 28th of October in the year of our Lord 1704, this tablet, which itself will quickly perish, is a record.

See also: R. Woolhouse, Locke. A Biography , NY 2007, p. 1.

^ Hirschmann, Nancy J. (2009).

Gender, Class, and Freedom in Modern Political Theory . Princeton: Princeton University Press . p. 79.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Sharma, Urmila; S. K. Sharma (2006).

Western Political Thought . Washington: Atlantic Publishers . p. 440.

^ Korab-Karpowicz, W. Julian (2010).

A History of Political Philosophy: From Thucydides to Locke . New York: Global Scholarly Publications. p. 291.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Becker, Carl Lotus (1922).

The Declaration of Independence: a Study in the History of Political Ideas . New York: Harcourt, Brace . p. 27.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "Foreword and study guide to" John Locke's Two Treatises on Government: A Translation into Modern English , ISR Publications, 2013, p. ii.

ISBN 978-0906321690 ^ Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008).

From Plato to Derrida . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall . pp.

527– 529.

ISBN 978-0131585911 .

^ Locke, John (30 May 2024).

"The Project Gutenberg eBook of Second Treatise Of Government, by John Locke" . Archived from the original on 30 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .

^ "Encroachment, Adverse Possession, and Labor Theory | Antonin Scalia Law School" .

law.gmu.edu . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .

^ Broad, C. D. (2000).

Ethics And the History of Philosophy . UK: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415225304 .

^ Uzgalis, William (2024), "John Locke" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2024 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 17 March 2025 ^ Roger Woolhouse (2007).

Locke: A Biography . Cambridge University Press. p. 116.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "How Muslims indirectly helped in the American Revolution" .

EgyptToday . 14 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Kalın, İbrahim (10 March 2018).

" 'Hayy ibn Yaqdhan' and the European Enlightenment" .

Daily Sabah .

^ Russell, G.A. (1994).

"The Impact Of The Philosophus Autodidactus: Pocockes, John Locke, And The Society Of Friends" .

The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England . Brill. pp.

224– 265.

doi : 10.1163/9789004247062_013 .

ISBN 978-9004247062 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Attar, Samar (2007).

The vital roots of European enlightenment: Ibn Tufayl's influence on modern Western thought . Lanham (Md.): Lexington books.

ISBN 978-0739119891 .

^ Uzgalis, William (2022), "John Locke" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 7 March 2024 ^ Henning, Basil Duke (1983), The House of Commons, 1660–1690 , vol. 1, Boydell & Brewer, ISBN 978-0436192746 , retrieved 28 August 2012 ^ Laslett 1988 , III.

Two Treatises of Government and the Revolution of 1688.

^ a b Jan Bor, Errit Petersma & Jelle Kingma (eds.), De verbeelding van het denken. Geïllustreerde geschiedenis van de westerse en oosterse filosofie , Amsterdam/Antwerpen : Atlas Contact, 1996, [ ISBN missing ] , p. 260 ^ Rebecca Newberger Goldstein (2006).

Betraying Spinoza: The Renegade Jew Who Gave Us Modernity . New York: Schocken Books. pp.

260– 261.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ "John Locke – Enlightenment, Philosophy, Government | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 25 August 2024 . Retrieved 4 September 2024 .

^ Rogers, Graham A. J.

"John Locke" .

Britannica Online .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2017 . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ Express, Britain.

"Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, History & Photos | Historic Oxford Guide" .

Britain Express .

^ Hoppit, Julian (2000).

A Land of Liberty? England. 1689–1727 . Oxford: Clarendon Press . p. 195.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Kenyon, John (1977).

Revolution Principles: The Politics of Party. 1689–1720 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Milton, John R. (2008) [2004]. "Locke, John (1632–1704)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/16885 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "The Three Greatest Men" .

American Treasures of the Library of Congress . Library of Congress. August 2007.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2018 . Retrieved 27 June 2018 .

Jefferson identified Bacon, Locke, and Newton as 'the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception'. Their works in the physical and moral sciences were instrumental in Jefferson's education and world view.

^ Jefferson, Thomas.

"The Letters: 1743–1826 Bacon, Locke, and Newton" . Archived from the original on 31 December 2009 . Retrieved 13 June 2009 .

Bacon, Locke and Newton, whose pictures I will trouble you to have copied for me: and as I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical & Moral sciences.

^ "Jefferson called Bacon, Newton, and Locke, who had so indelibly shaped his ideas, 'my trinity of the three greatest men the world had ever produced' " .

Explorer . Monticello.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2012 . Retrieved 28 August 2012 .

^ Seigel, Jerrold (2005).

The Idea of the Self: Thought and Experience in Western Europe since the Seventeenth Century . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Taylor, Charles (1989).

Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity . Cambridge: Harvard University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Schultz, Duane P. (2008).

A History of Modern Psychology (9th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomas Higher Education. pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 978-0495097990 .

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Wright, Edmund, ed. (2006).

The Desk Encyclopedia of World History . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 374.

ISBN 978-0739478097 .

^ McGrath, Alister (1998).

Historical Theology, An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought . Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. pp.

214– 215.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c Heussi 1956 .

^ Olmstead 1960 , p. 18.

^ Stahl, H.

(1957). "Baptisten".

Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German).

3 (1). col. 863.

^ Halbrooks, G. Thomas; Erich Geldbach; Bill J. Leonard; Brian Stanley (2011).

"Baptists" .

Religion Past and Present .

doi : 10.1163/1877-5888_rpp_COM_01472 .

ISBN 978-9004146662 .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

.

^ Olmstead 1960 , pp. 102–105.

^ Olmstead 1960 , p. 5.

^ Cohen, Martin (2008), Philosophical Tales , Blackwell, p. 101 .

^ Tully, James (2007), An Approach to Political Philosophy: Locke in Contexts , New York: Cambridge University Press, p. 128, ISBN 978-0521436380 ^ Farr, J. (1986). "I. 'So Vile and Miserable an Estate': The Problem of Slavery in Locke's Political Thought".

Political Theory .

14 (2): 263– 289.

doi : 10.1177/0090591786014002005 .

JSTOR 191463 .

S2CID 145020766 .

.

^ Farr, J. (2008). "Locke, Natural Law, and New World Slavery".

Political Theory .

36 (4): 495– 522.

doi : 10.1177/0090591708317899 .

S2CID 159542780 .

.

^ Brewer 2017 , p. 1052.

^ Brewer 2017 , pp. 1053–1054.

^ Brewer 2017 , pp. 1066 & 1072.

^ Diamond, J., The World Before Yesterday ^ Thompson, E. P. (1968).

The Making of the English Working Class . Penguin.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c Locke, John (1997a). "An Essay on the Poor Law". In Mark Goldie (ed.).

Locke: Political Essays . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Jolley, Nicholas (2015).

"Animals" .

Locke's Touchy Subjects: Materialism and Immortality . Oxford University Press. pp.

33– 49.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198737094.003.0003 .

ISBN 978-0198737094 .

^ Locke, John. [1690] 2017.

Second Treatise of Government Archived 16 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine (10th ed.), digitized by D. Gowan.

Project Gutenberg . Retrieved 2 June 2020.

^ Zuckert, Michael (1996), The Natural Rights Republic , Notre Dame University Press, pp.

73– 85 ^ Wills, Garry (2002), Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of Independence , Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co ^ Skinner, Quentin, Visions of Politics , Cambridge .

^ Locke, John (2009), Two Treatises on Government: A Translation into Modern English , Industrial Systems Research, p. 81, ISBN 978-0906321478 [ permanent dead link ] ^ "John Locke: Inequality is inevitable and necessary" . Department of Philosophy The University of Hong Kong. Archived from the original (MS PowerPoint) on 9 May 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ Locke, John.

"Second Treatise" . The Founders Constitution. §§ 25–51, 123–126. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ Cliff, Cobb; Foldvary, Fred.

"John Locke on Property" . The School of Cooperative Individualism. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 October 2012 .

^ Locke, John (1691), Some Considerations on the consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money , Marxists, archived from the original on 24 March 2015 , retrieved 4 July 2007 .

^ "Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest, and Raising the Value of Money (Diplomatic)" .

www.newtonproject.ox.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 2 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 March 2024 .

^ a b Vaughn, Karen (1978).

"John Locke and the Labor Theory of Value" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

2 (4): 311– 326. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2011.

^ Engle, Eric (15 September 2008).

"Karl Marx's Intellectual Roots in John Locke" .

Postmodern Openings .

7 (7). Rochester, NY: 35– 36.

SSRN 1268545 – via SSRN.

^ Locke 1997b , p. 307.

^ Locke 1997b , p. 306.

^ The American International Encyclopedia , vol. 9, New York: JJ Little Co, 1954 .

^ Angus, Joseph (1880).

The Handbook of Specimens of English Literature . London: William Clowes and Sons . p. 324.

^ "Clarke [née Jepp], Mary".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/66720 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ a b Locke 1996 , p. 10.

^ Locke 1997b , p. 357.

^ "Dreaming, Philosophy of – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

utm.edu .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 December 2016 .

^ Forster, Greg (2005), John Locke's politics of moral consensus .

^ Parker, Kim Ian (2004), The Biblical Politics of John Locke , Canadian Corporation for Studies in Religion .

^ Locke, John (2002), Nuovo, Victor (ed.), Writings on religion , Oxford {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

^ a b Marshall, John (1994), John Locke: resistance, religion and responsibility , Cambridge, p. 426 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

^ Wainwright, Arthur W., ed. (1987).

The Clarendon Edition of the Works of John Locke: A Paraphrase and Notes on the Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, Ephesians . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 806.

ISBN 978-0198248064 .

^ Waldron 2002 , pp. 27, 223.

^ Nelson 2019 , pp. 7–8.

^ Waldron 2002 , p. 145.

^ Henrich, D (1960), "Locke, John", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German) , 3. Auflage, Band IV, Spalte 426 ^ Waldron 2002 , pp. 217 ff.

^ a b Waldron 2002 , p. 13.

^ Dunn, John (1969), The Political Thought of John Locke: A Historical Account of the Argument of the 'Two Treatises of Government' , Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, p. 99, [The Two Treatises of Government are] saturated with Christian assumptions.

.

^ Wolterstorff, Nicholas . 1994. " John Locke's Epistemological Piety: Reason Is The Candle Of The Lord Archived 22 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine ." Faith and Philosophy 11(4):572–591.

^ Waldron 2002 , p. 142.

^ Elze, M (1958), "Grotius, Hugo", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German) 2(3):1885–1886.

^ Hohlwein, H (1961), "Pufendorf, Samuel Freiherr von", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German) , 5(3):721.

^ Waldron 2002 , p. 12.

^ Waldron 2002 , pp. 22–43, 45–46, 101, 153–158, 195, 197.

^ Waldron 2002 , pp. 21–43.

^ Waldron 2002 , p. 136.

^ Locke, John (1947).

Two Treatises of Government . New York: Hafner Publishing Company. pp.

17– 18, 35, 38.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Becker, Carl .

The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas . 1970 [1922].

Google Book Search . Revised ed., New York: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0394700601 .

^ Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971).

The Library of John Locke . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 1.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c d Quoted in Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971).

The Library of John Locke . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 8.

^ Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971).

The Library of John Locke . Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 57–61.

^ a b c d Bodleian Library.

"Rare Books Named Collections" .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 March 2021 .

^ Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971).

The Library of John Locke . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 20.

^ Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971).

The Library of John Locke . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 18.

^ a b c d e Clapinson, M, and TD Rogers. 1991.

Summary Catalogue of Post-Medieval Western Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, Oxford . Vol. 2. Oxford University Press.

^ The works of Robert Boyle , vol. 12. Edited by Michael Hunter and Edward B. Davis. London: Pickering & Chatto, 2000, pp. xviii–xxi.

^ James Farr and Clayton Robers. "John Locke on the Glorious Revolution: a Rediscovered Document" Historical Journal 28 (1985): 395–398.

^ Richard Yeo, Notebooks, English Virtuosi (University of Chicago Press, 2014), 183.

^ John Locke, The Educational Writings of John Locke , ed. James Axtell (Cambridge University Press, 1968), 421.

^ Richard Yeo, Notebooks, English Virtuosi (University of Chicago Press, 2014), 218.

^ G. G. Meynell, "John Locke's Method of Common-Placing, as seen in His Drafts and His Medical Notebooks, Bodleian MSS Locke d. 9, f. 21 and f. 23," The Seventeenth Century 8, no. 2 (1993): 248.

^ Michael Stolberg, "John Locke's 'New Method of Making Common-Place-Books': Tradition, Innovation and Epistemic Effects," Early Science and Medicine 19, no. 5 (2014): 448–470.

^ John Locke, A New Method of Making Common-Place-Books (London: Printed for J. Greenood, 1706), 4.

^ G. G. Meynell, "A Database for John Locke's Medical Notebooks and Medical Reading," Medical History 42 (1997): 478 ^ "The manuscripts, Letter from Andrew Millar to Thomas Cadell, 16 July, 1765. University of Edinburgh" .

www.millar-project.ed.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 June 2016 .

^ Locke, John. [1664] 1990.

Questions Concerning the Law of Nature (definitive Latin text), translated by R. Horwitz, et al. Ithaca: Cornell University Press .

Sources Ashcraft, Richard (1986).

Revolutionary Politics & Locke's Two Treatises of Government . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691022482 .

OCLC 13124720 .

Discusses the relationship between Locke's philosophy and his political activities.

Ayers, Michael R.

(1991).

Locke. Epistemology & Ontology . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415100304 .

OCLC 27894801 .

the standard work on Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding.

Bailyn, Bernard (1992) [1967].

The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674443013 .

OCLC 494071 .

Discusses the influence of Locke and other thinkers upon the American Revolution and on subsequent American political thought.

Brewer, Holly (October 2017).

"Slavery, Sovereignty, and "Inheritable Blood": Reconsidering John Locke and the Origins of American Slavery" .

American Historical Review .

122 (4): 1038– 1078.

doi : 10.1093/ahr/122.4.1038 .

Cohen, Gerald (1995). "Marx and Locke on Land and Labour".

Self-Ownership, Freedom and Equality . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0521471749 .

OCLC 31867308 .

Cox, Richard (1960).

Locke on War and Peace . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0819126627 .

OCLC 8669289 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Chappell, Vere C.

(1994).

The Cambridge Companion to Locke (1st ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521383714 .

OCLC 28854426 .

Dunn, John (1984).

Locke . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Dunn, John (1988).

The Political Thought of John Locke: An Historical Account of the Argument of the Two Treatises of Government (Reprinted ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521074087 .

OCLC 1077366466 .

Introduced the interpretation which emphasises the theological element in Locke's political thought.

Henderson, David R.

, ed. (2008).

"John Locke (1632–1704)" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . pp.

558– 559.

ISBN 978-0865976665 .

Heussi, Karl (1956), Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte (in German), Tübingen, DE {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Hudson, Nicholas (1997). "John Locke and the Tradition of Nominalism". In Hugo Keiper; Christoph Bode ; Richard Utz (eds.).

Nominalism and Literary Discourse . Amsterdam: Rodopi. pp.

283– 299.

ISBN 978-9042002883 .

OCLC 38471194 .

Jones, Howard (2010). "Epicurus and Epicureanism". In Grafton, Anthony ; Most, Glenn W.

; Settis, Salvatore (eds.).

The Classical Tradition . Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. pp.

320– 324.

ISBN 978-0674035720 .

Laslett, Peter (1988), Locke: Two Treatises of Government , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521354486 Locke, John; Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971).

The Library of John Locke (2nd ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198181392 .

OCLC 211643 .

Locke, John (1996). Grant, Ruth W; Tarcov, Nathan (eds.).

Some Thoughts Concerning Education and of the Conduct of the Understanding . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co . p. 10.

[ ISBN missing ] Locke, John (1997b).

Woolhouse, Roger (ed.).

An Essay Concerning Human Understanding . New York: Penguin Books .

[ ISBN missing ] Locke Studies , appearing annually from 2001, formerly The Locke Newsletter (1970–2000), publishes scholarly work on John Locke.

Macpherson, C.B.

; Cunningham, Frank (2011) [1962].

The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke (Wynford ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195444018 .

OCLC 648388121 .

Establishes the deep affinity from Hobbes to Harrington, the Levellers, and Locke through to nineteenth-century utilitarianism.

Nelson, Eric (2019).

The Theology of Liberalism: Political Philosophy and the Justice of God . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674240940 .

Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 .

Olmstead, Clifton E (1960).

History of Religion in the United States . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

OCLC 221231467 .

Tully, James (1980).

A Discourse on Property: John Locke and his Adversaries . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521271400 .

OCLC 9990099 .

Waldron, Jeremy (2002).

God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521890571 .

Yolton, John W.

(1969). John W. Yolton (ed.).

John Locke: Problems and Perspectives . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521073493 .

OCLC 35944 .

Yolton, John W.

(1993).

A Locke Dictionary . Oxford: Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0631175476 .

OCLC 26934829 .

Zuckert, Michael (2002).

Launching Liberalism: On Lockean Political Philosophy . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0700611737 .

External links John Locke at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Works Works by John Locke in eBook form at Standard Ebooks The Clarendon Edition of the Works of John Locke Of the Conduct of the Understanding Works by John Locke at Project Gutenberg Works by or about John Locke at the Internet Archive Works by John Locke at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Work by John Locke at Online Books The Works of John Locke 1823 Edition, 10 volumes on PDF files, and additional resources Archived 10 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine John Locke Manuscripts Archived 13 October 2009 at the Portuguese Web Archive Updated versions of Essay Concerning Human Understanding , Second Treatise of Government , Letter on Toleration and Conduct of the Understanding , edited (i.e. modernised and abridged) by Jonathan Bennett Resources "John Locke" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"John Locke: Epistemology" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"John Locke: Political Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Rickless, Samuel.

"Locke on Freedom" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

John Locke Bibliography Archived 13 October 2009 at the Portuguese Web Archive Locke Studies An Annual Journal of Locke Research Archived 13 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Hewett, Caspar, John Locke's Theory of Knowledge , UK: The great debate .

The Digital Locke Project , NL , archived from the original on 1 January 2014 , retrieved 27 February 2007 .

Portraits of Locke , UK: NPG, archived from the original on 24 May 2008 , retrieved 18 April 2007 .

Huyler, Jerome, Was Locke a Liberal?

(PDF) , Independent, archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009 , retrieved 2 August 2008 , a complex and positive answer.

Kraynak, Robert P. (March 1980). "John Locke: from absolutism to toleration".

American Political Science Review .

74 (1): 53– 69.

doi : 10.2307/1955646 .

JSTOR 1955646 .

S2CID 146901427 .

Articles and topics related to John Locke v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Philosophy of education Philosophers Dewey Freire Fröbel Herbart Humboldt Locke Montessori Pestalozzi Piaget Rousseau Steiner Vygotsky more...

Concepts Active learning Student-centred learning What to teach Classicism Contemplative education Critical pedagogy Critical theory Critical thinking Democratic education Educational essentialism Educational existentialism Educational perennialism Idealism Popular education Pragmatism Progressive education Realism Social reconstructionism Theism How and whom to teach Behaviorism Cognitivism Compulsory education Constructivism Criticism of schooling Humanism Montessori education Unschooling Waldorf education Related Cognitive science Psychology Category Discussion v t e American Revolutionary War Origins of the American Revolution Philosophy American Enlightenment John Locke Colonial history Liberalism Republicanism Freedom of religion Rights of Englishmen No taxation without representation Common Sense Spirit of '76 " All men are created equal " " Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness " " Consent of the governed " Expansionism Settler colonialism Royalists Pitt–Newcastle ministry Bute ministry Grenville ministry First Rockingham ministry Chatham ministry Grafton ministry North ministry Second Rockingham ministry Shelburne ministry Fox–North coalition Loyalists Black Loyalist Related British acts of Parliament Navigation Iron Molasses Royal Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Currency Quartering Stamp up i.p.o Declaratory Townshend Tea Quebec Intolerable Conciliatory Resolution Restraining Proclamation of Rebellion Prohibitory Colonials Loyal Nine Stamp Act Congress Declaration of Rights and Grievances Virginia Association Daughters of Liberty Sons of Liberty Patriots Black Patriots Committees of correspondence Committees of safety Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania Massachusetts Circular Letter Suffolk Resolves Continental Congress First Continental Congress Continental Association Minutemen Provincial Congress Second Continental Congress United Colonies Olive Branch Petition Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms Committee of Secret Correspondence Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Model Treaty Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Confederation Congress Events French and Indian War Treaty of Paris (1763) Boston Massacre British credit crisis of 1772–1773 Gaspee affair Hutchinson letters affair Boston Tea Party Philadelphia Tea Party Powder Alarm Combatants Campaigns Theaters Battles Events Colonies Combatants United Colonies / Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Board of War Army Navy Marines Kingdom of Great Britain Parliament British Army Royal Navy European allies of King George III Colonial allies France Franco-American Treaty Army Navy Hortalez et Cie German supporters of Congress Campaigns and theaters Boston Quebec Nova Scotia New York and New Jersey Saratoga Philadelphia Northern Northern after Saratoga Southern Western Yorktown Naval battles Major battles Lexington and Concord Boston Capture of Fort Ticonderoga Bunker Hill Quebec Valcour Island Long Island Harlem Heights Fort Washington Trenton Assunpink Creek Princeton Siege of Fort Ticonderoga Bennington Saratoga Oriskany Brandywine Germantown Monmouth St. Lucia Grenada Stony Point Sullivan Expedition Savannah Gibraltar Cape St. Vincent Charleston Connecticut Farms Springfield Camden Kings Mountain Cowpens Pensacola Guilford Court House Lochry's Defeat Chesapeake Yorktown The Saintes Other events Staten Island Peace Conference "First Salute" Washington's crossing of the Delaware River Conway Cabal Valley Forge Entry of France into war Carlisle Peace Commission Gordon Riots Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1781 Sint Eustatius Newburgh Conspiracy Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 Related conflicts Cherokee–American wars Fourth Anglo-Dutch War Second Anglo-Mysore War Involvement (by colony or location) Rebel colonies Connecticut Delaware Georgia Maryland Massachusetts New Hampshire New Jersey New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Virginia Loyal colonies East Florida Nova Scotia Quebec West Florida Leaders British Military Arbuthnot Brant Burgoyne Campbell Carleton Clinton Cornwallis Fraser Gage Graves Richard Howe William Howe Knyphausen Rodney Civilian King George III Amherst Barrington Germain North Rockingham Sandwich Shelburne Colonial Military Washington Alexander Allen Arnold Barry Claghorn Clark Duportail Gates Greene Hamilton Hopkins Jones de Kalb Knox Lafayette Charles Lee Lincoln Mercer Montgomery Nicholson Putnam Rodney St. Clair Schuyler von Steuben Sullivan Ward Wayne Civilian John Adams Samuel Adams Carroll Dickinson Franklin Hancock Hanson Henry Huntington Jay Jefferson Laurens Richard Henry Lee McKean Morris Revere Rush Witherspoon Colonial allies French Louis XVI Beaumarchais d'Estaing de Grasse de Guichen Luzerne de Rochambeau Suffren Vergennes Aftermath Society of the Cincinnati Treaty of Paris (1783) Evacuation Day (1783) Ratification Day (1784) Constitutional Convention The Federalist Papers Constitution Bill of Rights Shays's Rebellion Jay Treaty Related topics Military Prisoners The Turtle Tomb of the Unknown Revolutionary War Soldier Political Founding Fathers Diplomacy Liberty Tree Yankee Doodle Other topics Timeline of the American Revolution African Americans in the Revolutionary War Dogs in the American Revolutionary War Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War Women in the American Revolution Financial costs of the war Continental currency banknotes Continental Currency dollar coin Libertas Americana Commemoration films television theater Independence Day Patriots' Day Pulaski Memorial Day Washington's Birthday Jefferson's Birthday Von Steuben Day Minor holidays Centennial Sesquicentennial Bicentennial Semiquincentennial Children of the American Revolution Daughters of the American Revolution Sons of the American Revolution Sons of the Revolution Washington D.C. statuary Charters of Freedom Rotunda Museum of the American Revolution Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5q9j8
Cached time: 20250817043607
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.632 seconds
Real time usage: 3.139 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25470/1000000
Revision size: 87857/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 943218/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 219751/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 494830/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.573/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 32264240/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2439.263      1 -total
 26.75%  652.522      2 Template:Reflist
 16.78%  409.371      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 13.24%  322.921     52 Template:Cite_book
 12.89%  314.346      1 Template:Navboxes
  9.13%  222.703     19 Template:Navbox
  7.45%  181.641      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.08%  172.640      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
  6.97%  169.994      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
  5.86%  142.841     25 Template:Citation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16143:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043607 and revision id 1304964215. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Locke&oldid=1304964215 " Categories : John Locke 1632 births 1704 deaths 17th-century English male writers 17th-century English medical doctors 17th-century English philosophers 17th-century English writers Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford Anglican philosophers British expatriates in the Dutch Republic British critics of atheism Classical liberalism Empiricists English Anglicans English Christian theologians English political philosophers Enlightenment philosophers Epistemologists Fellows of Christ Church, Oxford Fellows of the Royal Society Metaphysicians People educated at Westminster School, London People from Epping Forest District People from Wrington People of the Rye House Plot English philosophers of language British philosophers of law Philosophers of education Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2022 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use British English from June 2024 Use dmy dates from June 2024 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Webarchive template other archives Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 06:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Locke 146 languages Add topic

