Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Setting 2 Plants Toggle Plants subsection 2.1 Endemic 2.2 Native 3 Land animals Toggle Land animals subsection 3.1 Amphibians 3.2 Reptiles 3.3 Mammals 3.4 Birds 3.5 Insects 3.5.1 Ants 3.6 Terrestrial invertebrates 4 Marine life Toggle Marine life subsection 4.1 Marine mammals 4.2 Fish 4.3 Marine invertebrates 4.3.1 Sea squirts 4.3.2 Crustaceans 5 Threats and preservation 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecology of Bermuda 3 languages Esperanto ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Bermuda ) Bermuda cedar on the outskirts of Hamilton .

Bermuda's ecology has an abundance of unique flora and fauna due to the island's isolation from the mainland of North America. The wide range of endemic species and the islands form a distinct ecoregion , the Bermuda subtropical conifer forests . The variety of species found both on land and in the waters surrounding Bermuda have varying positive and negative impacts on the ecosystem of the island, depending on the species. There are varying biotic and abiotic factors that have threatened and continue to threaten the island's ecology. There are, however, also means of conservation that can be used to mitigate these threats.

Setting [ edit ] Located 1,040 km (645 mi.) off the American East Coast, Bermuda is a crescent-shaped chain of 184 islands and islets that were once the rim of a volcano. The islands are slightly hilly rather than having steep cliffs, with the highest point being 79 m. The coast has many bays and inlets, with sandy beaches especially on the south coasts. Bermuda has a semi-tropical climate, warmed by the Gulf Stream current. Bermuda is very densely populated. Twenty of the islands are inhabited.

Wildlife that could fly to the island or were carried there by winds and currents formed the species. There are no native mammals other than bats , and only two reptiles , but there are large numbers of birds, plants, and insects.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Once on the island, organisms had to adapt to local conditions, such as the humid climate , lack of fresh water, frequent storms, and salt spray. The area of the islands shrank as water levels rose at the end of the Pleistocene epoch , and fewer species were able to survive in the reduced land-area. Nearly 8,000 different species of flora and fauna are known from the islands of Bermuda. The number is likely to be considerably higher if microorganisms , cave-dwellers and deep-sea species were counted.

[ 3 ] Today the variety of species on Bermuda has been greatly increased by introductions , both deliberate and accidental. Many of these introduced species have posed a threat to the native flora and fauna because of competition and interference with habitat .

Plants [ edit ] Bermuda palmetto 1904 view across Hamilton Harbour from Fort Hamilton of cedar-cloaked hills in Paget Parish Caribbean royal palm in an 1895 photo Over 1000 species of vascular plants are found on the islands, the majority of which were introduced. Of the 165 native species, 17 are endemic.

Forest cover is around 20% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,000 hectares of forest in 2020, which was unchanged from 1990.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] At the time of the first human settlement by shipwrecked English sailors in 1593, Bermuda was dominated by forests of Bermuda cedar ( Juniperus bermudiana ) [ 6 ] with mangrove swamps on the coast. More deliberate settlement began after 1609, and colonists began clearing forests to use for building and shipmaking, and to develop agricultural cultivation. By the 1830s, the demands of the shipbuilding industry had denuded the forests, but these recovered in many areas.

In the 1940s the cedar forests were devastated by introduced scale insects , which killed roughly eight million trees. Replanting using resistant trees has taken place since then, but the area covered by cedar is only 10% of what it used to be. Another important component of the original forest was Bermuda palmetto ( Sabal bermudana ), a small palm tree . It now grows in a few small patches, notably at Paget Marsh . Other trees and shrubs include Bermuda olivewood ( Cassine laneana ) and Bermuda snowberry ( Chiococca alba ). The climate allows for the growth of other introduced palms such as royal palm ( Roystonea spp.) and coconut palm ( Cocos nucifera ), although the coconuts seldom fruit properly, due to the relatively moderate temperatures on the island. Bermuda is the farthest north location where coconut palms grow naturally.

[ 7 ] Remnant patches of mangrove swamp can be found around the coast and at some inland sites, including Hungry Bay Nature Reserve and Mangrove Lake . These are important for moderating the effects of storms and providing transitional habitats. Here black mangrove ( Avicennia germinans ) and red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ) are the northernmost mangroves in the Atlantic. The inland swamps are particularly interesting as mangroves thrive in salty water; in this case, the saltwater arrives through underground channels rather than the usual tidal wash of coastal mangrove swamps. Areas of peat marsh include Devonshire, Pembroke, and Paget marshes.

Bermuda has four endemic ferns : [ 8 ] Bermuda maidenhair fern ( Adiantum bellum ), Bermuda shield fern ( Thelypteris bermudiana ), [ 9 ] Bermuda cave fern ( Ctenitis sloanei ) and Governor Laffan's fern ( Diplazium laffanianum ).

[ 10 ] The latter is extinct in the wild but is grown at Bermuda Botanical Gardens . The endemic flora of the island also include two mosses , ten lichens and forty fungi .

Among the many introduced species are the casuarina ( Casuarina equisetifolia ) and Suriname cherry ( Eugenia uniflora ).

Endemic [ edit ] Trees and palms Bermuda cedars ( Juniperus bermudiana ) in the cemetery of St. John's Church (Church of England), Pembroke, Bermuda 2016 Bermuda cedar ( Juniperus bermudiana ) Bermuda olivewood ( Cassine laneana ) Bermuda palmetto ( Sabal bermudana ) Shrubs Bermuda snowberry ( Chiococca alba ) St. Andrew's cross ( Hypericum macrosepalum ) St. Andrew's cross leaf Flowers, grasses, ferns and others Wild Bermuda pepper ( Peperomia septentrionalis ) Bermuda sedge ( Carex bermudiana ) Bermuda sedge ( Carex bermudiana ) flower Bermuda maidenhair fern ( Adiantum bellum ) Bermudiana ( Sisyrinchium bermudiana ) Darrell's fleabane ( Erigeron darrellianus ) Bermuda campylopus (moss) ( Campylopus bermudianus ) Bermuda bean ( Phaseolus lignosus ) Bermuda spike rush ( Eleocharis bermudiana ) Bermuda trichostomum (moss) ( Trichostomum bermudanum ) Governor Laffan's fern ( Diplazium laffanianum ) Native [ edit ] Bay grape ( Coccoloba uvifera ) Box briar ( Randia aculeata ) Buttonwood ( Conocarpus erectus ) Jamaica dogwood ( Dodonaea viscosa ) Red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ) Seven year apple ( Casasia clusiifolia ) Shrubby fleabane ( Pluchea odorata ) Southern hackberry ( Celtis laevigata ) Tassel plant ( Suriana maritima ) Forestiera ( Forestiera segregata ) Lamarcks trema ( Trema lamarckiana ) Black mangrove ( Avicennia nitida ) White stopper ( Eugenia axillaris ) Wild coffee shrub ( Psychotria undata ) Yellow wood ( Zanthoxylum flavum ) Land animals [ edit ] Amphibians [ edit ] Bermuda has no native amphibians . A species of toad, cane toad ( Rhinella marina ), and two species of frog, Antilles coqui ( Eleutherodactylus johnstonei ), and Eleutherodactylus gossei were introduced by humans through the transportation of orchids to the island prior to the 1900s, and subsequently became naturalized.

R. marina and E. johnstonei are common, but E. gossei is thought to have been recently extirpated . They are nocturnal and can often be heard at night in Bermuda. Their songs are most prevalent from April until November.

[ 11 ] Reptiles [ edit ] Four species of lizard and two species of turtle comprise Bermuda's non-marine reptilian fauna. Of the lizards, the Bermuda rock lizard ( Plestiodon longirostris ), also known as the rock lizard or Bermuda skink, is the only endemic species.

[ 2 ] Once very common, the Bermuda skink is critically endangered . The Jamaican anole ( Anolis grahami ) was deliberately introduced in 1905 from Jamaica and is now by far the most common lizard in Bermuda. The Leach's anole ( Anolis leachii ) was accidentally introduced from Antigua about 1940 and is now common. The Barbados anole ( Anolis extremus ) was accidentally introduced about 1940 and is rarely seen. The diamondback terrapin ( Malaclemys terrapin ) is native to Bermuda.

[ 1 ] The red-eared slider turtle ( Trachemys scripta elegans ) was introduced as a pet, but has subsequently become invasive .

[ 12 ] Mammals [ edit ] All mammals in Bermuda were introduced by humans, except for four species of migratory North American bats of the genus Lasiurus : the hoary bat , eastern red bat , Seminole bat and silver-haired bat . Early accounts refer to wild or feral hogs, descendants of pigs left by the Spanish and Portuguese as feedstock for ships stopping at the islands for supplies. The house mouse , brown rat and black rat were accidentally introduced soon after the settlement of Bermuda, and feral cats have become common as another introduced species.

Birds [ edit ] A white-eyed vireo ( Vireo griseus bermudianus ) Juvenile eastern bluebird ( Sialia sialis bermudensis ), from below Over 360 species of bird have been recorded on Bermuda. The majority of these are migrants or vagrants from North America or elsewhere. Only 24 species breed on the island; 13 of these are thought to be native.

One endemic species is the Bermuda petrel or cahow ( Pterodroma cahow ), which was thought to have been extinct since the 1620s. Its ground-nesting habitats had been severely disrupted by introduced species and colonists had killed the birds for food. In 1951, researchers discovered 18 breeding pairs, and started a recovery program to preserve and protect the species.

Another endemic subspecies is the Bermuda white-eyed vireo or chick-of-the-village ( Vireo griseus bermudianus ). The national bird of Bermuda is the white-tailed tropicbird or longtail, which is a summer migrant to Bermuda, its most northerly breeding site. Other native birds include the eastern bluebird , grey catbird and perhaps the common ground dove . The common gallinule is the most common native waterbird; very small numbers of American coot and pied-billed grebe are breeding. Small numbers of common tern nest around the coast. The barn owl and mourning dove colonized the island during the 20th century, and the green heron has recently begun to breed.

A white-tailed tropicbird or longtail Of the introduced birds, the European starling , house sparrow , great kiskadee , rock dove , American crow and chicken [ 13 ] are all very numerous and considered to be pests. Other introduced species include the mallard , northern cardinal , European goldfinch and small numbers of orange-cheeked and common waxbills . The yellow-crowned night heron was introduced in the 1970s to replace the extinct native heron .

Fossil remains of a variety of species have been found on the island, including a crane , an owl and the short-tailed albatross . Some of these became extinct as the islands' land-mass shrank by nine tenths after the Last Glacial Maximum , while others were exterminated by early settlers. The Bermuda petrel was thought to be extinct until its rediscovery in 1951.

Among the many non-breeding migrants are a variety of shorebirds , herons and ducks . In spring many shearwaters can be seen of the South Shore. Over 30 species of New World warbler are seen each year, with the yellow-rumped warbler being the most abundant. The arrival of many species is dependent on weather conditions; low-pressure systems moving across from North America often bring many birds to the islands. Among the rare visitors recorded are the Siberian flycatcher from Asia and the fork-tailed flycatcher and tropical kingbird from South America.

Insects [ edit ] Lawrence Ogilvie , Bermuda's agricultural scientist 1923 to 1928 identified 395 local insects and wrote the Department of Agriculture's 52-page book The Insects of Bermuda , including Aphis ogilviei , which he discovered.

Ants [ edit ] There are four ant species found in Bermuda. The African big-headed ant ( Pheidole megacephala ) and Argentine ant ( Linepithema humile ) are both invasive to Bermuda. The African ant was first recorded on the island in 1889, and the Argentine ant arrived in Bermuda in the 1940s. These two ants battle for territory and control over the island. Furthermore, there is the Bermuda ant ( Odontomachus insularis ), which is indigenous to the island. This ant was initially presumed to be extinct, however, they were re-discovered alive in July 2002. Carpenter ants ( Camponotus spp.) are also found in Bermuda.

[ 14 ] Terrestrial invertebrates [ edit ] Monarch butterfly More than 1100 kinds of insects and spiders are found on Bermuda, including 41 endemic insects and a possibly endemic spider. Eighteen species of butterfly have been seen; about six of these breed on the islands, including the large monarch and the very common Bermuda buckeye ( Junonia coenia bergi ). More than 200 moths have been recorded; one of the most conspicuous is Pseudosphinx tetrio , which can reach 14 cm (5.5 in) in wingspan.

Bermuda has lost a number of its endemic invertebrates, including the Bermuda cicada ( Neotibicen bermudianus ), which became extinct when the cedar forests disappeared. Some species feared extinct have been rediscovered, including a Bermuda land snail ( Poecilozonties circumfirmatus ) and the Bermuda ant ( Odontomachus insularis ).

Marine life [ edit ] Humpback whale Bermuda lies on the western edge of the Sargasso Sea , an area with high salinity, high temperature and few currents. Large quantities of seaweed of the genus Sargassum are present and there are high concentrations of plankton , but the area is less attractive to commercial fish species and seabirds .

Greater diversity is present in the coral reefs which surround the island.

Marine mammals [ edit ] A variety of whales , dolphins and porpoises have been recorded in the waters around Bermuda. The most common of these is the humpback whale , which passes the islands in April and May during its northward migration.

Fish [ edit ] There are many fish species in Bermuda's waters, such as the barracuda , Bermuda chub , bluestriped grunt , hogfish , longspine squirrelfish , various types of parrotfish , smooth trunkfish , and slippery dick , to name a few.

[ 11 ] Marine invertebrates [ edit ] Sea squirts [ edit ] There are various types of sea squirts, such as the black sea squirt ( Phallusia nigra ), the purple sea squirt ( Clavelina picta ), the orange sea squirt ( Ecteinascidia turbinata ), and the lacy sea squirt ( Botrylloides nigrum ).

[ 11 ] Crustaceans [ edit ] There are various types of crabs in Bermuda. There are, Sally Lightfoot crabs ( Grapsus grapsus ), decorator crabs , swimming crabs ( Portunidae ), spider crabs ( Majoidea ), and Verrill's hermit crab ( Calcinus verrillii ). Great land crabs ( Cardisoma guanhumi ) are hard to find, but present in Bermuda. Finally, there is the Bermuda land crab ( Gecarcinus lateralis ), which is native, but not exclusive to, Bermuda.

[ 11 ] Threats and preservation [ edit ] Bermuda was the first place in the Americas to pass conservation laws, protecting the Bermuda petrel in 1616 and the Bermuda cedar in 1622. It has a well-organised network of protected areas including Spittal Pond , marshes in Paget and Devonshire and Pembroke Parishes , Warwick Pond and the hills above Castle Harbour .

Only small areas of natural forest remain today; much was cleared since colonisation began in the 17th century, and recovered forest was lost in the 1940s due to insect infestation. The Bermuda petrel and Bermuda skink are highly endangered, and Bermuda cedar, Bermuda palmetto and Bermuda olivewood are all listed as threatened species. Some wild plants, including a spike rush , have disappeared. Introduced plants and animals have had adverse effects on the wildlife of the islands. The thriving tourist industry creates its own challenges to preserve the wildlife and habitat that attract visitors.

Parrotfish are crucial to the coral reefs of Bermuda. Overfishing has caused issues for parrotfish that live in the coastal waters of other islands, such as the U.S. Virgin Islands. Looking at these instances in other habitats can help conservationists prevent the parrotfish population in Bermuda from experiencing decline as well.

[ 15 ] Birds such as the white-tailed tropicbird (Bermuda longtail) are strongly affected by hurricanes, as the hurricanes harm individuals and destroy their nests, which makes reproduction nearly impossible. Invasive species have been known to use similar nesting sites. Specifically, the rock pigeon often builds its nests within crevices around the island, including on rocky shorelines and cracks in Bermuda's tall cliffs. This is also where the Bermuda longtail nests, so the competition makes reproduction harder for the local species.

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Parham, James (23 April 2008).

"Introduced delicacy or native species? A natural origin of Bermudian terrapins supported by fossil and genetic data" .

Biology Letters .

4 (2): 216– 219.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2007.0599 .

PMC 2429930 .

PMID 18270164 .

^ a b Brandley, Matthew C.; Wang, Yuezhao; Guo, Xianguang; Nieto Montes De Oca, Adrián; Fería Ortíz, Manuel; Hikida, Tsutomu; Ota, Hidetoshi (2010).

"Bermuda as an Evolutionary Life Raft for an Ancient Lineage of Endangered Lizards" .

PLOS ONE .

5 (6): e11375.

Bibcode : 2010PLoSO...511375B .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0011375 .

PMC 2894854 .

PMID 20614024 .

^ Bermuda Aquarium, Museum & Zoo.

"Bermuda Biodiversity Project" . Archived from the original on 12 August 2010 . Retrieved 2 October 2010 .

^ Terms and Definitions FRA 2025 Forest Resources Assessment, Working Paper 194 . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2023.

^ "Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020, Bermuda" .

Food Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .

^ https://archive.org/stream/floraofbermuda00brit#page/n7/mode/2up.htm / ^ International Palm Society ^ "Bermuda Conservation - Endemic Ferns" . Archived from the original on 5 March 2010 . Retrieved 5 October 2010 .

^ "Bermuda Shield Fern ( Thelypteris bermudiana )" ^ "Governor Laffan's Fern ( Diplazium laffanianum )" ^ a b c d "Bermuda's Fauna" .

Bermuda and her North Atlantic Islands . Retrieved 5 November 2024 .

^ "Red-eared slider" , Conservation ^ "Bermuda Conservation - Feral Chickens" . Archived from the original on 9 December 2014 . Retrieved 12 March 2015 .

^ a b "Bermuda's Fauna" .

Bermuda and her North Atlantic Islands . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

^ Bell, Jonathan (15 September 2016).

"New study of parrotfish" .

www.royalgazette.com . Retrieved 5 November 2024 .

Amos, Eric J. R. (1991) A Guide to the Birds of Bermuda , privately published.

Bermuda Aquarium, Museum and Zoo Bermuda Biodiversity Project Archived 2010-08-12 at the Wayback Machine , downloaded 21 February 2007.

Dobson, A. (2002) A Birdwatching Guide to Bermuda , Arlequin Press, Chelmsford, UK.

Flora of Bermuda (Illustrated) by Nathaniel Lord Britton, Ph.D., Sc.D., LL.D.

(Published 1918) Forbes, Keith Archibald (2007) Bermuda's Fauna , downloaded downloaded 21 February 2007.

Gehrman, Elizabeth (2102) Rare Birds: The Extraordinary Tale of the Bermuda Petrel and the Man Who Brought It Back from Extinction (Beacon Press).

Ogden, George (2002) Bermuda A Gardener's Guide , The Garden Club of Bermuda Ogilvie , Lawrence (1928) The Insects of Bermuda Raine, André (2003) A Field Guide to the Birds of Bermuda , Macmillan, Oxford.

"Bermuda subtropical conifer forests" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 7 February 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Bermuda Audubon Society Bermuda biodiversity, Flickr Bermuda National Trust Bermuda Government, Department of Environment and Natural Resources v t e Bermuda articles History Hurricane strikes Railway Sloop Colonisation London Company Sea Venture George Somers Somers Isles Company Nathaniel Butler Military Bermuda Base Command (World War II) Militias 1612–1687 1687–1813 1813 North American Station RAF in Bermuda during World War II USN Submarine Base, Ordnance Island Volunteer/Territorial Army Units 1895–1965 Geography Bermuda Triangle Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS) Islands National Trust Sargasso Sea Spittal Pond Environment Flora Bermuda onion (cultivated) Casuarina (invasive) Elaeodendron laneanum Juniperus bermudiana Lilium longiflorum (cultivated) Sabal bermudana Sisyrinchium bermudiana Fauna Bermuda land snail Bermuda petrel Bermuda rock skink Common ground dove Eastern bluebird Gray catbird Great kiskadee Humpback whale Mourning dove Northern cardinal White-eyed vireo White-tailed tropicbird Yellow-crowned night heron Schools State Berkeley Institute Cedarbridge Academy Independent Bermuda HS Bermuda Institute Saltus Grammar School Warwick Academy Tertiary Bermuda College Politics British Overseas Territories Elections Governor Law enforcement LGBT rights Parliament Political parties Premiers Economy ACE Ltd.

Bermudian dollar (currency) Butterfield Bank Electricity HSBC Bank Bermuda Industrial Union Monetary Authority Public Services Association Stock Exchange Transport XL Capital Society Places Places of interest The Causeway The Fairmont Hamilton Princess Government House Hamilton, Bermuda Lighthouses Royal Naval Dockyard Somerset Bridge Victoria Park, Hamilton Communications Bermuda Broadcasting Company Newspapers Postal codes TV stations Culture Architecture Bermudian English Coat of arms Cuisine Gombey Kites Music Public holidays Bermuda Day Shorts Sports and recreation Religion Anglican Church of Bermuda Cathedral of the Most Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Diocese of Hamilton in Bermuda Cathedral of Saint Theresa of Lisieux Outline Index Category v t e Ecology of  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐d6gpr
Cached time: 20250817161739
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.497 seconds
Real time usage: 0.649 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2626/1000000
Revision size: 25413/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 97006/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17415/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77475/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.242/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7546711/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  528.031      1 -total
 32.92%  173.841      1 Template:Bermuda_topics
 32.53%  171.751      1 Template:Territory_topics
 26.71%  141.048      1 Template:Reflist
 15.73%   83.055      2 Template:Cite_journal
 12.45%   65.756      1 Template:Short_description
  7.48%   39.486      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.47%   34.155      7 Template:Cite_web
  4.39%   23.186      1 Template:Convert
  2.97%   15.697      8 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2147062:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817161739 and revision id 1288081535. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecology_of_Bermuda&oldid=1288081535 " Categories : Biota of Bermuda Environment of Bermuda Flora of Bermuda Nearctic ecoregions Natural history of Bermuda Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests Wildlife by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from December 2024 Use dmy dates from December 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 09:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecology of Bermuda 3 languages Add topic

