Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Elements of the dispute 3 See also 4 Notes and references 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Positivism dispute 7 languages Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1960s political and philosophical dispute This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a review .

Please help rewrite it in a neutral , encyclopedic style. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The positivism dispute (German: Positivismusstreit ) was a political-philosophical dispute between the critical rationalists ( Karl Popper , Hans Albert ) and the Frankfurt School ( Theodor Adorno , Jürgen Habermas ) in 1961, about the methodology of the social sciences . It grew into a broader discussion within German sociology from 1961 to 1969. The name itself was controversial, inasmuch as the Frankfurt School proponents accused the critical rationalists of being positivists – this despite the latter considering themselves to be opponents of positivism .

Overview [ edit ] The debate began in 1961 in Tübingen , West Germany , at the Conference of the German Society of Sociology.  The speakers at the conference were invited to discuss the differences between social and natural sciences and the status of values in the social sciences.

In 1963, the debate was heated by Jürgen Habermas in the Festschrift für Adorno ( writings in honor of Adorno). The debate became more intensely critical at Sociology Day in Heidelberg when Herbert Marcuse joined the discussion. A spirited literary debate between Habermas and Hans Albert sprang up and positivism became the centre of the debate.

The participants also discussed the question of whether Popper's and Albert's critical rationalism had exacerbated ethical problems. The Frankfurt School believed this should be impossible, because as a theory of science critical rationalism is seen to be restricted to the field of knowledge.

The famous dispute inspired a collection of essays which were published in 1969. This book was translated into several languages, including English in 1976. This collection revived the debate and introduced these ideas to a broader audience.

Elements of the dispute [ edit ] The dispute has its foundation in the value judgment dispute ( Werturteilsstreit ) in German sociology and economics around the question of whether or not the statements from various social sciences are normative and obligatory in politics, and whether or not their measures can be justified scientifically and be applied in political actions. Consequently, the positivism dispute is also called the Second Werturteilsstreit .

The precursor of the debate about positivism can be traced back to Max Horkheimer 's essay "Der neueste Angriff auf die Metaphysik" ("The Latest Attack on Metaphysics") published in 1937, that criticizes the logical positivism of the Vienna Circle . The prolonged criticism of positivism [ 1 ] led to the formation of two camps: on one side we find critical rationalism advanced by Karl Popper and on the other side, there is the critical theory advanced in the Frankfurt School. This view was strengthened by the fact that Popper's main work, Logic of Scientific Discovery , was published in the main book series of the Vienna Circle. Popper, however, considered himself an opponent of positivism, and his main work was a sharp attack on it.

Both camps accept that sociology cannot avoid a value judgement that inevitably influences subsequent conclusions. In critical rationalism, the scientific approach should be maintained in sociology, and wherever the use of an induction method is not possible, it should be avoided. This leads to a sociology having a firm ground in observations and assured deductions that cannot be ignored in politics. For critical rationalism, sociology is best conceived as a set of empirical questions subject to scientific investigation.

Frankfurt School critical theory, by contrast, denies that sociology can be severed from its metaphysical heritage; empirical questions are necessarily rooted in substantive philosophical issues. Drawing on concepts from Hegelian and Marxian traditions, critical theory conceives society as a concrete totality, a social environment, e.g., family, authorities, peers or mass media shape individual consciousness. According to the Frankfurt School, it is important to discover the society's fabric to allow individuals to overcome being cornered. Critical rationalism considers this goal to be impossible and any attempts (changing society based on possibly non-scientific deductions) to be dangerous. The Frankfurt School counters critical rationalism as being itself cornered, disallowing itself from asking scientific questions when some methods are just not available.

Marx argues that "It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness." [ 2 ] The social existence impacts the mindset of scientists as well. Hypotheses generated by scientists (which would need to be falsified) spring from society's thinkable. While critical rationalism provides methods that are supposed to have an influence on society, the absence of a metaphysical critique of society makes the reforms advocated by Popper ineffective for noticeable changes.

In 2020, philosopher Carl Sachs contended that the Frankfurt School and Vienna Circle , rather than Popperian adherents tout court , comprised the two sides of the debate. In addition to an overemphasis on Popper's seminar in this debate, each side misunderstood the extent of the other's grievances. In Sachs' telling, "Frankfurters" interpreted "the Vienna Circle as fundamentally concerned with the explication of objectivity, which they carried out in purely formal terms so that nothing ‘subjective’ entered into the conception of objectivity." [ 3 ] Vienna Circle members, especially Popper, likewise misconstrued the Frankfurt School, specifically Adorno and Horkheimer, as omitting or repudiating "a better future" for society and physical science. Fears of determinism by the Frankfurt School propelled members to promote moments of violent revolution as the only means to escape such historicism . Thus, approaches to gradual reform measures had been occluded from the ideas of the Frankfurt School.

[ 4 ] Sachs held that members of the Frankfurt School and members of the Vienna Circle underestimated each other. The Vienna School, rather than deemphasizing subjectivity and intersubjectivity in the pursuit of positivism, "never even attempted to study the role of subjectivity and intersubjectivity in epistemology." The Vienna Circle believed that "the commitment to the unity of science, the explication of a purely formal conception of objectivity, and the use of mathematical logic to do so are not epistemological projects." In fact, they had already arrived at a similar conclusion, that "speculative metaphysical systems such as those of Henri Bergson or German Idealism were useless for science because they could not satisfy the formal conditions of objectivity." The Vienna Circle instead wished to design a "formal semantics of declarative assertions" that could "be [universally] said to anyone by anyone," thereby furthering a "neglect of subjectivity" and, conversely, an "explication of objectivity" in "mathematical or symbolic logic" that produced "scientific explanations." Certainly, the Circle "conceptualize[d] the distinction between synthetic statements as truths of mathematical logic together with sensory qualities" to a limited extent, but their emphasis was on "declarative assertions" devoid of "subjectivity" in "mathematical or symbolic logic." [ 5 ] Frankfurt School members, on the other hand, did not aim to repudiate the notion of "a better future," an impulse that purportedly derived from their historicism. Rather, "the Frankfurters" were principally concerned with assessing conceptual underpinnings, including the development of a given "philosophy of language," that could potentially advance "irrationality and short-sightedness," both of which Sachs associated with "contemporary neoliberalism." The Frankfurt School, at least in its "first generation" (and, with a young Habermas, the beginning of the second), believed that "the truth-content of German Idealism had to be interpreted allegorically as the hope for a truly rational society." They hoped to forge a path to "a post-capitalist society in which cooperation, rather than competition, is the underlying logic of all institutions and the social practices supported by them." Common hope for a "utopian rational society," premised on different yet reconcilable beliefs, underscored the projects of both the Frankfurt and Vienna Schools. Sachs noted the compatibility element: "there is no reason why a purely formal explication of objectivity [by the Vienna Circle] should interfere with a diagnosis and critique of social pathologies of rational subjectivity and intersubjectivity [by the Frankfurt School]." [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Antipositivism Cassirer–Heidegger debate Chomsky–Foucault debate Foucault–Habermas debate Gadamer–Derrida debate Popper legend Searle–Derrida debate Science wars Scientific rationalism Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Critical theorists used the term "positivism" as an encompassing term to refer to various philosophical schools that they thought had been founded on the same methodological basis; these schools included the Vienna Circle, logical positivism, realism , and logical atomism (see Andrew Arato and Eike Gebhardt (eds), The Essential Frankfurt School Reader , Continuum, 1978, p. 373).

^ Marx, Karl.

"Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2023-05-25 .

^ Sachs, Carl (5 August 2020).

"Why Did the Frankfurt School Misunderstand Logical Positivism?" .

JHI Blog . Journal of the History of Ideas.

^ Popper, Karl.

Addendum 1974: The Frankfurt School , in The Myth of the Framework.

London, New York 1994, p. 80.

^ Sachs, Carl (5 August 2020).

"Why Did the Frankfurt School Misunderstand Logical Positivism?" .

JHI Blog . Journal of the History of Ideas.

^ Sachs, Carl (5 August 2020).

"Why Did the Frankfurt School Misunderstand Logical Positivism?" .

JHI Blog . Journal of the History of Ideas.

Further reading [ edit ] Adorno, Albert, Dahrendorf, Habermas, Pilot and Popper, The Positivist Dispute in German Sociology , Heinemann London 1976 and Harper Torchbook 1976.

Habermas, Knowledge and Human Interests (original: Erkenntnis und Interesse , 1968).

Habermas, Technology and Science as Ideology (original: Technik und Wissenschaft als „Ideologie“ , 1968).

Helmut F. Spinner , Popper und die Politik . Berlin (Dietz), 1978.

Strubenhoff, Marius, 'The Positivism Dispute in German Sociology, 1954-1970', History of European Ideas 44 (2018).

Dahms, H.-J., Positivismusstreit. Die Auseinandersetzungen der Frankfurter Schule mit dem logischen Positivismus, dem amerikanischen Pragmatismus und dem kritischen Rationalismus , Frankfurt a.M. (Suhrkamp), 1994.

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks Wikibooks has a book on this subject: Positivismusstreit v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category v t e Jürgen Habermas Philosophy Communicative rationality Discourse ethics Deliberative democracy Universal pragmatics Communicative action Instrumental and value-rational action Works The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere (1962) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) Legitimation Crisis (1973) The Theory of Communicative Action (1981) The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity (1985) Between Facts and Norms (1992) The Inclusion of the Other (1996) A Berlin Republic (1997) Old Europe, New Europe, Core Europe (2005) Related topics Foucault–Habermas debate Habermas–Rawls debate Positivism dispute Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Positivism_dispute&oldid=1291050254 " Categories : Social philosophy Positivism History of sociology Philosophy controversies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2019 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 19:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Positivism dispute 7 languages Add topic

