Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alfred Sohn-Rethel 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى 日本語 Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist economist and philosopher (1899–1990) For the painter, see Alfred Sohn-Rethel (painter) .

Alfred Sohn-Rethel ( German: [ˈzoːn ˈʁeːtl̩] ; 4 January 1899 – 6 April 1990) was a French-born German Marxian economist and philosopher especially interested in epistemology . His main intellectual achievement was the publication of Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique of Epistemology . He also wrote about the relationship between German industry and National Socialism .

Biography [ edit ] Born in Neuilly-sur-Seine near Paris, Sohn-Rethel came from a family of painters, his father was painter, Alfred Sohn-Rethel (1875–1958) and his mother was Anna Julie, née Michels. His mother was a descendant from the noble Oppenheim family and had influential relations with big business. His paternal grandfather was painter, Karl Rudolf Sohn and his paternal grandmother was painter and singer, Else Sohn-Rethel .

[ 1 ] As his family did not want him also to become a painter, he was brought up by his uncle, the steel industrialist Ernst Poensgen .

[ 2 ] On Christmas 1915, he expressed a wish for a copy of Karl Marx 's Capital as a present. He received one and studied it intensively. Thrown out of home, he participated in the anti-war student protest in his first year at Heidelberg University in 1917.

[ 3 ] From 1920 Sohn-Rethel was a friend of the philosopher Ernst Bloch , and he met Walter Benjamin in 1921. He came to live in Positano in 1923–24, and Naples: philosophy of the broken recorded his fascination with the relaxed Neapolitan attitude to technology.

[ 4 ] Between 1924 and 1927 he remained in Italy, "mainly in Capri , where Benjamin and Bloch were staying", [ 3 ] meeting Adorno and Kracauer also at Capri in 1924. Additionally his paternal uncle, Otto Sohn-Rethel lived in Anacapri a city in Capri, whom he visited with.

[ 5 ] He stayed in contact with different members of the Frankfurt School , to whom his theoretical concerns were close; however, they never established a close working relationship.

Sohn-Rethel received his doctorate with the Austrian economist Emil Lederer in 1928.

[ 6 ] In his thesis he criticized the theory of marginal utility as a petitio principii because it implies the notion of number implicitly. 
Thanks to Poensgen he found a job as research assistant at the Mitteleuropäischer Wirtschaftstag (MWT). The MWT was a lobbying organization of the leading export industries. From 1931 to 1936 he worked 'in the cave of the lion' and watched and analyzed power politics from a very close distance. At the same time he had contacts with socialist resistance groups like Neu beginnen or Der rote Stosstrupp . In 1937 he emigrated via Switzerland and Paris to England . He wrote economic analyses for a circle close to Winston Churchill which were used against Neville Chamberlain 's appeasement policy.

For a long time after the Second World War Sohn-Rethel was not really able to continue his theoretical work. He made a living teaching French. He joined the Communist Party and despite his disillusionment he was a member until 1972. The 1968 movement created a new interest in his work. At the funeral of Adorno he met the editor Siegfried Unseld who encouraged him to crystallize his ideas in his major work Intellectual and manual labor . In 1978 Sohn-Rethel was appointed Professor for Social Philosophy at Bremen University .  He died in Bremen in 1990.

Work [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sohn-Rethel's lifelong project was the critique of Kantian epistemology through Marx's critique of political economy. Even though individuals exchange commodities in order to gain access to their use-value, the act of exchange is possible only through the abstraction from the use-value that permits to draw an equivalence of value between disparate sensible objects. Only the value of these goods is important. This abstraction is called 'real abstraction' because it is not operated by the consciousness of the property owners, but is nevertheless necessarily presupposed by the real act of exchange. Sohn-Rethel believed this abstraction to be the real basis of formal and abstract thinking. All of Kant's categories such as space, time, quality, substance, accident, movement and so forth are present in the act of exchange. Readers of Marx will not be entirely surprised by such a genealogy, since Marx himself suggested that the ideas of freedom and equality, at least as we know them so far, are rooted in the exchange of commodities. Sohn-Rethel's work on the nature of 'real abstraction' has been amplified and extended by the writers of Arena (Australian publishing co-operative) , especially the notion that a post-Marxist social and historical analysis can be founded on the 'real abstraction' principle.  An example of using Sohn-Rethel's idea of commodity occurs in Slavoj Zizek's work The Sublime Object of Ideology .

The second domain where Sohn-Rethel made important contributions was the study of the economic policies that favoured the rise of German fascism, much of which is based on first-hand knowledge gained from his time at the MWT. He insisted on the difference between different factions of capitalists, the more prospering industries close to Brüning and the less successful industries close to the Harzburger Front (Hugenberg, Hitler) namely coal, construction and steel - with the exception of Krupp . The endorsement of the compromise between industry and big agrarians  at the shareholders' meeting of the IG Farben in 1932 paved the way for the dictatorship, according to Sohn-Rethel.

Bibliography [ edit ] Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique of Epistemology , Atlantic Highlands, N.J: Humanities Press, 1977; Leiden: Brill, 2020 Economy and class structure of German fascism , London: CSE Books, 1978 References [ edit ] ^ Böttcher, Kirsten (2016-06-01).

"Else Sohn-Rethels Memoiren, Das Turbulente Leben einer Künstlergattin" [Else Sohn-Rethel's Memoirs, The Turbulent Life of an Artist's Wife].

Radio Bayern 2, Kultur .

Archived from the original on 2016-08-18 . Retrieved 2020-08-09 .

^ Banaji, Jairus.

"Alfred Sohn-Rethel" .

Historical Materialism . Retrieved 2020-08-10 .

^ a b Alfred Sohn-Rethel, 'Preface', Intellectual and Manual Labour ^ The Ideal of the Broken-Down: On the Neapolitan Approach to Things Technical ^ Orme, Robert (Summer 2007).

"A Rediscovered Gay Artist" (PDF) .

The Journal of Leslie/Lohman Gay Art Foundation (24): 20– 21.

^ Von der Analytik des Wirtschaftcns zur Theorie der Volkswirtschaft: Methodologische Untersuchung mit besonderem Bezug auf die Theorie Schumpeters , 1928. Published 1936.

External links [ edit ] Bibliography Sohn-Rethel, The Ideal of the Broken Down: On the Neapolitan Approach to Things Technical Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alfred_Sohn-Rethel&oldid=1292618248 " Categories : 1899 births 1990 deaths German economists German communists German Marxists Marxist theorists Marxian economists French emigrants to Germany Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with German IPA Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 23:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alfred Sohn-Rethel 12 languages Add topic

