Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Military 2 Private sector 3 Notable examples 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Insubordination 17 languages العربية Български Dansk Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Simple English Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of willfully disobeying one's superior The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( July 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Insubordination is the act of willfully disobeying a lawful order of one's superior. It is generally a punishable offense in hierarchical organizations such as the armed forces , which depend on people lower in the chain of command obeying orders.

Military [ edit ] Insubordination is when a service member willfully disobeys the lawful orders of a superior officer . If a military officer disobeys the lawful orders of their civilian superiors , this also counts. For example, the head of state in many countries, is also the most superior officer of the military as the Commander in Chief .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Generally, however, an officer or soldier may disobey an unlawful order to the point of mutiny (see Nuremberg defense ).

In the U.S. military , insubordination is covered under Article 91 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice .

[ 5 ] It covers disobeying lawful orders as well as disrespectful language or even striking a superior. The article for insubordination should not be confused with the article for contempt. While Article 91 of the UCMJ deals predominantly with disobeying or disrespecting a superior and applies to enlisted members and warrant officers , Article 88 involves the use of contemptuous words against certain appointed or elected officials and only applies to commissioned officers .

[ 6 ] According to a 2021 typology, military disobedience can take four forms: "defiance, refinement, grudging obedience, and exit." [ 7 ] A 2019 study argued that military disobedience may arise when a tension is created in the social networks of a soldier, which gives the soldier motivations and justifications to disobey orders.

[ 8 ] Private sector [ edit ] Other types of hierarchical structures, especially corporations, may use insubordination as a reason for dismissal or censure of an employee.

There have been court cases in the United States which have involved charges of insubordination from the employer with counter charges of infringement of First Amendment rights from the employee. A number of these cases have reached the U.S. Supreme Court usually involving a conflict between an institution of higher education and a faculty member.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] In the modern workplace in the Western world , hierarchical power relationships are usually sufficiently internalized so that the issue of formal charges of insubordination are rare. In his book Disciplined Minds , American physicist and writer Jeff Schmidt points out that professionals are trusted to run organizations in the interests of their employers. Because employers cannot be on hand to manage every decision, professionals are trained "to make sure that the subtext of each and every detail of their work advances the right interests—or skewers the disfavored ones" in the absence of overt control.

[ 11 ] Notable examples [ edit ] There have been a number of famous and notorious people who have committed insubordination or publicly objected to an organizational practice.

Emil Bessels – German Arctic explorer who undermined and likely poisoned the Polaris expedition 's commander, Charles Francis Hall Daniel V. Gallery – U.S. Navy admiral whose published articles played a role in the public debate during the Revolt of the Admirals George Grosz – German artist and soldier Mike Jackson – Commanding Officer of KFOR during the Kosovo War. Countermanded an order by Wesely Clark (the Supreme Allied Commander Europe) thus avoiding an international incident at Pristina Airport .

Douglas MacArthur – U.S. general relieved of command by President Harry S. Truman during the Korean War Billy Mitchell – U.S. Army Air Corps commander during World War I and proponent of air power during the interwar years Stanislav Petrov – Russian army officer who refused to report a detected missile strike averting nuclear war Albert Pike – charged by the Confederate Army with insubordination Jackie Robinson – American baseball player accused of insubordination while in the military, but exonerated at a court martial Thomas Scott – executed by Louis Riel Hunter S. Thompson – American writer, fired from Time magazine Jeffrey Wigand – vice president of Brown & Williamson, revealed tobacco industry practices See also [ edit ] Contumacy Civil disobedience Contempt of court Criticism Discrediting Failure to obey a police order Fragging Mutiny Rebellion Whistleblowing Court cases involving insubordination: Rendell-Baker v. Kohn , 457 U.S. 830 (1982 US Supreme Court) Schenck v. United States , 249 U.S. 47 (1919 US Supreme Court) Perry v. Sindermann , 408 U.S. 593 References [ edit ] ^ usmilitary.about.com.

Article 90—Assaulting or willfully disobeying superior commissioned officer Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed December 9, 2010.

^ usmilitary.about.com.

Article 91—Insubordinate conduct toward warrant officer, NCO, or PO Archived 2016-04-10 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed December 9, 2010.

^ usmilitary.about.com.

Article 92—Failure to obey order or regulation Archived 2016-05-11 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed December 9, 2010.

^ usmilitary.about.com.

Article 94—Mutiny and sedition Archived 2016-03-10 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed December 9, 2010.

^ usmilitary.about.com.

Article 91—Insubordinate conduct toward warrant officer, NCO, or PO Archived 2016-04-10 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed November 25, 2013.

^ usmilitary.about.com.

Article 88—Contempt toward officials Archived 2016-04-14 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed December 9, 2010.

^ Hundman, Eric (2021).

"The Diversity of Disobedience in Military Organizations" .

Journal of Global Security Studies .

6 (4).

doi : 10.1093/jogss/ogab003 .

^ Hundman, Eric; Parkinson, Sarah E. (2019-02-04).

"Rogues, degenerates, and heroes: Disobedience as politics in military organizations" .

European Journal of International Relations .

25 (3): 645– 671.

doi : 10.1177/1354066118823891 .

^ Imber, Michael and Tyll Van Geel (2001).

A Teacher's Guide to Education Law . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. p. 196.

ISBN 0-8058-3754-X . Google Book Search. Retrieved on December 10, 2010.

^ Kaplin, William A. and Barbar A. Lee (2007).

The Law of Higher Education .

Jossey-Bass , John Wiley & Sons . p. 234.

ISBN 978-0-7879-7095-6 . Google Book Search. Retrieved on December 10, 2010.

^ Schmidt, Jeff (2001).

Disciplined Minds: A Critical Look at Salaried Professionals and the Soul-battering System That Shapes Their Lives .

Rowman & Littlefield Publishers , Inc. p. 41.

ISBN 0-7425-1685-7 . Google Book Search. Retrieved on December 10, 2010.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Insubordination .

v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value Authority control databases National Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Insubordination&oldid=1304933323 " Categories : Hierarchy Military law Disobedience Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2013 United States-centric This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 01:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Insubordination 17 languages Add topic

