Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Functional description 3 Liberdade class flying wings 4 Payloads 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Underwater glider 9 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of autonomous underwater vehicle "Sea glider" redirects here. For the type of ground-effect vehicle, see REGENT Viceroy .

A Rutgers Slocum RU02 underwater glider deployed An underwater glider is a type of autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) that employs variable-buoyancy propulsion instead of traditional propellers or thrusters . It employs variable buoyancy in a similar way to a profiling float , but unlike a float, which can move only up and down, an underwater glider is fitted with hydrofoils (underwater wings) that allow it to glide forward while descending through the water. At a certain depth, the glider switches to positive buoyancy to climb back up and forward, and the cycle is then repeated.

While not as fast as conventional AUVs, gliders offer significantly greater range and endurance compared to traditional AUVs, extending ocean sampling missions from hours to weeks or months, and to thousands of kilometers of range.

[ 1 ] The typical up-and-down, sawtooth -like profile followed by a glider can provide data on temporal and spatial scales unattainable by powered AUVs and much more costly to sample using traditional shipboard techniques. A wide variety of glider designs are in use by navies and ocean research organizations, with gliders typically costing around US$100,000.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] A University of Washington Seaglider being prepared for deployment A Seaglider at the surface between dives The concept of an underwater glider was first explored in the early 1960s with a prototype swimmer delivery vehicle named Concept Whisper.

[ 3 ] The sawtooth glide pattern, stealth properties and the idea of a buoyancy engine powered by the swimmer-passenger was described by Ewan Fallon in his Hydroglider patent submitted in 1960.

[ 4 ] In 1992, the University of Tokyo conducted tests on ALBAC, a drop weight glider with no buoyancy control and only one glide cycle.

[ citation needed ] The DARPA SBIR program received a proposal for a temperature gradient glider in 1988. DARPA was aware at that time of similar research projects underway in the USSR.

[ 5 ] This idea, a glider with a buoyancy engine powered by a heat exchanger, was introduced to the oceanographic community by Henry Stommel in a 1989 article in Oceanography , when he proposed a glider concept called Slocum , developed with research engineer Doug Webb. They named the glider after Joshua Slocum , who made the first solo circumnavigation of the globe by sailboat. They proposed harnessing energy from the thermal gradient of 2 to 4°C (3.6 to 7.2°F) between deep ocean water and surface water (near atmospheric temperature) to achieve globe-circling range, constrained only by battery power on board for communications, sensors, and navigational computers.

[ 3 ] By 2003, not only had a working thermal-powered glider ( Slocum Thermal ) been demonstrated by Webb Research (founded by Doug Webb), but they and other institutions had introduced battery-powered gliders with impressive duration and efficiency, far exceeding that of traditional survey-class AUVs.

[ 6 ] These vehicles have been widely deployed in the years since then. The University of Washington Seaglider , Scripps Institution of Oceanography Spray , and Teledyne Webb Research Slocum vehicles have performed feats such as completing a transatlantic journey [ 7 ] and conducting sustained, multi-vehicle collaborative monitoring of oceanographic variables.

[ citation needed ] In 2011, the first wingless glider, SeaExplorer, was released by a collaboration of French institutions and companies.

[ 8 ] In 2020, NOAA was using "hurricane gliders" to monitor the temperature of the water around the Gulf Stream , for the agency to better understand how warm waters affect hurricanes and storms.

[ 9 ] Functional description [ edit ] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration personnel launch a Slocum glider.

Gliders typically make measurements such as temperature , conductivity (to calculate salinity ), currents, chlorophyll fluorescence , optical backscatter , bottom depth, and sometimes acoustic backscatter or ambient sound. They navigate with the help of periodic surface GPS fixes, pressure sensors, tilt sensors, and magnetic compasses. Vehicle pitch is controllable by movable internal ballast (usually battery packs), and steering is accomplished either with a rudder (as in Slocum ) or by moving internal ballast to control roll (as in SeaExplorer , Spray and Seaglider ). Buoyancy is adjusted either by using a piston to flood/evacuate a compartment with seawater ( Slocum ) or by moving oil in/out of an external bladder ( SeaExplorer , Seaglider , Spray , and Slocum Thermal ). Because buoyancy adjustments are relatively small, a glider's ballast must typically be adjusted before the start of a mission to achieve an overall vehicle density close to that of the water it will be deployed in. Commands and data are relayed between gliders and shore by satellite.

[ 3 ] Gliders vary in the pressure they are able to withstand. The Slocum model is rated for 200-meter (656 ft) or 1,000-metre (3,281 ft) depths.

Spray can operate to 1,500 meters (4,921 ft), Seaglider to 1,000 meters (3,281 ft), SeaExplorer to 700 meters (2,297 ft), and Slocum Thermal to 1,200 meters (3,937 ft). In August 2010, a Deep Glider variant of the Seaglider achieved a repeated 6,000-meter (19,685 ft) operating depth.

[ citation needed ] A Chinese glider reached similar depths in 2016.

[ 10 ] Liberdade class flying wings [ edit ] In 2004, the US Navy Office of Naval Research began developing the world's largest glider, the Liberdade class flying wing glider , which uses a blended wing body hullform to achieve hydrodynamic efficiency. They were initially designed to quietly track diesel electric submarines in littoral waters , remaining on station for up to six months. By 2012, a newer model, known as the ZRay, was designed to track and identify marine mammals for extended periods of time.

[ 11 ] It uses water jets for fine attitude control as well as propulsion on the surface.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ needs update ] Payloads [ edit ] Gliders were designed to carry oceanographic instrumentation. Initially simple conductivity, temperature and depth sensors were equipped.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Since they are propelled by a buoyancy engine, gliders have moving parts that are only active occasionally, so there are minimal mechanical vibrations and noise, making them excellent vehicles for sensitive instrumentation including microstructure probes [ 15 ] and acoustic sensors.

Many existing oceanographic sensors have been modified to fit into a glider, or designed specifically for gliders. These include: [ 16 ] Fluorometers Photosynthetically Available Radiation (PAR) sensors Dissolved Oxygen optodes Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCP) Laser In-Situ Scattering and Transmissometry (LISST) instruments Nitrate sensors Active acoustics Passive acoustic monitoring (PAM) Shadowgraph cameras Microstructure ( turbulence ) probes Hydrocarbon sensors The number of sensors a glider can be equipped with depends on how much space there is for sensors in its hull. Slocum gliders have modular hulls and can be extended to allow for new sensors to be added, other types of gliders only have their initial surface area that may be instrumented. For data reasons instruments may require special positioning, such as on the top of the vehicle to capture light penetration from the surface, or at the very front of the vehicle, outside of the area where the vehicle influences the water's flow for microstructure probes. The number of sensors may also be restricted by the power required to run them.

See also [ edit ] Autonomous underwater vehicle – Uncrewed underwater vehicle with autonomous guidance system Argo floats – International oceanographic observation program Liquid Robotics – American marine robotics corporation, developers of the Wave Glider Paravane (weapon) – Minesweeping device Paravane (water kite) – Towed hydrofoiled underwater object DeepFlight Super Falcon – Winged personal submarine Autonomous Robotics Ltd – UK company developing an autonomous underwater vehicle Hybrid Airship – proposed use of underwater glider principles to improve range of airships References [ edit ] ^ "Seaglider: Autonomous Underwater Vehicle" .

Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington . Retrieved 2020-04-24 .

^ US patent 7987674 , Jack A. Jones; Yi Chao & Thomas I. Valdez, "Phase Change Material Thermal Power Generator", issued 2011-08-02 ^ a b c Jenkins, Scott A.; Humphreys, Douglas E; Sherman, Jeff; Osse, Jim; Jones, Clayton; Leonard, Naomi (May 6, 2003), Underwater Glider System Study , Scripps Institution of Oceanography , Report No. 53 , retrieved May 26, 2012 ^ US patent 3204596 , Ewan S. Fallon, "Hydroglider", issued 1965-09-07 ^ "Perpetual Autonomus Survey Submersible" . Tony Bigras . Retrieved 2009-07-03 .

^ "Autonomous buoyancy-driven underwater gliders" (PDF) .

^ "Rutgers undersea glider makes trans-Atlantic crossing" . Archived from the original on 2013-01-21 . Retrieved 2009-12-16 .

^ Claustre, Hervé; Beguery, Laurent; Pla, Patrice (March 2014). "SeaExplorer glider breaks two world records".

Sea Technology .

55 (3): 19– 22.

^ "NOAA: 50 Years of Science, Service and Stewardship" .

Issuu . 2020-10-03. pp.

84– 85 . Retrieved 2021-07-06 .

^ Chen, Stephen (1 September 2016).

"PLA Navy eyes China's deep-sea underwater glider after successful test shows it rivals US vessel" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 2017-05-16 .

^ a b D'Spain, Gerald L.

"XRay/ZRay Flying Wing Gliders" .

Scripps Institution of Oceanography ( FTP ) . Retrieved May 25, 2012 .

[ dead ftp link ] (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ Liberdade XRay Advanced Underwater Glider , Office of Naval Research , April 19, 2006, archived from the original on April 19, 2013 , retrieved May 25, 2012 ^ Webb, D.C.; Simonetti, P.J.; Jones, C.P. (2001).

"SLOCUM: an underwater glider propelled by environmental energy" .

IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering .

26 (4): 447– 452.

Bibcode : 2001IJOE...26..447W .

doi : 10.1109/48.972077 .

ISSN 0364-9059 .

^ Sherman, J.; Davis, R.E.; Owens, W.B.; Valdes, J. (2001).

"The autonomous underwater glider "Spray" " .

IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering .

26 (4): 437– 446.

Bibcode : 2001IJOE...26..437S .

doi : 10.1109/48.972076 .

ISSN 0364-9059 .

^ Wolk, F.; Lueck, R. G.; St. Laurent, L. (October 2009).

"Turbulence measurements from a glider" .

Oceans 2009 . IEEE: 1– 6.

doi : 10.23919/oceans.2009.5422413 .

ISBN 978-1-4244-4960-6 .

S2CID 37954022 .

^ "Slocum G3 Glider - Autonomous Underwater Vehicle Long Endurance, Proven Performance" (PDF) .

www.teledynemarine.com .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Underwater gliders .

GROOM – Gliders for Research, Ocean Observation and Management COST Action ES0904 EGO network – glider user group Seaexplorer page at ALSEAMAR-ALCEN Oceanic Platform of the Canary Islands  – PLOCAN Spray page at Scripps Institution of Oceanography Spray underwater glider database Seaglider page at Applied Physics Laboratory – University of Washington Seaglider Operations page at APL-UW Rutgers University Coastal Ocean Observations Lab – Glider Operations Slocum page at Webb Research Corp.

Underwater glider configurations and details – AUVAC.org [ permanent dead link ] Underwater Gliders for Ocean Research Robot glider harvests ocean heat National Oceanography Centre, UK. Glider Home Page v t e Mobile robots and uncrewed vehicles Aerial Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) Unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV) Aerobot Helicam List of unmanned aerial vehicle applications Ornithopter Ground Walking Humanoid Android Hexapod list Other Unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) Automated guided vehicle (AGV) Self-driving car Automatic train operation (ATO) list Underwater Unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) Intervention AUV (I-AUV) Remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROUV) Underwater glider Surface Unmanned surface vehicle (USV) Space Uncrewed spacecraft list of probes list by program list of orbiters Cargo spacecraft spaceflights to the ISS Space telescope list Other Domestic Military Rescue Medical Disability Agricultural BEAM robotics Microbotics Nanorobotics Robotics Robot locomotion Autonomous robot Autonomous logistics Radio-controlled model Remote control vehicle Remote control animal Categories Radio control Unmanned vehicles v t e Robotics Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Aerobot Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Gynoid Claytronics Companion Automaton Animatronic Audio-Animatronics Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retail BEAM robotics Soft robotics Classifications Biorobotics Cloud robotics Continuum robot Unmanned vehicle aerial ground Mobile robot Microbotics Nanorobotics Necrobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Telerobotics Underwater remotely-operated Robotic fish Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Electric unicycle Robotic fins Navigation and mapping Motion planning Simultaneous localization and mapping Visual odometry Vision-guided robot systems Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Human–robot interaction Paradigms Perceptual Situated Ubiquitous Companies ABB Amazon Robotics Anybots Barrett Technology Boston Dynamics Doosan Robotics Energid Technologies FarmWise FANUC Figure AI Foster-Miller Harvest Automation HD Hyundai Robotics Honeybee Robotics Intuitive Surgical IRobot KUKA Rainbow Robotics Starship Technologies Symbotic Universal Robotics Wolf Robotics Yaskawa Related Critique of work Powered exoskeleton Workplace robotics safety Robotic tech vest Technological unemployment Terrainability Fictional robots Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_glider&oldid=1296808915 " Categories : Underwater gliders Robotic submarines Oceanographic instrumentation Hidden categories: Articles with dead FTP links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2013 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater glider 9 languages Add topic

