Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 Name 1.2 "Church" and "rite" 2 History 3 Membership 4 Organisation Toggle Organisation subsection 4.1 Liturgical patrimony 4.2 Disciplinary patrimony 5 Theology and philosophy Toggle Theology and philosophy subsection 5.1 Augustinianism 5.2 Scholasticism 5.2.1 Thomism 5.2.1.1 Five Ways 5.2.1.2 Impact 5.2.2 Actus purus 5.2.2.1 Lack of essence-energies distinction 5.3 Filioque 5.4 Purgatory 5.4.1 Speculations and imaginings about purgatory 5.5 Mary Magdalene of Bethany 5.6 Original sin 5.7 Immaculate Conception 5.7.1 Duns Scotus 5.7.2 Dogmatically defined 5.8 Assumption of Mary 5.8.1 Assumption vs. Dormition 5.9 Ancient of Days 6 Social and cultural issues Toggle Social and cultural issues subsection 6.1 Sexual abuse cases 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Latin Church 48 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Largest autonomous particular Catholic church "Latin Christian" redirects here. For the music genre, see Latin Christian music .

Latin Church Ecclesia Latina Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome , Italy Type Particular church ( sui iuris ) Classification Christian Orientation Roman Catholic Scripture Nova Vulgata [ 1 ] Theology Catholic theology Polity Papal supremacy - Episcopal [ 2 ] Governance Holy See Pope Leo XIV Full communion Catholic Church Region Mainly in Western Europe , Central Europe , the Americas , the Philippines , pockets of Africa , Madagascar , Oceania , with several episcopal conferences around the world Language Ecclesiastical Latin and native languages Liturgy Latin liturgical rites Headquarters Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran , Rome , Italy Territory Worldwide Origin 1st century Rome , Roman Empire Branched from Catholic Church Separations Donatism [ 3 ] Protestantism (initially Lutheranism , Calvinism , Anglicanism and Anabaptism in the 16th century) Old Catholicism (Utrecht, 19th century) Sedevacantism Members 1.3 billion (2015) [ 4 ] Other name(s) Western Church Latin Catholic Church Roman Church Official website vatican.va Part of a series on Particular churches sui iuris of the Catholic Church Latin cross and Byzantine Patriarchal cross Particular churches are grouped by liturgical rite Alexandrian Rite Coptic Ethiopian Eritrean Armenian Rite Armenian Byzantine Rite Albanian Belarusian Bulgarian Croatian and Serbian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Ukrainian East Syriac Rite Chaldean Syro-Malabar Latin liturgical rites Latin West Syriac Rite Maronite Syriac Syro-Malankara Eastern Catholic Churches Eastern Catholic liturgy Catholicism portal Christianity portal v t e Part of a series on the Catholic Church St. Peter's Basilica , Vatican City Overview Pope : Leo XIV Hierarchy History ( timeline ) Theology Liturgy Sacraments Mary Background Jesus Christ Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Early Christianity Peter Paul Fathers History of the Catholic Church History of the papacy Ecumenical councils Magisterium Four Marks of the Church One true church Apostolic succession Organisation Holy See Roman Curia College of Cardinals Ecumenical councils Episcopal polity Latin Church Eastern Churches Canon law Theologies Doctrine God Trinity Father Son Holy Ghost Consubstantialitas Filioque Divinum illud munus Divine law Decalogus Ex Cathedra Deificatio Realms beyond the States of the Church Heaven Purgatory Limbo Hell Paschal mystery Passion of Jesus Crucifixion of Jesus Harrowing of Hell Resurrection of Jesus Ascension of Jesus Blessed Virgin Mary Mariology Veneration Immaculate Conception Mater Dei Perpetual virginity Assumption Dormition Titles Queen Apparition Mediatrix Salvation Baptism of desire Baptism of blood Divine grace Outside the Church there is no salvation Infused righteousness Invincible ignorance Justification Means of grace Merit Mortal sin Satisfaction Moral influence Sanctification Synergism Venial sin Ecclesiology College of Bishops Deposit of faith Infallibility of the Church Mystical Body of Christ Papal primacy People of God Perfect community Subsistit in Other teachings Josephology Morality Body Sexuality Apologetics Amillennialism Original sin Hypostatic union Predestination Seven deadly sins Beatific vision Saints Dogma Texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Official Bible Vulgate Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Peshitta Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Catechism of the Catholic Church Papal bull Apostolic exhortation Epistula Encyclica Philosophy Cardinal virtues Just war Natural law Catholic ethics Personalism Probabilism Social teaching Philosophy of canon law Philosophers Virtue ethics Schools Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Christian humanism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Traditionalist Catholicism Sedevacantism Worship Liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Mass Divine Liturgy Holy Qurbana Holy Qurobo Liturgy of the Hours Liturgical year Sacraments Baptism Penance Eucharist Confirmation Anointing of the Sick Matrimony Holy orders Prayer Devotions Bible Biblical canon Rites Latin liturgy : Roman Post-Vatican II Tridentine Use of Sarum Anglican Use Zaire Use Gallican Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Eastern Catholic liturgy : Alexandrian Antiochene West Syriac Malankara East Syriac Armenian Byzantine Miscellaneous Antipopes Anti-Catholicism Criticism Deism / Pandeism Ecumenism Monasticism Relations with: Islam Judaism ( Zionism ) Orthodoxy Protestantism Societal issues Art Evolution Health care HIV/AIDS Homosexuality Sexual abuse Music Nazi Germany Politics ( in the United States ) Role in civilization Science Sex and gender roles Slavery the Age of Discovery Links and resources Index Outline Glossary Category Media Templates WikiProject Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e The Latin Church ( Latin : Ecclesia Latina ) is the largest autonomous ( sui iuris ) particular church within the Catholic Church , whose members constitute the vast majority of the 1.3 billion Catholics. The Latin Church is one of 24 sui iuris churches in full communion with the pope ; the other 23 are collectively referred to as the Eastern Catholic Churches , and they have approximately 18 million members combined.

[ 5 ] The Latin Church is directly headed by the pope in his role as the bishop of Rome , whose cathedra as a bishop is located in the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome , Italy. The Latin Church both developed within and strongly influenced Western culture ; as such, it is sometimes called the Western Church ( Latin : Ecclesia Occidentalis ), which is reflected in one of the pope's traditional titles in some eras and contexts, the Patriarch of the West .

[ 6 ] It is also known as the Roman Church ( Latin : Ecclesia Romana ), [ 7 ] [ 8 ] the Latin Catholic Church , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and in some contexts as the Roman Catholic Church (though this name can also refer to the Catholic Church as a whole).

[ 11 ] [ a ] The Latin Church was in full communion with what is referred to as the Eastern Orthodox Church until the East–West Schism of Rome and Constantinople in 1054. From that time, but also before it, it became common to refer to Western Christians as Latins in contrast to Byzantines or Greeks .

The Latin Church employs the Latin liturgical rites , which since the mid-20th century are very often translated into the vernacular . The predominant liturgical rite is the Roman Rite , elements of which have been practiced since the fourth century.

[ 12 ] There exist and have existed since ancient times additional Latin liturgical rites and uses , including the currently used Mozarabic Rite in restricted use in Spain, the Ambrosian Rite in parts of Italy, and the Anglican Use in the personal ordinariates .

In the early modern period and subsequently, the Latin Church carried out evangelizing missions to the Americas , and from the late modern period to Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia . The Protestant Reformation in the 16th century resulted in Protestantism breaking away, resulting in the fragmentation of Western Christianity , including not only Protestant offshoots of the Latin Church, but also smaller groups of 19th-century break-away Independent Catholic denominations .

Terminology [ edit ] See also: Catholic Church § Name , Catholic (term) , and Roman Catholic (term) Name [ edit ] The historical part of the Catholic Church in the West is called the Latin Church to distinguish itself from the Eastern Catholic Churches which are also under the pope's primacy . In historical context, before the East–West Schism in 1054 the Latin Church is sometimes referred to as the Western Church . Writers belonging to various Protestant denominations sometime use the term Western Church as an implicit claim to legitimacy.

[ clarification needed ] The term Latin Catholic refers to followers of the Latin liturgical rites , of which the Roman Rite is predominant. The Latin liturgical rites are contrasted with the liturgical rites of the Eastern Catholic Churches.

"Church" and "rite" [ edit ] Further information: Catholic liturgical rites and particular churches The 1990 Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches defines the use within that code of the words "church" and "rite".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In accordance with these definitions of usage within the code that governs the Eastern Catholic Churches , the Latin Church is one such group of Christian faithful united by a hierarchy and recognized by the supreme authority of the Catholic Church as a sui iuris particular Church. The "Latin Rite" is the whole of the patrimony of that distinct particular church, by which it manifests its own manner of living the faith, including its own liturgy, its theology, its spiritual practices and traditions and its canon law. A Catholic, as an individual person, is necessarily a member of a particular church. A person also inherits, or "is of", [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] a particular patrimony or rite. Since the rite has liturgical, theological, spiritual and disciplinary elements, a person is also to worship, to be catechized, to pray and to be governed according to a particular rite.

Particular churches that inherit and perpetuate a particular patrimony are identified by the metonymy "church" or "rite". Accordingly, "Rite" has been defined as "a division of the Christian Church using a distinctive liturgy", [ 20 ] or simply as "a Christian Church".

[ 21 ] In this sense, "Rite" and "Church" are treated as synonymous, as in the glossary prepared by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and revised in 1999, which states that each "Eastern-rite (Oriental) Church ... is considered equal to the Latin rite within the Church".

[ 22 ] The Second Vatican Council likewise stated that "it is the mind of the Catholic Church that each individual Church or Rite should retain its traditions whole and entire and likewise that it should adapt its way of life to the different needs of time and place" [ 23 ] and spoke of patriarchs and of "major archbishops, who rule the whole of some individual Church or Rite".

[ 24 ] It thus used the word "Rite" as "a technical designation of what may now be called a particular Church".

[ 25 ] "Church or rite" is also used as a single heading in the United States Library of Congress classification of works.

[ 26 ] History [ edit ] Historically, the governing entity of the Latin Church (i.e. the Holy See ) has been viewed as one of the five patriarchates of the Pentarchy of early Christianity , along with the patriarchates of Constantinople , Alexandria , Antioch , and Jerusalem . Due to geographic and cultural considerations, the latter patriarchates developed into churches with distinct Eastern Christian traditions. This scheme, tacitly at least accepted by Rome, is constructed from the viewpoint of Greek Christianity and does not take into consideration other churches of great antiquity which developed in the East outside the frontiers of the Roman Empire. The majority of Eastern Christian Churches broke full communion with the Bishop of Rome and the Latin Church, following various theological and jurisdictional disputes in the centuries following the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451. These included notably the Nestorian Schism (431–544) ( Church of the East ), Chalcedonian Schism (451) ( Oriental Orthodoxy ), and the East-West Schism (1054) ( Eastern Orthodoxy ).

[ 27 ] The Protestant Reformation of the 16th century saw a schism which was not analogous since it was not based upon the same historical factors and involved far more profound theological dissent from the teaching of the totality of previously existing historical Christian churches. Until 2006, the pope claimed the title " patriarch of the West "; Benedict XVI set aside this title. In 2024, Pope Francis reinstated patriarch of the West as one of the official papal titles .

[ 28 ] Following the Islamic conquests , the Crusades were launched by the West from 1095 to 1291 in order to defend Christians and their properties in the Holy Land against persecution . In the long term the Crusaders did not succeed in re-establishing political and military control of Palestine, which like former Christian North Africa and the rest of the Middle East remained under Islamic control. The names of many former Christian dioceses of this vast area are still used by the Catholic Church as the names of Catholic titular sees , irrespective of the question of liturgical families.

In the High Middle Ages began the development of Scholasticism in the Latin Church, which saw to reconcile the rediscovery of Classical Greek works such as those of Aristotle with Christianity. Under that came new theologians  such as Thomas Aquinas and Anselm of Canterbury who believed that faith and reason could exist without any contradiction.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] During the Age of Discovery, the Latin Church spread to the Americas and the Philippines under the colonial powers of Spain and Portugal , which Pope Alexander VI in the papal bull Inter caetera awarded colonial rights to.

[ 32 ] The French colonization of the Americas beginning in the 16th century established the French Latin Church in Quebec .

[ 33 ] Membership [ edit ] In the Catholic Church, in addition to the Latin Church—directly headed by the pope as Latin patriarch and notable within Western Christianity for its sacred tradition and seven sacraments — there are 23 Eastern Catholic Churches , self-governing particular churches sui iuris with their own hierarchies. Most of these churches trace their origins to the other four patriarchates of the ancient pentarchy , but either never historically broke full communion or returned to it with the Papacy at some time. These differ from each other in liturgical rite (ceremonies, vestments, chants, language), devotional traditions, theology , canon law , and clergy , but all maintain the same faith, and all see full communion with the pope as bishop of Rome as essential to being Catholic as well as part of the one true church as defined by the Four Marks of the Church in Catholic ecclesiology .

The approximately 18 million Eastern Catholics represent a minority of Christians in communion with the pope, [ 5 ] compared to well over 1 billion Latin Catholics. Additionally, there are roughly 250 million Eastern Orthodox and 86 million Oriental Orthodox around the world that are not in union with Rome. Unlike the Latin Church, the pope does not exercise a direct patriarchal role over the Eastern Catholic churches and their faithful, instead encouraging their internal hierarchies, which while separate from that of the Latin Church and function analogously to it, and follow the traditions shared with the corresponding Eastern Christian churches in Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy.

[ 27 ] Organisation [ edit ] Further information: Holy See Liturgical patrimony [ edit ] Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI) described the Latin liturgical rites on 24 October 1998: [ 34 ] Several forms of the Latin rite have always existed, and were only slowly withdrawn, as a result of the coming together of the different parts of Europe. Before the Council there existed, side by side with the Roman rite , the Ambrosian rite , the Mozarabic rite of Toledo , the rite of Braga , the Carthusian rite , the Carmelite rite, and best known of all, the Dominican rite, and perhaps still other rites of which I am not aware.

Today, the most common Latin liturgical rites are the Roman Rite —either the post- Vatican II Mass promulgated by Pope Paul VI in 1969 and revised by Pope John Paul II in 2002 (the "Ordinary Form" ), or the 1962 form of the Tridentine Mass (the "Extraordinary Form"); the Ambrosian Rite ; the Mozarabic Rite ; and variations of the Roman Rite (such as the Anglican Use ). The 23 Eastern Catholic Churches employ five different families of liturgical rites. The Latin liturgical rites are used only in a single sui iuris particular church.

Of other liturgical families, the main survivors are what is now referred to officially as the Hispano-Mozarabic Rite , still in restricted use in Spain; the Ambrosian Rite , centred geographically on the Archdiocese of Milan , in Italy , and much closer in form, though not specific content, to the Roman Rite; and the Carthusian Rite , practised within the strict Carthusian monastic Order , which also employs in general terms forms similar to the Roman Rite, but with a number of significant divergences which have adapted it to the distinctive way of life of the Carthusians.

There once existed what is referred to as the Gallican Rite, used in Gaulish or Frankish territories. This was a conglomeration of varying forms, not unlike the present Hispano-Mozarabic Rite in its general structures, but never strictly codified and which from at least the seventh century was gradually infiltrated, and then eventually for the most part replaced, by liturgical texts and forms which had their origin in the diocese of Rome. Other former "Rites" in past times practised in certain religious orders and important cities were in truth usually partial variants upon the Roman Rite and have almost entirely disappeared from current use, despite limited nostalgic efforts at revival of some of them and a certain indulgence by the Roman authorities.

Disciplinary patrimony [ edit ] Main article: 1983 Code of Canon Law Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e Canon law for the Latin Church is codified in the Code of Canon Law , of which there have been two codifications, the first promulgated by Pope Benedict XV in 1917 and the second by Pope John Paul II in 1983.

[ 35 ] In the Latin Church, the norm for administration of confirmation is that, except when in danger of death, the person to be confirmed should "have the use of reason, be suitably instructed, properly disposed, and able to renew the baptismal promises", [ 36 ] and "the administration of the Most Holy Eucharist to children requires that they have sufficient knowledge and careful preparation so that they understand the mystery of Christ according to their capacity and are able to receive the body of Christ with faith and devotion." [ 37 ] In the Eastern Churches these sacraments are usually administered immediately after baptism , even for an infant.

[ 38 ] Celibacy , as a consequence of the duty to observe perfect continence, is obligatory for priests in the Latin Church.

[ 39 ] An exception is made for married clergy from other churches, who join the Catholic Church; they may continue as married priests.

[ 40 ] In the Latin Church, a married man may not be admitted even to the diaconate unless he is legitimately destined to remain a deacon and not become a priest.

[ 41 ] Marriage after ordination is not possible, and attempting it can result in canonical penalties.

[ 42 ] The Eastern Catholic Churches, unlike the Latin Church, have a married clergy.

At the present time, Bishops in the Latin Church are generally appointed by the pope after hearing the advice of the various dicasteries of the Roman Curia , specifically the Congregation for Bishops , the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples (for countries in its care), the Section for Relations with States of the Secretariat of State (for appointments that require the consent or prior notification of civil governments), and the Congregation for the Oriental Churches (in the areas in its charge, even for the appointment of Latin bishops). The Congregations generally work from a "terna" or list of three names advanced to them by the local church, most often through the Apostolic Nuncio or the Cathedral Chapter in those places where the Chapter retains the right to nominate bishops.

[ citation needed ] Theology and philosophy [ edit ] Augustinianism [ edit ] See also: Augustinianism , New Jerusalem , The City of God , and Neoplatonism St. Augustine by Peter Paul Rubens , 1636–1638 Augustine of Hippo was a Roman African , philosopher and bishop in the Catholic Church . He helped shape Latin Christianity , and is viewed as one of the most important Church Fathers in the Latin Church for his writings in the Patristic Period . Among his works are The City of God , De doctrina Christiana , and Confessions .

In his youth he was drawn to Manichaeism and later to neoplatonism . After his baptism and conversion in 386, Augustine developed his own approach to philosophy and theology, accommodating a variety of methods and perspectives.

[ 43 ] Believing that the grace of Christ was indispensable to human freedom, he helped formulate the doctrine of original sin and made seminal contributions to the development of just war theory . His thoughts profoundly influenced the medieval worldview. The segment of the church that adhered to the concept of the Trinity as defined by the Council of Nicaea and the Council of Constantinople [ 44 ] closely identified with Augustine's On the Trinity When the Western Roman Empire began to disintegrate, Augustine imagined the church as a spiritual City of God , distinct from the material Earthly City.

[ 45 ] in his book On the city of God against the pagans , often called The City of God , Augustine declared its message to be spiritual rather than political. Christianity, he argued, should be concerned with the mystical, heavenly city, the New Jerusalem , rather than with earthly politics.

The City of God presents human history as a conflict between what Augustine calls the Earthly City (often colloquially referred to as the City of Man, but never by Augustine) and the City of God, a conflict that is destined to end in victory for the latter. The City of God is marked by people who forego earthly pleasure to dedicate themselves to the eternal truths of God, now revealed fully in the Christian faith. The Earthly City, on the other hand, consists of people who have immersed themselves in the cares and pleasures of the present, passing world.

Portrait of Augustine by Philippe de Champaigne , 17th century For Augustine, the Logos "took on flesh" in Christ, in whom the logos was present as in no other man.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] He strongly influenced Early Medieval Christian Philosophy .

[ 49 ] Like other Church Fathers such as Athenagoras , [ 50 ] Tertullian , [ 51 ] Clement of Alexandria and Basil of Caesarea , [ 52 ] Augustine "vigorously condemned the practice of induced abortion ", and although he disapproved of an abortion during any stage of pregnancy, he made a distinction between early abortions and later ones.

[ 53 ] He acknowledged the distinction between "formed" and "unformed" fetuses mentioned in the Septuagint translation of Exodus 21:22–23 , which is considered as wrong translation of the word "harm" from the original Hebrew text as "form" in the Greek Septuagint and based in Aristotelian distinction "between the fetus before and after its supposed 'vivification'", and did not classify as murder the abortion of an "unformed" fetus since he thought that it could not be said with certainty that the fetus had already received a soul.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Augustine also used the term " Catholic " to distinguish the " true " church from heretical groups: In the Catholic Church, there are many other things which most justly keep me in her bosom. The consent of peoples and nations keeps me in the Church; so does her authority, inaugurated by miracles, nourished by hope, enlarged by love, established by age. The succession of priests keeps me, beginning from the very seat of the Apostle Peter , to whom the Lord, after His resurrection, gave it in charge to feed His sheep (Jn 21:15–19), down to the present episcopate .

And so, lastly, does the very name of Catholic, which, not without reason, amid so many heresies, the Church has thus retained; so that, though all heretics wish to be called Catholics, yet when a stranger asks where the Catholic Church meets, no heretic will venture to point to his own chapel or house.

Such then in number and importance are the precious ties belonging to the Christian name which keep a believer in the Catholic Church, as it is right they should. ...With you, there is none of these things to attract or keep me. ...No one shall move me from the faith which binds my mind with ties so many and so strong to the Christian religion. ...For my part, I should not believe the gospel except as moved by the authority of the Catholic Church.

— St. Augustine (354–430): Against the Epistle of Manichaeus called Fundamental , chapter 4: Proofs of the Catholic Faith.

[ 55 ] Saint Augustine of Hippo by Gerard Seghers (attributed) In both his philosophical and theological reasoning, Augustine was greatly influenced by Stoicism , Platonism and Neoplatonism , particularly by the work of Plotinus , author of the Enneads , probably through the mediation of Porphyry and Victorinus (as Pierre Hadot has argued). Although he later abandoned Neoplatonism, some ideas are still visible in his early writings.

[ 56 ] His early and influential writing on the human will , a central topic in ethics , would become a focus for later philosophers such as Schopenhauer , Kierkegaard , and Nietzsche . He was also influenced by the works of Virgil (known for his teaching on language), and Cicero (known for his teaching on argument).

[ 57 ] In the East, his teachings are more disputed, and were notably attacked by John Romanides .

[ 58 ] But other theologians and figures of the Eastern Orthodox Church have shown significant approbation of his writings, chiefly Georges Florovsky .

[ 59 ] The most controversial doctrine associated with him, the filioque, [ 60 ] was rejected by the Orthodox Church [ 61 ] as heretical.

[ citation needed ] Other disputed teachings include his views on original sin, the doctrine of grace, and predestination .

[ 60 ] Nevertheless, though considered to be mistaken on some points, he is still considered a saint, and has even had influence on some Eastern Church Fathers, most notably the Greek theologian Gregory Palamas.

[ 62 ] In the Orthodox Church his feast day is celebrated on 15 June.

[ 60 ] [ 63 ] Historian Diarmaid MacCulloch has written: "[Augustine's] impact on Western Christian thought can hardly be overstated; only his beloved example Paul of Tarsus has been more influential, and Westerners have generally seen Paul through Augustine's eyes." [ 64 ] In his autobiographical book Milestones , Pope Benedict XVI claims Augustine as one of the deepest influences in his thought.

Scholasticism [ edit ] See also: René Descartes and Cartesianism 14th-century image of a university lecture Scholasticism is a method of critical thought which dominated teaching by the academics ("scholastics", or "schoolmen" ) of medieval universities in Europe from about 1100 to 1700, The 13th and early 14th centuries are generally seen as the high period of scholasticism. The early 13th century witnessed the culmination of the recovery of Greek philosophy . Schools of translation grew up in Italy and Sicily, and eventually in the rest of Europe. Powerful Norman kings gathered men of knowledge from Italy and other areas into their courts as a sign of their prestige.

[ 65 ] William of Moerbeke 's translations and editions of Greek philosophical texts in the middle half of the thirteenth century helped form a clearer picture of Greek philosophy, particularly of Aristotle, than was given by the Arabic versions on which they had previously relied.

Edward Grant writes: "Not only was the structure of the Arabic language radically different from that of Latin, but some Arabic versions had been derived from earlier Syriac translations and were thus twice removed from the original Greek text. Word-for-word translations of such Arabic texts could produce tortured readings. By contrast, the structural closeness of Latin to Greek permitted literal, but intelligible, word-for-word translations." [ 66 ] Universities developed in the large cities of Europe during this period, and rival clerical orders within the church began to battle for political and intellectual control over these centers of educational life. The two main orders founded in this period were the Franciscans and the Dominicans . The Franciscans were founded by Francis of Assisi in 1209. Their leader in the middle of the century was Bonaventure , a traditionalist who defended the theology of Augustine and the philosophy of Plato , incorporating only a little of Aristotle in with the more neoplatonist elements. Following Anselm, Bonaventure supposed that reason can only discover truth when philosophy is illuminated by religious faith.

[ 67 ] Other important Franciscan scholastics were Duns Scotus , Peter Auriol and William of Ockham .

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Thomism [ edit ] Further information: Thomism , Thought of Thomas Aquinas , and Summa Theologica During the 13th century, Saint Thomas Aquinas sought to reconcile Aristotelian philosophy with Augustinian theology, employing both reason and faith in the study of metaphysics, moral philosophy, and religion. While Aquinas accepted the existence of God on faith, he offered five proofs of God's existence to support such a belief.

Detail from Valle Romita Polyptych by Gentile da Fabriano (c. 1400) showing Thomas Aquinas Detail from Triumph of St. Thomas Aquinas over Averroes by Benozzo Gozzoli (1420–97) Saint Thomas Aquinas , [ 70 ] [ 71 ] an Italian Dominican friar , philosopher and priest , was immensely influential in the tradition of scholasticism, within which he is also known as the Doctor Angelicus and the Doctor Communis .

[ 72 ] Aquinas emphasized that " Synderesis is said to be the law of our mind, because it is a habit containing the precepts of the natural law, which are the first principles of human actions." [ 73 ] [ 74 ] According to Aquinas "…all acts of virtue are prescribed by the natural law, since each one's reason naturally dictates to him to act virtuously. But if we speak of virtuous acts, considered in themselves, i.e., in their proper species, not all virtuous acts are prescribed by the natural law for many things are done virtuously to which nature does not incline at first; but that, through the inquiry of reason, have been found by men to be conducive to well living." Therefore, we must determine if we are speaking of virtuous acts as under the aspect of virtuous or as an act in its species.

[ 75 ] Thomas defined the four cardinal virtues as prudence , temperance , justice , and fortitude . The cardinal virtues are natural and revealed in nature, and they are binding on everyone. There are, however, three theological virtues : faith , hope , and charity . Thomas also describes the virtues as imperfect (incomplete) and perfect (complete) virtues. A perfect virtue is any virtue with charity, which completes a cardinal virtue. A non-Christian can display courage, but it would be courage with temperance. A Christian would display courage with charity. These are somewhat supernatural and are distinct from other virtues in their object, namely, God: Now the object of the theological virtues is God Himself, Who is the last end of all, as surpassing the knowledge of our reason. On the other hand, the object of the intellectual and moral virtues is something comprehensible to human reason. Wherefore the theological virtues are specifically distinct from the moral and intellectual virtues.

[ 76 ] Thomas Aquinas wrote: "[Greed] is a sin against God, just as all mortal sins, in as much as man condemns things eternal for the sake of temporal things." [ 77 ] Aquinas also contributed to economic thought as an aspect of ethics and justice. He dealt with the concept of a just price , normally its market price or a regulated price sufficient to cover seller costs of production . He argued it was immoral for sellers to raise their prices simply because buyers were in pressing need for a product.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Aquinas later expanded his argument to oppose any unfair earnings made in trade, basing the argument on the Golden Rule . The Christian should "do unto others as you would have them do unto you", meaning he should trade value for value. Aquinas believed that it was specifically immoral to raise prices because a particular buyer had an urgent need for what was being sold and could be persuaded to pay a higher price because of local conditions: If someone would be greatly helped by something belonging to someone else, and the seller not similarly harmed by losing it, the seller must not sell for a higher price: because the usefulness that goes to the buyer comes not from the seller, but from the buyer's needy condition: no one ought to sell something that doesn't belong to him.

[ 80 ] — Summa Theologiae , 2-2, q. 77, art. 1 Aquinas would therefore condemn practices such as raising the price of building supplies in the wake of a natural disaster . Increased demand caused by the destruction of existing buildings does not add to a seller's costs, so to take advantage of buyers' increased willingness to pay constituted a species of fraud in Aquinas's view.

[ 81 ] Five Ways [ edit ] Further information: Five Ways (Aquinas) In his Summa Theologica and Summa contra Gentiles , Aquinas laid out five arguments for the existence of God , known as the quinque viae ("five ways").

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] He also enumerated five divine qualities, all framed as negatives .

[ 84 ] Impact [ edit ] Aquinas shifted Scholasticism away from neoplatonism and towards Aristotle . The ensuing school of thought, through its influence on Latin Christianity and the ethics of the Catholic school, is one of the most influential philosophies of all time, also significant due to the number of people living by its teachings.

In theology, his Summa Theologica is one of the most influential documents in medieval theology and continued into the 20th century to be the central point of reference for the philosophy and theology of Latin Christianity. In the 1914 encyclical Doctoris Angelici , [ 85 ] Pope Pius X cautioned that the teachings of the Catholic Church cannot be understood without the basic philosophical underpinnings of Aquinas' major theses: The capital theses in the philosophy of St. Thomas are not to be placed in the category of opinions capable of being debated one way or another, but are to be considered as the foundations upon which the whole science of natural and divine things is based; if such principles are once removed or in any way impaired, it must necessarily follow that students of the sacred sciences will ultimately fail to perceive so much as the meaning of the words in which the dogmas of divine revelation are proposed by the magistracy of the Church.

[ 86 ] The Second Vatican Council described Aquinas' system as the "Perennial Philosophy".

[ 87 ] Actus purus [ edit ] Further information: Palamism , Hesychast controversy , Hesychasm , Barlaam of Seminara , and Essence–energies distinction Actus purus is the absolute perfection of God . According to Scholasticism, created beings have potentiality —that is not actuality, imperfections as well as perfection. Only God is simultaneously all that He can be, infinitely real and infinitely perfect: 'I am who I am' ( Exodus 3:14 ). His attributes or His operations are really identical with His essence , and His essence necessitates His existence .

Lack of essence-energies distinction [ edit ] Later, the Eastern Orthodox ascetic and archbishop of Thessaloniki, (Saint) Gregory Palamas argued in defense of hesychast spirituality, the uncreated character of the light of the Transfiguration , and the distinction between God's essence and energies . His teaching unfolded over the course of three major controversies, (1) with the Italo-Greek Barlaam between 1336 and 1341, (2) with the monk Gregory Akindynos between 1341 and 1347, and (3) with the philosopher Gregoras , from 1348 to 1355. His theological contributions are sometimes referred to as Palamism , and his followers as Palamites.

Historically Latin Christianity has tended to reject Palamism, especially the essence-energies distinction, some times characterizing it as a heretical introduction of an unacceptable division in the Trinity and suggestive of polytheism .

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Further, the associated practice of hesychasm used to achieve theosis was characterized as "magic".

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] More recently, some Roman Catholic thinkers have taken a positive view of Palamas's teachings, including the essence-energies distinction, arguing that it does not represent an insurmountable theological division between Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy, [ 92 ] and his feast day as a saint is celebrated by some Byzantine Catholic churches in communion with Rome.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The rejection of Palamism by the West and by those in the East who favoured union with the West (the "Latinophrones"), actually contributed to its acceptance in the East, according to Martin Jugie, who adds: "Very soon Latinism and Antipalamism, in the minds of many, would come to be seen as one and the same thing".

[ 95 ] Filioque [ edit ] Further information: History of the Filioque controversy The Father The Son The Holy Spirit The " Shield of the Trinity " or Scutum Fidei diagram of traditional medieval Western Christian symbolism Filioque is a Latin term added to the original Nicene Creed , and which has been the subject of great controversy between Eastern and Western Christianity. It is not in the original text of the Creed, attributed to the First Council of Constantinople (381), the second ecumenical council , which says that the Holy Spirit proceeds "from the Father ", without additions of any kind, such as "and the Son" or "alone".

[ 96 ] The phrase Filioque first appears as an anti- Arian [ 97 ] [ 98 ] interpolation in the Creed at the Third Council of Toledo (589), at which Visigothic Spain renounced Arianism , accepting Catholic Christianity. The addition was confirmed by subsequent local councils in Toledo and soon spread throughout the West, not only in Spain but also in the kingdom of the Franks, who had adopted the Catholic faith in 496, [ 99 ] and in England, where the Council of Hatfield imposed it in 680 as a response to Monothelitism .

[ 100 ] However, it was not adopted in Rome.

In the late 6th century, some Latin churches added the words "and from the Son" ( Filioque ) to the description of the procession of the Holy Spirit, in what many Eastern Orthodox Christians have at a later stage argued is a violation of Canon VII of the Council of Ephesus , since the words were not included in the text by either the First Council of Nicaea or that of Constantinople.

[ 101 ] This was incorporated into the liturgical practice of Rome in 1014, [ 102 ] but was rejected by Eastern Christianity.

Whether that term Filioque is included, as well as how it is translated and understood, can have important implications for how one understands the doctrine of the Trinity , which is central to the majority of Christian churches. For some, the term implies a serious underestimation of God the Father 's role in the Trinity; for others, denial of what it expresses implies a serious underestimation of the role of God the Son in the Trinity.

The Filioque phrase has been included in the Creed throughout all the Latin liturgical rites except where Greek is used in the liturgy, [ 103 ] [ 104 ] although it was never adopted by Eastern Catholic Churches.

[ 105 ] Purgatory [ edit ] Further information: History of purgatory and Three states of the Church Impression of purgatory by Peter Paul Rubens Another doctrine of Latin Christianity is purgatory , about which Latin Christianity holds that "all who die in God's grace and friendship but still imperfectly purified" undergo the process of purification which the Catholic Church calls purgatory, "so as to achieve the holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven ". It has formulated this doctrine by reference to biblical verses that speak of purifying fire ( 1 Corinthians 3:15 and 1 Peter 1:7 ) and to the mention by Jesus of forgiveness in the age to come ( Matthew 12:32 ). It bases its teaching also on the practice of praying for the dead in use within the church ever since the church began and which is mentioned even earlier in 2 Macc 12:46 .

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] The idea of purgatory has roots that date back into antiquity. A sort of proto-purgatory called the "celestial Hades " appears in the writings of Plato and Heraclides Ponticus and in many other pagan writers. This concept is distinguished from the Hades of the underworld described in the works of Homer and Hesiod. In contrast, the celestial Hades was understood as an intermediary place where souls spent an undetermined time after death before either moving on to a higher level of existence or being reincarnated back on earth. Its exact location varied from author to author. Heraclides of Pontus thought it was in the Milky Way; the Academicians, the Stoics , Cicero, Virgil , Plutarch , the Hermetical writings situated it between the Moon and the Earth or around the Moon; while Numenius and the Latin Neoplatonists thought it was located between the sphere of the fixed stars and the Earth.

[ 108 ] Perhaps under the influence of Hellenistic thought, the intermediate state entered Jewish religious thought in the last centuries before Christ. In Maccabees, we find the practice of prayer for the dead with a view to their after life purification, [ 109 ] a practice accepted by some Christians . The same practice appears in other traditions, such as the medieval Chinese Buddhist practice of making offerings on behalf of the dead, who are said to suffer numerous trials.

[ 110 ] Among other reasons, Western Catholic teaching of purgatory is based on the pre-Christian (Judaic) practice of prayers for the dead .

[ 111 ] Image of a fiery purgatory by Ludovico Carracci Specific examples of belief in a purification after death and of the communion of the living with the dead through prayer are found in many of the Church Fathers .

[ 112 ] Irenaeus ( c.

130–202 ) mentioned an abode where the souls of the dead remained until the universal judgment, a process that has been described as one which "contains the concept of ... purgatory".

[ 113 ] Both Clement of Alexandria ( c.

150–215 ) and his pupil Origen of Alexandria ( c.

185–254 ) developed a view of purification after death; [ 114 ] this view drew upon the notion that fire is a divine instrument from the Old Testament , and understood this in the context of New Testament teachings such as baptism by fire , from the Gospels, and a purificatory trial after death, from St. Paul .

[ 115 ] Origen, in arguing against soul sleep , stated that the souls of the elect immediately entered paradise unless not yet purified, in which case they passed into a state of punishment, a penal fire, which is to be conceived as a place of purification.

[ 116 ] For both Clement and Origen, the fire was neither a material thing nor a metaphor, but a "spiritual fire".

[ 117 ] The early Latin author Tertullian ( c.

160–225 ) also articulated a view of purification after death.

[ 118 ] In Tertullian's understanding of the afterlife, the souls of martyrs entered directly into eternal blessedness, [ 119 ] whereas the rest entered a generic realm of the dead. There the wicked suffered a foretaste of their eternal punishments, [ 119 ] whilst the good experienced various stages and places of bliss wherein "the idea of a kind of purgatory … is quite plainly found," an idea that is representative of a view widely dispersed in antiquity.

[ 120 ] Later examples, wherein further elaborations are articulated, include St. Cyprian (d. 258), [ 121 ] St. John Chrysostom ( c.

347–407 ), [ 122 ] and St. Augustine (354–430), [ 123 ] among others.

Pope Gregory the Great 's Dialogues , written in the late 6th century, evidence a development in the understanding of the afterlife distinctive of the direction that Latin Christendom would take: As for certain lesser faults, we must believe that, before the Final Judgment, there is a purifying fire. He who is truth says that whoever utters blasphemy against the Holy Spirit will be pardoned neither in this age nor in the age to come . From this sentence we understand that certain offenses can be forgiven in this age, but certain others in the age to come.

[ 124 ] Speculations and imaginings about purgatory [ edit ] Dante gazes at purgatory (shown as a mountain) in this 16th-century painting.

Some Catholic saints and theologians have had sometimes conflicting ideas about purgatory beyond those adopted by the Catholic Church, reflecting or contributing to the popular image, which includes the notions of purification by actual fire, in a determined place and for a precise length of time.

Paul J. Griffiths notes: "Recent Catholic thought on purgatory typically preserves the essentials of the basic doctrine while also offering second-hand speculative interpretations of these elements." [ 125 ] Thus Joseph Ratzinger wrote: "Purgatory is not, as Tertullian thought, some kind of supra-worldly concentration camp where man is forced to undergo punishment in a more or less arbitrary fashion. Rather it is the inwardly necessary process of transformation in which a person becomes capable of Christ, capable of God, and thus capable of unity with the whole communion of saints." [ 126 ] In Theological Studies , John E. Thiel argued that "purgatory virtually disappeared from Catholic belief and practice since Vatican II" because it has been based on "a competitive spirituality, gravitating around the religious vocation of ascetics from the late Middle Ages". "The birth of purgatory negotiated the eschatological anxiety of the laity. [...] In a manner similar to the ascetic's lifelong lengthening of the temporal field of competition with the martyr, belief in purgatory lengthened the layperson's temporal field of competition with the ascetic." [ 127 ] The speculations and popular imaginings that, especially in late medieval times, were common in the Western or Latin Church have not necessarily found acceptance in the Eastern Catholic Churches , of which there are 23 in full communion with the pope. Some have explicitly rejected the notions of punishment by fire in a particular place that are prominent in the popular picture of purgatory. The representatives of the Eastern Orthodox Church at the Council of Florence argued against these notions, while declaring that they do hold that there is a cleansing after death of the souls of the saved and that these are assisted by the prayers of the living: "If souls depart from this life in faith and charity but marked with some defilements, whether unrepented minor ones or major ones repented of but without having yet borne the fruits of repentance, we believe that within reason they are purified of those faults, but not by some purifying fire and particular punishments in some place." [ 128 ] The definition of purgatory adopted by that council excluded the two notions with which the Orthodox disagreed and mentioned only the two points that, they said, were part of their faith also. Accordingly, the agreement, known as the Union of Brest , that formalized the admission of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church into the full communion of the Roman Catholic Church stated: "We shall not debate about purgatory, but we entrust ourselves to the teaching of the Holy Church".

[ 129 ] Mary Magdalene of Bethany [ edit ] Further information: Mary of Bethany § Medieval Western identification with Mary Magdalene See also: Mary Magdalene The Penitent Magdalene by Guido Reni In the medieval Western tradition, Mary of Bethany the sister of Lazarus was identified as Mary Magdalene perhaps in large part because of a homily given by Pope Gregory the Great in which he taught about several women in the New Testament as though they were the same person. This led to a conflation of Mary of Bethany with Mary Magdalene as well as with another woman (besides Mary of Bethany who anointed Jesus), the woman caught in adultery. Eastern Christianity never adopted this identification. In his article in the 1910 Catholic Encyclopedia , Hugh Pope stated, "The Greek Fathers , as a whole, distinguish the three persons: the 'sinner' of Luke 7:36–50 ; the sister of Martha and Lazarus, Luke 10:38–42 and John 11 ; and Mary Magdalen.

[ 130 ] French scholar Victor Saxer dates the identification of Mary Magdalene as a prostitute, and as Mary of Bethany, to a sermon by Pope Gregory the Great on September 21, AD 591, where he seemed to combine the actions of three women mentioned in the New Testament and also identified an unnamed woman as Mary Magdalene. In another sermon, Gregory specifically identified Mary Magdalene as the sister of Martha mentioned in Luke 10.

[ 131 ] But according to a view expressed more recently by theologian Jane Schaberg, Gregory only put the final touch to a legend that already existed before him.

[ 132 ] Latin Christianity's identification of Mary Magdalene and Mary of Bethany was reflected in the arrangement of the General Roman Calendar until this was altered in 1969, [ 133 ] reflecting the fact that by then the common interpretation in the Catholic Church was that Mary of Bethany, Mary Magdalene and the sinful woman who anointed the feet of Jesus were three distinct women.

[ 134 ] Original sin [ edit ] Further information: Original sin See also: Hamartiology The Catechism of the Catholic Church says: By his sin Adam , as the first man, lost the original holiness and justice he had received from God, not only for himself but for all humans.

Adam and Eve transmitted to their descendants human nature wounded by their own first sin and hence deprived of original holiness and justice; this deprivation is called "original sin".

As a result of original sin, human nature is weakened in its powers, subject to ignorance, suffering and the domination of death, and inclined to sin (this inclination is called "concupiscence").

[ 135 ] Michelangelo 's painting of the sin of Adam and Eve from the Sistine Chapel ceiling The concept of original sin was first alluded to in the 2nd century by St Irenaeus , Bishop of Lyon in his controversy with certain dualist Gnostics .

[ 136 ] Other church fathers such as Augustine also shaped and developed the doctrine, [ 137 ] [ 138 ] seeing it as based on the New Testament teaching of Paul the Apostle ( Romans 5:12–21 and 1 Corinthians 15:21–22 ) and the Old Testament verse of Psalm 51:5 .

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] Tertullian , Cyprian , Ambrose and Ambrosiaster considered that humanity shares in Adam's sin, transmitted by human generation.

Augustine's formulation of original sin after AD 412 was popular among Protestant reformers , such as Martin Luther and John Calvin , who equated original sin with concupiscence (or "hurtful desire"), affirming that it persisted even after baptism and completely destroyed freedom to do good. Before 412, Augustine said that free will was weakened but not destroyed by original sin.

[ 138 ] But after 412 this changed to a loss of free will except to sin.

[ 144 ] Modern Calvinism holds the later Augustinian soteriology view. The Jansenist movement, which the Catholic Church declared to be heretical, also maintained that original sin destroyed freedom of will .

[ 145 ] Instead the Western Catholic Church declares: "Baptism, by imparting the life of Christ's grace , erases original sin and turns a man back towards God, but the consequences for nature, weakened and inclined to evil, persist in man and summon him to spiritual battle." [ 146 ] "Weakened and diminished by Adam's fall, free will is yet not destroyed in the race." [ 147 ] St. Anselm says: "The sin of Adam was one thing but the sin of children at their birth is quite another, the former was the cause, the latter is the effect." [ 148 ] In a child, original sin is distinct from the fault of Adam, it is one of its effects. The effects of Adam's sin according to the Catholic Encyclopedia are: Death and Suffering: "One man has transmitted to the whole human race not only the death of the body, which is the punishment of sin, but even sin itself, which is the death of the soul." Concupiscence or Inclination to sin. Baptism erases original sin but the inclination to sin remains.

The absence of sanctifying grace in the new-born child is also an effect of the first sin, for Adam, having received holiness and justice from God, lost it not only for himself but also for us. Baptism confers original sanctifying grace, lost through the Adam's sin, thus eliminating original sin and any personal sin.

[ 149 ] Eastern Catholics and Eastern Christianity, in general, do not have the same theology of the Fall and original sin as Latin Catholics.

[ 150 ] But since Vatican II there has been development in Catholic thinking. Some warn against taking Genesis 3 too literally. They take into account that "God had the church in mind before the foundation of the world" (as in Ephesians 1:4).

[ 151 ] as also in 2 Timothy 1:9: ". . . his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began." [ 152 ] And Pope Benedict XVI in his book In the Beginning ...

referred to the term "original sin" as "misleading and unprecise".

[ 153 ] Benedict does not require a literal interpretation of Genesis, or of the origin or evil, but writes: "How was this possible, how did it happen? This remains obscure. ...Evil remains mysterious. It has been presented in great images, as does chapter 3 of Genesis, with the vision of two trees, of the serpent, of sinful man." [ 154 ] [ 155 ] Immaculate Conception [ edit ] Inmaculada Concepción by Juan Antonio de Frías y Escalante The Immaculate Conception is the conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary free from original sin by virtue of the merits of her son Jesus . Although the belief has been widely held since Late Antiquity , the doctrine was dogmatically defined in the Catholic Church only in 1854 when Pope Pius IX declared it ex cathedra , i.e., using papal infallibility, in his papal bull Ineffabilis Deus .

[ 156 ] It is admitted that the doctrine as defined by Pius IX was not explicitly noted before the 12th century. It is also agreed that "no direct or categorical and stringent proof of the dogma can be brought forward from Scripture ".

[ 157 ] But it is claimed that the doctrine is implicitly contained in the teaching of the Fathers. Their expressions on the subject of the sinlessness of Mary are, it is pointed out, so ample and so absolute that they must be taken to include original sin as well as actual. Thus in the first five centuries, such epithets as "in every respect holy", "in all things unstained", "super-innocent", and "singularly holy" are applied to her; she is compared to Eve before the fall, as ancestress of a redeemed people; she is "the earth before it was accursed". The well-known words of St.

Augustine (d. 430) may be cited: "As regards the mother of God," he says, "I will not allow any question whatever of sin." It is true that he is here speaking directly of actual or personal sin. But his argument is that all men are sinners; that they are so through original depravity; that this original depravity may be overcome by the grace of God, and he adds that he does not know but that Mary may have had sufficient grace to overcome sin "of every sort" ( omni ex parte ).

[ 158 ] Bernard of Clairvaux in the 12th century raised the question of the Immaculate Conception. A feast of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin had already begun to be celebrated in some churches of the West. St Bernard blames the canons of the metropolitan church of Lyon for instituting such a festival without the permission of the Holy See. In doing so, he takes occasion to repudiate altogether the view that the conception of Mary was sinless, calling it a "novelty". Some doubt, however, whether he was using the term "conception" in the same sense in which it is used in the definition of Pope Pius IX . Bernard would seem to have been speaking of conception in the active sense of the mother's cooperation, for in his argument he says: "How can there be absence of sin where there is concupiscence ( libido )?" and stronger expressions follow, which could be interpreted to indicate that he was speaking of the mother and not of the child. Yet, Bernard also decries those who support the feast for trying to "add to the glories of Mary", which proves he was indeed talking about Mary.

[ 158 ] The theological underpinnings of Immaculate Conception had been the subject of debate during the Middle Ages with opposition provided by figures such as Saint Thomas Aquinas , a Dominican. However, supportive arguments by Franciscans William of Ware and Pelbartus Ladislaus of Temesvár , [ 159 ] and general belief among Catholics, made the doctrine more acceptable so that the Council of Basel supported it in the 15th century, but the Council of Trent sidestepped the question.

Pope Sixtus IV , a Franciscan, had tried to pacify the situation by forbidding either side to criticize the other, and placed the feast of the Immaculate Conception on the Roman Calendar in 1477, but Pope Pius V , a Dominican, changed it to the feast of the Conception of Mary.

Clement XI made the feast universal in 1708, but still did not call it the feast of the Immaculate Conception.

[ 160 ] Popular and theological support for the concept continued to grow and by the 18th century it was widely depicted in art.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Duns Scotus [ edit ] See also: Scotism and Duns Scotus John Duns Scotus was one of the Scholastic philosophers that argued most for the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary.

The Blessed John Duns Scotus (d. 1308), a Friar Minor like Saint Bonaventure, argued, that from a rational point of view it was certainly as little derogatory to the merits of Christ to assert that Mary was by him preserved from all taint of sin, as to say that she first contracted it and then was delivered.

[ 158 ] Proposing a solution to the theological problem of reconciling the doctrine with that of universal redemption in Christ, he argued that Mary's immaculate conception did not remove her from redemption by Christ; rather it was the result of a more perfect redemption granted her because of her special role in salvation history.

[ 165 ] The arguments of Scotus, combined with a better acquaintance with the language of the early Fathers, gradually prevailed in the schools of the Western Church. In 1387 the university of Paris strongly condemned the opposite view.

[ 158 ] Scotus's arguments remained controversial, however, particularly among the Dominicans, who were willing enough to celebrate Mary's sanctificatio (being made free from sin) but, following the Dominican Thomas Aquinas' arguments, continued to insist that her sanctification could not have occurred until after her conception.

[ 157 ] Scotus pointed out that Mary's Immaculate Conception enhances Jesus' redemptive work.

[ 166 ] Scotus's argument appears in Pope Pius IX 's 1854 declaration of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, "at the first moment of Her conception, Mary was preserved free from the stain of original sin, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ." [ 167 ] Scotus's position was hailed as "a correct expression of the faith of the Apostles." [ 167 ] Dogmatically defined [ edit ] The complete defined dogma of the Immaculate Conception states: We declare, pronounce, and define that the doctrine which holds that the most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first instance of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege granted by Almighty God, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the human race, was preserved free from all stain of original sin, is a doctrine revealed by God and therefore to be believed firmly and constantly by all the faithful.

[ 168 ] Declaramus, pronuntiamus et definimus doctrinam, quae tenet, beatissimam Virginem Mariam in primo instanti suae Conceptionis fuisse singulari omnipotentis Dei gratia et privilegio, intuitu meritorum Christi lesu Salvatoris humani generis, ab omni originalis culpae labe praeservatam immunem, esse a Deo revelatam, atque idcirco ab omnibus fidelibus firmiter constanterque credendam. Quapropter si qui secus ac a Nobis.

Pope Pius IX explicitly affirmed that Mary was redeemed in a manner more sublime. He stated that Mary, rather than being cleansed after sin, was completely prevented from contracting original sin in view of the foreseen merits of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the human race. In Luke 1:47 , Mary proclaims: "My spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour." This is referred to as Mary's pre-redemption by Christ. Since the Second Council of Orange against semi-pelagianism , the Catholic Church has taught that even had man never sinned in the Garden of Eden and was sinless, he would still require God's grace to remain sinless.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] The definition concerns original sin only, and it makes no declaration about the church's belief that the Blessed Virgin was sinless in the sense of freedom from actual or personal sin.

[ 158 ] The doctrine teaches that from her conception Mary, being always free from original sin, received the sanctifying grace that would normally come with baptism after birth.

Eastern Catholics and Eastern Christianity, in general, believe that Mary was sinless but they do not have the same theology of the Fall and original sin as Latin Catholics.

[ 150 ] Assumption of Mary [ edit ] The Assumption of Mary , Peter Paul Rubens , c.

1626 The Assumption of Mary into Heaven (often shortened to the Assumption ) is the bodily taking up of the Virgin Mary into Heaven at the end of her earthly life.

On 1 November 1950, in the Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus , Pope Pius XII declared the Assumption of Mary as a dogma: By the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by our own authority, we pronounce, declare, and define it to be a divinely revealed dogma: that the Immaculate Mother of God, the ever Virgin Mary, having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory.

[ 171 ] In Pius XII's dogmatic statement, the phrase "having completed the course of her earthly life", leaves open the question of whether the Virgin Mary died before her assumption or not. Mary's assumption is said to have been a divine gift to her as the "Mother of God". Ludwig Ott's view is that, as Mary completed her life as a shining example to the human race, the perspective of the gift of assumption is offered to the whole human race.

[ 172 ] Ludwig Ott writes in his book Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma that "the fact of her death is almost generally accepted by the Fathers and Theologians, and is expressly affirmed in the Liturgy of the Church", to which he adds a number of helpful citations. He concludes: "for Mary, death, in consequence of her freedom from original sin and from personal sin, was not a consequence of punishment of sin. However, it seems fitting that Mary's body, which was by nature mortal, should be, in conformity with that of her Divine Son , subject to the general law of death".

[ 173 ] Titian's Assumption (1516–1518) The point of her bodily death has not been infallibly defined by any pope. Many Catholics believe that she did not die at all, but was assumed directly into Heaven. The dogmatic definition within the Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus which, according to Roman Catholic dogma, infallibly proclaims the doctrine of the Assumption leaves open the question of whether, in connection with her departure, Mary underwent bodily death. It does not dogmatically define the point one way or the other, as shown by the words "having completed the course of her earthly life".

[ 174 ] Before the dogmatic definition in Deiparae Virginis Mariae Pope Pius XII sought the opinion of Catholic Bishops. A large number of them pointed to the Book of Genesis ( 3:15 ) as scriptural support for the dogma.

[ 175 ] In Munificentissimus Deus (item 39) Pius XII referred to the "struggle against the infernal foe" as in Genesis 3:15 and to "complete victory over the sin and death" as in the Letters of Paul as a scriptural basis for the dogmatic definition, Mary being assumed to heaven as in 1 Corinthians 15:54 : "then shall come to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory".

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] Assumption vs. Dormition [ edit ] See also: John of Damascus The Western Feast of the Assumption is celebrated on 15 August, and the Eastern Orthodox and Greek Catholics celebrate the Dormition of the Mother of God (or Dormition of the Theotokos , the falling asleep of the Mother of God) on the same date, preceded by a 14-day fast period. Eastern Christians believe that Mary died a natural death, that her soul was received by Christ upon death, and that her body was resurrected on the third day after her death and that she was taken up into heaven bodily in anticipation of the general resurrection . Her tomb was found empty on the third day.

Icon of the Dormition by Theophan the Greek , 1392 Orthodox tradition is clear and unwavering in regard to the central point [of the Dormition]: the Holy Virgin underwent, as did her Son, a physical death, but her body—like His—was afterwards raised from the dead and she was taken up into heaven, in her body as well as in her soul. She has passed beyond death and judgement, and lives wholly in the Age to Come. The Resurrection of the Body ... has in her case been anticipated and is already an accomplished fact. That does not mean, however, that she is dissociated from the rest of humanity and placed in a wholly different category: for we all hope to share one day in that same glory of the Resurrection of the Body which she enjoys even now.

[ 177 ] Many Catholics also believe that Mary first died before being assumed, but they believe that she was miraculously resurrected before being assumed. Others believe she was assumed bodily into Heaven without first dying.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] Either understanding may be legitimately held by Catholics, with Eastern Catholics observing the Feast as the Dormition.

Many theologians note by way of comparison that in the Catholic Church, the Assumption is dogmatically defined, while in the Eastern Orthodox tradition, the Dormition is less dogmatically than liturgically and mystically defined. Such differences spring from a larger pattern in the two traditions, wherein Catholic teachings are often dogmatically and authoritatively defined—in part because of the more centralized structure of the Catholic Church—while in Eastern Orthodoxy, many doctrines are less authoritative.

[ 180 ] Ancient of Days [ edit ] See also: God the Father in Western art The Ancient of Days , watercolor etching from 1794 by William Blake Ancient of Days is a name for God that appears in the Book of Daniel .

In an early Venetian school Coronation of the Virgin by Giovanni d'Alemagna and Antonio Vivarini , ( c.

1443 ), God the Father is shown in the representation consistently used by other artists later, namely as a patriarch, with benign, yet powerful countenance and with long white hair and a beard, a depiction largely derived from, and justified by, the description of the Ancient of Days in the Old Testament , the nearest approach to a physical description of God in the Old Testament: [ 181 ] ... the Ancient of Days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. ( Daniel 7:9) St Thomas Aquinas recalls that some bring forward the objection that the Ancient of Days matches the person of the Father, without necessarily agreeing with this statement himself.

[ 182 ] By the twelfth century depictions of a figure of God the Father, essentially based on the Ancient of Days in the Book of Daniel , had started to appear in French manuscripts and in stained glass church windows in England. In the 14th century the illustrated Naples Bible had a depiction of God the Father in the Burning bush . By the 15th century, the Rohan Book of Hours included depictions of God the Father in human form or anthropomorphic imagery, and by the time of the Renaissance artistic representations of God the Father were freely used in the Western Church.

[ 183 ] The Ancient of Days , a 14th-century fresco from Ubisi , Georgia Artistic depictions of God the Father were uncontroversial in Catholic art thereafter, but less common depictions of the Trinity were condemned. In 1745 Pope Benedict XIV explicitly supported the Throne of Mercy depiction, referring to the "Ancient of Days", but in 1786 it was still necessary for Pope Pius VI to issue a papal bull condemning the decision of an Italian church council to remove all images of the Trinity from churches.

[ 184 ] The depiction remains rare and often controversial in Eastern Orthodox art. In Eastern Orthodox Church hymns and icons , the Ancient of Days is most properly identified with God the Son or Jesus, and not with God the Father. Most of the eastern church fathers who comment on the passage in Daniel (7:9–10, 13–14) interpreted the elderly figure as a prophetic revelation of the son before his physical incarnation.

[ 185 ] As such, Eastern Christian art will sometimes portray Jesus Christ as an old man, the Ancient of Days, to show symbolically that he existed from all eternity, and sometimes as a young man, or wise baby, to portray him as he was incarnate. This iconography emerged in the 6th century, mostly in the Eastern Empire with elderly images, although usually not properly or specifically identified as "the Ancient of Days".

[ 186 ] The first images of the Ancient of Days, so named with an inscription, were developed by iconographers in different manuscripts, the earliest of which are dated to the 11th century. The images in these manuscripts included the inscription "Jesus Christ, Ancient of Days," confirming that this was a way to identify Christ as pre-eternal with the God the Father.

[ 187 ] Indeed, later, it was declared by the Russian Orthodox Church at the Great Synod of Moscow in 1667 that the Ancient of Days was the Son and not the Father.

[ 188 ] Social and cultural issues [ edit ] Sexual abuse cases [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church sexual abuse cases From the 1990s, the issue of sexual abuse of minors by Western Catholic clergy and other church members has become the subject of civil litigation, criminal prosecution, media coverage and public debate in countries around the world . The Western Catholic Church has been criticised for its handling of abuse complaints when it became known that some bishops had shielded accused priests, transferring them to other pastoral assignments where some continued to commit sexual offences.

In response to the scandal, formal procedures have been established to help prevent abuse, encourage the reporting of any abuse that occurs, and to handle such reports promptly, although groups representing victims have disputed their effectiveness.

[ 189 ] In 2014, Pope Francis instituted the Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors for the safeguarding of minors from abuse.

[ 190 ] See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal Christianity portal Early African church Counter-Reformation Latin Church in the Middle East Latin liturgical rites Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin James the Great#Spain Paul the Apostle#Journey from Rome to Spain Saint Peter#Connection to Rome General Roman Calendar East–West Schism Eastern Christianity Notes [ edit ] ^ The term Roman Catholic Church is also used to refer to the Catholic Church as a whole, especially in a non-Catholic context, while also occasionally used in reference to the Latin Church vis-à-vis the Eastern Catholic Churches.

"Do you know differences between Roman, Byzantine Catholic Churches?" .

The Compass . 30 November 2011. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

References [ edit ] ^ Houghton, H. A. G. (2016).

The Latin New Testament: A Guide to Its Early History, Texts, and Manuscripts . Oxford University Press. p. 132.

ISBN 9780198744733 .

The standard Bible of the Roman Catholic Church until 1979 was the Clementine Vulgate, prepared for Pope Clement VIII in 1592.

^ Marshall, Thomas William (1844).

Notes of the Episcopal Polity of the Holy Catholic Church . London: Levey, Rossen and Franklin.

^ "Christianity and the Donatist controversy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc .

^ McAleese, Mary (2019).

Children's Rights and Obligations in Canon Law: The Christening Contract .

Brill Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-04-41117-3 .

^ a b Anderson, Jon (7 March 2019).

"The beautiful witness of the Eastern Catholic Churches" .

Catholic Herald .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2019 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ Mancini, Marco (11 August 2017).

"Patriarca d'Occidente? No grazie, disse Benedetto XVI" [Patriarch of the West? No thanks, said Benedict XVI].

ACI Stampa (in Italian). Vatican City . Retrieved 28 November 2023 .

^ Turner, Paul (2007).

When other Christians become Catholic . Liturgical Press. p. 141.

ISBN 978-0-8146-6216-8 .

When other Christians become Catholic: the individual becomes Eastern Catholic, not Roman Catholic ^ Fortescue, Adrian (1910).

"Latin Church" " .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

no doubt, by a further extension Roman Church may be used as equivalent to Latin Church for the patriarchate ^ Faris, John D.

(2002).

"The Latin Church Sui Iuris " .

Jurist .

62 : 280.

^ Ashni, A. L.; Santhosh, R. (December 2019).

"Catholic Church, Fishers and Negotiating Development: A Study on the Vizhinjam Port Project" .

Review of Development and Change .

24 (2): 187– 204.

doi : 10.1177/0972266119883165 .

ISSN 0972-2661 .

S2CID 213671195 .

^ Turner, Paul (2007).

When other Christians become Catholic . Liturgical Press. p. 141.

ISBN 978-0-8146-6216-8 .

When other Christians become Catholic: the individual becomes Eastern Catholic, not Roman Catholic ^ Fortescue, Adrian (1914). Ward, Bernard; Thurston, Herbert (eds.).

The Mass: A Study of the Roman Liturgy . The Westminster Library (New ed.). London: Longmans, Green and Co. p. 167.

^ "CCEO, canon 27" .

w2.vatican.va . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ CCEO, canon 28 §1 ^ "Code of Canon Law, canons 383 §2" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ 450 §1 ^ 476 ^ 479 §2 ^ 1021 ^ Rite , Merriam Webster Dictionary, 3 October 2023 ^ Rite , Collins English Dictionary ^ "Glossary of Church Terms" .

usccb.org . Archived from the original on 6 July 2013 . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ Pope Paul VI (21 November 1964).

"Decree on the Eastern Rite Orientalium Ecclesiarum " . Rome.

^ Orientalium Ecclesiarum , 10 ^ Bassett, William W. (1967).

The Determination of Rite, an Historical and Juridical Study . Analecta Gregoriana. Vol. 157. Rome: Gregorian University Press. p. 73.

ISBN 978-88-7652129-4 .

^ "Library of Congress Classification – KBS Table 2" (PDF) .

loc.gov . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ a b Fortescue, Adrian (1910). " Latin Church ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Why is Pope Francis embracing the patriarchy (of the West)?" .

The Pillar . 10 April 2024.

^ Gilson, Etienne (1991).

The Spirit of Medieval Philosophy (Gifford Lectures 1933–35) . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 490.

ISBN 978-0-268-01740-8 .

^ Grant, Edward.

God and Reason in the Middle Ages.

Cambridge University Press, 2004, 56 ^ McInerny, Ralph; O'Callaghan, John (5 February 2018). "Saint Thomas Aquinas". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Koschorke, K.

A History of Christianity in Asia, Africa, and Latin America (2007), pp. 13, 283 ^ Lyons (2013), p. 17 ^ Rowland, Tracey (2008).

Ratzinger's Faith: The Theology of Pope Benedict XVI . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191623394 . Retrieved 24 November 2017 .

^ "Codes of Canon Law – Archive" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Code of Canon Law, canon 889 §2" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Code of Canon Law, canon 913 §1" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canons 695 §1 and 710" .

w2.vatican.va . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Code of Canon Law, canon 277 §1" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ " Anglicanorum coetibus , VI §§1–2" .

w2.vatican.va . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Code of Canon Law, canon 1042" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Code of Canon Law, canon 1087" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ TeSelle, Eugene (1970).

Augustine the Theologian . London. pp.

347–349 .

ISBN 978-0-223-97728-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) 2002: ISBN 1-57910-918-7 .

^ Wilken, Robert L. (2003).

The Spirit of Early Christian Thought . New Haven: Yale University Press . p. 291.

ISBN 978-0-300-10598-8 .

^ Durant, Will (1992).

Caesar and Christ: a History of Roman Civilization and of Christianity from Their Beginnings to A.D. 325 . New York: MJF Books.

ISBN 978-1-56731-014-6 .

^ Augustine, Confessions, Book 7.9.13–14 ^ De immortalitate animae of Augustine: text, translation and commentary, By Saint Augustine (Bishop of Hippo.), C. W. Wolfskeel, introduction ^ 1 John 1:14 ^ Handboek Geschiedenis van de Wijsbegeerte I, Article by Douwe Runia ^ the Athenian, Athenagoras.

"A Plea for the Christians" . New advent.

^ Flinn, Frank K. and Melton, J. Gordon (2007) Encyclopedia of Catholicism . Facts on File Encyclopedia of World Religions.

ISBN 978-0-8160-5455-8 ), p. 4 ^ Kristin, Luker (1985) Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-5209-0792-8 ), p. 12 ^ a b Bauerschmidt, John C (1999).

"Abortion" . In Fitzgerald, Allan D (ed.).

Augustine Through the Ages: An Encyclopedia . Wm B Eerdmans. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-8028-3843-8 .

^ Respect for Unborn Human Life: the Church's Constant Teaching . U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops ^ "Chapter 5.—Against the Title of the Epistle of Manichæus" . Christian Classics Ethereal Library . Retrieved 21 November 2008 .

^ Russell , Book II, Chapter IV ^ Mendelson, Michael (24 March 2000).

"Saint Augustine" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 21 December 2012 .

^ "Some Underlying Positions of This Website" .

www.romanity.org . Retrieved 30 September 2015 .

^ "Limits of Church" .

www.fatheralexander.org . Retrieved 30 September 2015 .

^ a b c Papademetriou, George C.

"Saint Augustine in the Greek Orthodox Tradition" . goarch.org Archived 5 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Siecienski, Anthony Edward (2010).

The Filioque: History of a Doctrinal Controversy . Oxford University Press. pp.

53– 67.

ISBN 978-0195372045 .

^ Kappes, Christiaan (30 September 2015). "Gregory Palamas' Use of Augustine's De Trinitate for Original Sin and its Application to the Theotokos & Scholarius' Palamitico-Augustinianism of the Immaculate Conception (Stockholm 28.VI.15)" (Document). Stockholm University Press.

^ Archimandrite .

"Book Review: The Place of Blessed Augustine in the Orthodox Church " .

Orthodox Tradition .

II (3&4): 40– 43.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2007 . Retrieved 28 June 2007 .

^ Diarmaid MacCulloch (2010).

A History of Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years . Penguin Books. p. 319.

ISBN 978-0-14-102189-8 .

^ Lindberg, David C. (1978).

Science in the Middle Ages . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

70– 72.

ISBN 978-0-226-48232-3 .

^ Grant, Edward, and Emeritus Edward Grant. The foundations of modern science in the Middle Ages: their religious, institutional and intellectual contexts. Cambridge University Press, 1996, 23–28 ^ Hammond, Jay; Hellmann, Wayne; Goff, Jared, eds. (2014).

A companion to Bonaventure . Brill's Companions to the Christian Tradition. Vol. 48. Brill. p. 122.

doi : 10.1163/9789004260733 .

ISBN 978-90-04-26072-6 .

^ Evans, Gillian Rosemary (2002).

Fifty key medieval thinkers . Routledge Key Guides. Routledge. pp. 93, 147– 149, 164– 169.

ISBN 9780415236638 .

^ Gracia, Jorge J. E.; Noone, Timothy B., eds. (2005).

A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

353– 369, 494– 503, 696– 712.

ISBN 978-0-631-21673-5 .

^ Vaughan, Roger Bede (1871).

The Life and Labours of St. Thomas of Aquin . Vol. 1. London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Conway, Placid (1911).

Saint Thomas Aquinas . Friar Saints. Vol. 1. London: Longmans, Green and Co.

^ See Pius XI, Studiorum Ducem 11 (29 June 1923), AAS, XV ("non modo Angelicum, sed etiam Communem seu Universalem Ecclesiae Doctorem"). The title Doctor Communis dates to the fourteenth century; the title Doctor Angelicus dates to the fifteenth century, see Walz, Xenia Thomistica , III, p. 164 n. 4.

Tolomeo da Lucca writes in Historia Ecclesiastica (1317): "This man is supreme among modern teachers of philosophy and theology, and indeed in every subject. And such is the common view and opinion, so that nowadays in the University of Paris they call him the Doctor Communis because of the outstanding clarity of his teaching." Historia Eccles.

xxiii, c. 9.

^ Langston, Douglas (5 February 2015).

"Medieval Theories of Conscience" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Summa Theologica, First Part of the Second Part, Question 94 Reply Obj. 2 ^ Summa Question 94, A.3 ^ " Summa , Q62a2" . Ccel.org . Retrieved 2 February 2012 .

^ Summa Theologica , Second Part of the Second Part, Question 118, Article 1. Retrieved 26 October 2018.

^ Thomas Aquinas. Summa Theologica. "Of Cheating, Which Is Committed in Buying and Selling". Translated by The Fathers of the English Dominican Province [1] Retrieved 19 June 2012 ^ Barry Gordon (1987). "Aquinas, St Thomas (1225–1274)", v. 1, p. 100 ^ Si vero aliquis multum iuvetur ex re alterius quam accepit, ille vero qui vendidit non damnificatur carendo re illa, non debet eam supervendere. Quia utilitas quae alteri accrescit non est ex vendente, sed ex conditione ementis, nullus autem debet vendere alteri quod non est suum. . .

^ Aquinas, Summa Theologica , 2ª-2ae q. 77 pr.

: " Deinde considerandum est de peccatis quae sunt circa voluntarias commutationes. Et primo, de fraudulentia quae committitur in emptionibus et venditionibus ...

" ^ "Summa Theologiae: The existence of God (Prima Pars, Q. 2)" .

New Advent .

^ Summa of Theology I, q.2, The Five Ways Philosophers Have Proven God's Existence ^ Kreeft, pp. 74–112.

^ "Doctoris Angelici" .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2009 . Retrieved 4 November 2009 .

Accessed 25 October 2012 ^ Pope Pius X , Doctoris Angelici , 29 June 1914.

^ Second Vatican Council , Optatam Totius (28 October 1965) 15.

^ John Meyendorff (editor), Gregory Palamas – The Triads , p. xi. Paulist Press, 1983, ISBN 978-0809124473 , although that attitude has never been universally prevalent in the Catholic Church and has been even more widely criticised in the catholic theology for the last century (see section 3 of this article). Retrieved on 12 September 2014.

^ "No doubt the leaders of the party held aloof from these vulgar practices of the more ignorant monks, but on the other hand they scattered broadcast perilous theological theories. Palamas taught that by asceticism one could attain a corporal, i.e. a sense view, or perception, of the Divinity. He also held that in God there was a real distinction between the Divine Essence and Its attributes, and he identified grace as one of the Divine propria making it something uncreated and infinite. These monstrous errors were denounced by the Calabrian Barlaam, by Nicephorus Gregoras, and by Acthyndinus. The conflict began in 1338 and ended only in 1368, with the solemn canonization of Palamas and the official recognition of his heresies. He was declared the 'holy doctor' and 'one of the greatest among the Fathers of the Church', and his writings were proclaimed 'the infallible guide of the Christian Faith'. Thirty years of incessant controversy and discordant councils ended with a resurrection of polytheism" Simon Vailhé (1909).

"Greek Church" . Catholic Encyclopedia, New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Fortescue, Adrian (1910), Hesychasm , vol. VII, New York: Robert Appleton Company , retrieved 3 February 2008 ^ "No doubt the leaders of the party held aloof from these vulgar practices of the more ignorant monks, but on the other hand they scattered broadcast perilous theological theories. Palamas taught that by asceticism one could attain a corporal, i.e. a sense view, or perception, of the Divinity. He also held that in God there was a real distinction between the Divine Essence and Its attributes, and he identified grace as one of the Divine propria making it something uncreated and infinite. These monstrous errors were denounced by the Calabrian Barlaam, by Nicephorus Gregoras, and by Acthyndinus. The conflict began in 1338 and ended only in 1368, with the solemn canonization of Palamas and the official recognition of his heresies. He was declared the 'holy doctor' and 'one of the greatest among the Fathers of the Church', and his writings were proclaimed 'the infallible guide of the Christian Faith'. Thirty years of incessant controversy and discordant councils ended with a resurrection of polytheism" ( Simon Vailhé, "Greek Church" in Catholic Encyclopedia (New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909) ^ Michael J. Christensen, Jeffery A. Wittung (editors), Partakers of the Divine Nature (Associated University Presses 2007 ISBN 0-8386-4111-3 ), pp. 243–244 ^ The Search For Sacred Quietude (melkite.org) ^ Second Sunday of the Great Fast Gregory Palamas (sspp.ca) ^ "Martin Jugie, The Palamite Controversy" . 13 June 2009 . Retrieved 27 December 2010 .

^ Reformed Church in America. Commission on Theology (2002).

"The Nicene Creed and the Procession of the Spirit" . In Cook, James I. (ed.).

The Church speaks: papers of the Commission on Theology, Reformed Church in America, 1959–1984 . Historical series of the Reformed Church in America. Vol. 40. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.

ISBN 978-0-80280980-3 .

^ Dale T. Irvin, Scott Sunquist, History of the World Christian Movement (2001) , Volume 1, p. 340 ^ Dix, The Shape of the Liturgy (2005), p, 487 ^ The Conversion of Clovis ^ Plested, "Filioque" in John Anthony McGuckin, The Encyclopedia of Eastern Orthodox Christianity (Wiley, John & Sons 2011 ISBN 978-1-4051-8539-4 ), vol. 1, p. 251 ^ For a different view, see e.g.

Excursus on the Words πίστιν ἑτέραν ^ "Greek and Latin Traditions on Holy Spirit" .

Ewtn.com .

^ Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity: The Greek and the Latin Traditions regarding the Procession of the Holy Spirit and same document on another site ^ Ρωμαϊκό Λειτουργικό (Roman Missal), Συνοδική Επιτροπή για τη θεία Λατρεία 2005, I, p. 347 ^ Article 1 of the Treaty of Brest ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church, "The Final Purification, or Purgatory" ^ "Pius IV Council of Trent-25" .

www.ewtn.com .

^ Adrian Mihai, "L'Hadès céleste. Histoire du purgatoire dans l'Antiquité"(Garnier: 2015), pp.185–188 ^ cf.

2 Maccabees 12:42–44 ^ Purgatory in Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church , 1032 ^ Gerald O'Collins and Edward G. Farrugia, A Concise Dictionary of Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000) p. 27.

^ Christian Dogmatics vol. 2 (Philadelphia : Fortress Press, 1984) p. 503; cf. Irenaeus, Against Heresies 5.31.2, in The Ante-Nicene Fathers eds. Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1979) 1:560 cf. 5.36.2 / 1:567; cf. George Cross, "The Differentiation of the Roman and Greek Catholic Views of the Future Life", in The Biblical World (1912) p. 107 ^ Gerald O'Collins and Edward G. Farrugia, A Concise Dictionary of Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000) p. 27; cf. Adolph Harnack, History of Dogma vol. 2, trans. Neil Buchanan (London, Williams & Norgate, 1995) p. 337; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 6:14 ^ Jacques Le Goff, The Birth of Purgatory (University of Chicago Press, 1984) p. 53; cf.

Leviticus 10:1–2 , Deuteronomy 32:22 , 1Corinthians 3:10–15 ^ Adolph Harnack , History of Dogma vol. 2, trans. Neil Buchanan (London: Williams & Norgate, 1905) p. 377.

read online .

^ Jacques Le Goff, The Birth of Purgatory (University of Chicago Press, 1984) pp. 55–57; cf. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 7:6 and 5:14 ^ Gerald O'Collins and Edward G. Farrugia, A Concise Dictionary of Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000) p. 27; cf. Adolph Harnack, History of Dogma vol. 2, trans. Neil Buchanan (London, Williams & Norgate, 1995) p. 296 n. 1; George Cross, "The Differentiation of the Roman and Greek Catholic Views of the Future Life", in The Biblical World (1912); Tertullian De Anima ^ a b A. J. Visser, "A Bird's-Eye View of Ancient Christian Eschatology", in Numen (1967) p. 13 ^ Adolph Harnack , History of Dogma vol. 2, trans. Neil Buchanan (London: Williams & Norgate, 1905) p. 296 n. 1.

read online ; cf. Jacques Le Goff, The Birth of Purgatory (University of Chicago Press, 1984) pp. 58–59 ^ Cyprian, Letters 51:20 ; Gerald O'Collins and Edward G. Farrugia, A Concise Dictionary of Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000) p. 27 ^ John Chrysostom, Homily on First Corinthians 41:5 ; Homily on Philippians 3:9–10 ; Gerald O'Collins and Edward G. Farrugia, A Concise Dictionary of Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000) p. 27 ^ Augustine, Sermons 159:1, 172:2; City of God 21:13 ; Handbook on Faith, Hope, and Charity 18:69, 29:109; Confessions 2.27; Gerald O' Collins and Mario Farrugia, Catholicism: the story of Catholic Christianity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003) p. 36; Gerald O'Collins and Edward G. Farrugia, A Concise Dictionary of Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000) p. 27 ^ Gregory the Great, Dialogues 4, 39: PL 77, 396; cf.

Matthew 12:31 ^ Paul J. Griffiths (2010).

"Purgatory" . In Jerry L. Walls (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Eschatology . Oxford University Press. p. 436.

ISBN 9780199742486 .

^ Joseph Ratzinger (2007).

Eschatology: Death and Eternal Life . CUA Press. p. 230.

ISBN 9780813215167 .

^ Thiel, John E. (2008).

"Time, Judgment, and Competitive Spirituality: A Reading of the Development of the Doctrine of Purgatory" (PDF) .

Theological Studies .

69 (4): 741– 785.

doi : 10.1177/004056390806900401 .

S2CID 170574571 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 November 2020 . Retrieved 5 July 2020 .

^ "First Speech by Mark, Archbishop of Ephesus, on Purifying Fire" in Patrologia Orientalis , vol. 15, pp. 40–41 ^ "Treaty of Brest, Article 5" .

^ Pope, H. (1910).

St. Mary Magdalen , in The Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ referenced in Jansen, Katherine Ludwig (2001).

The making of the Magdalen: preaching and popular devotion in the later Middle Ages . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-08987-4 .

^ Rivera, John (18 April 2003).

"John Rivera, "Restoring Mary Magdalene" in "Worldwide Religious News", The Baltimore Sun , April 18, 2003" . Wwrn.org . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ Erwin Fahlbusch, Geoffrey William Bromiley (editors), The Encyclopedia of Christianity , Volume 3 (Eerdmans 2003 ISBN 978-90-0412654-1 ), p. 447 ^ John Flader, Question Time: 150 Questions and Answers on the Catholic Faith (Taylor Trade Publications, 2010 ISBN 978-1-58979594-5 ), pp. 79–81 ^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church – IntraText" .

Vatican.va . Retrieved 24 January 2017 .

^ "In the person of the first Adam we offend God, disobeying His precept" (Haeres., V, xvi, 3).

^ Patte, Daniel. The Cambridge Dictionary of Christianity. Ed. Daniel Patte. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010, 892.

^ a b Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A., eds. (2005). "Original sin".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd rev. ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ Peter Nathan.

"The Original View of Original Sin" .

Vision.org . Retrieved 24 January 2017 .

^ "Original Sin Explained and Defended: Reply to an Assemblies of God Pastor" .

Philvaz.com . Archived from the original on 29 July 2019 . Retrieved 24 January 2017 .

^ Preamble and Articles of Faith Archived 20 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine – V. Sin, Original and Personal – Church of the Nazarene. Retrieved 13 October 2013.

^ Are Babies Born with Sin?

Archived 21 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine – Topical Bible Studies. Retrieved 13 October 2013.

^ Original Sin – Psalm 51:5 – Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 13 October 2013.

^ Wilson, Kenneth (2018).

Augustine's Conversion from Traditional Free Choice to "Non-free Free Will": A Comprehensive Methodology . Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck. pp.

16– 18, 157– 187.

ISBN 9783161557538 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Jansenius and Jansenism" .

Newadvent.org . 1 October 1910 . Retrieved 24 January 2017 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church 405.

^ Council of Trent (Sess. VI, cap. i and v).

^ De conceptu virginali, xxvi.

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Original Sin" .

New Advent . Retrieved 1 January 2018 .

^ a b " Original Sin ", From East to West.

^ Ritenbaugh, John W. (31 May 1998).

"The Holy Spirit and the Trinity (Part One) (Sermon)" .

Bible Tools . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ Morris, Henry M. (6 December 2018).

"Before the World Began" .

The Institute for Creation Research . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ "Cardinal" Joseph Ratzinger, In the Beginning , 1986, p. 72.

^ "General Audience of 3 December 2008: Saint Paul (15). The Apostle's teaching on the relation between Adam and Christ | BENEDICT XVI" .

The Holy See . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ "Pope ponders original sin, speaks about modern desire for change" .

Catholic News Agency . 3 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church – "Conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary" " .

The Holy See .

^ a b Frederick Holweck, "Immaculate Conception" in The Catholic Encyclopedia 1910 ^ a b c d e One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Hedley, John (1911). " Immaculate Conception, The ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

334– 335.

^ Z. J. Kosztolnyik, Some Hungarian Theologians in the Late Renaissance , Church History. Volume: 57 . Issue: 1, 1988. Z. J. Kosztolnyik, Pelbartus of Temesvar: a Franciscan Preacher and Writer of the Late Middle Ages in Hungary , Vivarium , 5/1967. Kenan B. Osborne, O.F.M., The History of Franciscan Theology , The Franciscan Institute St. Bonaventure, New York , 1994. Franklin H. Littell (ed.), Reformation Studies , John Knox Press, Richmond , Virginia , 1962.

^ Edward Bouverie Pusey, First letter to the Very Rev. J. H. Newman (J. Parker & Co. 1869), p. 379 ^ Mary in the Christian tradition by Kathleen Coyle 1996 ISBN 0-85244-380-3 page 38 ^ Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, Volume 2 by André Vauchez, Richard Barrie Dobson 2001 ISBN 1-57958-282-6 page 348 ^ Burke, Raymond L.; et al. (2008).

Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons, Seminarians, and Consecrated Persons ISBN 978-1-57918-355-4 , pp. 642–644 ^ The Catholic Reformation by Michael A. Mullett 1999 ISBN 0-415-18914-4 , p. 5 ^ Encyclopedia of theology: a concise Sacramentum mundi by Karl Rahner 2004 ISBN 0-86012-006-6 , pp. 896–898 ^ Foley OFM, Leonard. "Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception", Saint of the Day , (revised by Pat McCloskey OFM), AmericanCatholic.org ^ a b "The Life of Blessed John Duns Scotus" . EWTN.

^ "INEFFABILIS DEUS (The Immaculate Conception) Pope Pius IX" .

ewtn.com .

^ Council of Orange II, Canon 19 Archived 2009-01-13 at the Wayback Machine "That no one is saved except by God's mercy. Even if human nature remained in that integrity in which it was formed, it would in no way save itself without the help of its Creator; therefore, since without the grace of God it cannot guard the health which it received, how without the grace of God will it be able to recover what it has lost?" ^ Theology for Beginners by Francis Joseph Sheed 1958 ISBN 0-7220-7425-5 , pp. 134–138 ^ Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus item 44 at the Vatican web site Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ludwig Ott's Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma , pp. 250 ff.

^ Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma , Ludwig Ott, Book III, Pt. 3, Ch. 2, §6, ISBN 0-89555-009-1 ^ "Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus, no 44" . Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 4 September 2013 . Retrieved 3 November 2013 .

^ a b Introduction to Mary by Mark Miravalle (1993) Queenship Pub. Co.

ISBN 978-1-882972-06-7 pp. 75–78 ^ Paul Haffner in Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons, seminarians, and Consecrated Persons (2008) ISBN 9781579183554 edited by M. Miravalle, pp. 328–350 ^ Bishop Kallistos (Ware) of Diokleia, in: Festal Menaion [London: Faber and Faber, 1969], p. 64.

^ The Catholicism Answer Book: The 300 Most Frequently Asked Questions by John Trigilio, Kenneth Brighenti 2007 ISBN 1-4022-0806-5 p. 64 ^ Shoemaker 2006, p. 201 ^ See " Three Sermons on the Dormition of the Virgin " by John of Damascus , from the Medieval Sourcebook ^ Bigham Chapter 7 ^ Summa Theologica III.59.1 obj 2, ad 2 ^ George Ferguson, 1996 Signs & symbols in Christian art ISBN 0195014324 p. 92 ^ Bigham, 73–76 ^ McKay, Gretchen K. (1999).

"The Eastern Christian Exegetical Tradition of Daniel's Vision of the Ancient of Days" .

Journal of Early Christian Studies .

7 : 139– 161.

doi : 10.1353/earl.1999.0019 .

S2CID 170245894 .

^ Cartlidge and Elliott, 69–72 ^ The manuscripts that include an image of the Ancient of Days are discussed in the unpublished dissertation by Gretchen Kreahling McKay, "Imaging the Divine: A Study of the Representations of the Ancient of Days in Byzantine Manuscripts," University of Virginia, 1997.

^ The Tome of the Great Council of Moscow (1666–1667 A.D.), Ch. 2, 43–45; tr.

Hierodeacon Lev Puhalo, Canadian Orthodox Missionary Journal ^ David Willey (15 July 2010).

"Vatican 'speeds up' abuse cases" .

BBC News . Retrieved 28 October 2010 .

^ "Comunicato della Sala Stampa: Istituzione della Pontificia Commissione per la Tutela dei Minori" . Holy See Press Office. 22 March 2014 . Retrieved 30 March 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Latin Church .

Official website of the Holy See Latin Church (in the Catholic Encyclopedia ) v t e Latin Church Patriarchates (by order of precedence ) Current Rome (' Patriarch of the West '): Pope Leo XIV (with cathedra in Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ) Jerusalem : Pierbattista Pizzaballa East Indies : Filipe Neri Ferrão Lisbon : Rui Valério Venice : Francesco Moraglia Defunct Carthage (?−1964) Alexandria (1276–1964) Antioch (1098–1964) Constantinople (1204–1964) West Indies (1524–1963) Aquileia (560–1751) Ethiopia (1555–1663) Grado (560–1451) History Apostolic succession History of the papacy Papal primacy Historical development First Martyrs Great Church Early African church Vulgate East–West Schism Scholasticism Crusades Western Schism Age of Discovery Humanism Protestant Reformation Council of Trent Counter-Reformation Vatican I Vatican II 1983 Code of Canon Law Apostolic sees Rome Peter Paul Syracuse Peter Malta Paul Milan Barnabas Santiago de Compostela James Church Fathers Tertullian Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers * Ambrose * Pope Damasus I Jerome * Augustine of Hippo * Pope Gregory I * Isidore of Seville * Language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Liturgical days Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary form) Tridentine Mass Extraordinary form Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass See also Latin cross Latin Church in the Middle East Latins Turkey Titular sees Eastern Catholic Churches Conference of the Latin Bishops of the Arab Regions Western Rite Orthodoxy * also Doctors of the Church Category v t e Mass of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church Forms and uses Pre-Tridentine Mass Tridentine Mass After the Second Vatican Council Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary Form) Zaire Use Anglican Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Types Low Mass Missa Cantata Solemn Mass Pontifical High Mass Papal Mass sine populo Votive Mass Ritual Masses Blue Mass Chapter and Conventual Mass Coronation Mass Nuptial Mass Red Mass Requiem Mass Month's mind Language Liturgical use of Latin Ecclesiastical Latin Vernacular Order of Mass Pre-Mass Vesting prayers Asperges me Vidi aquam in Eastertide Processional hymn Liturgy of the Word Sign of the Cross Psalm 43 Entrance Antiphon Penitential Act Confiteor / Kyrie Gloria Dominus vobiscum Collect Oremus Responsorial Psalm or Gradual Epistle Alleluia Tract / sequence Gospel Homily Credo Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed or Apostles' Creed Universal Prayer Liturgy of the Eucharist Offertory Orate fratres / prayer over the gifts Preface Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna Eucharistic Prayer / Canon of the Mass oblation / epiclesis / Words of Institution / elevation / anamnesis texts and rubrics Canonical digits Roman Canon history Memorial Acclamation Lord's Prayer embolism / doxology Pax Sign of peace Agnus Dei Dona nobis pacem Fraction Holy Communion Communion antiphon Ablutions Postcommunion Dismissal Ite, missa est / Benedicamus Domino Last Gospel Post-Mass Leonine Prayers Recessional hymn Participants Acolyte Altar server female Bishop Boat boy Cantor Choir Crucifer Deacon Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion Laity Eucharistic Congress Lector Porter Priest Subdeacon Usher Altar Altar crucifix Altar rails Ambo Antependium Candles and candlesticks Triple candlestick Paschal candle Sanctuary lamp Chalice veil Communion bench Corporal Credence table Kneeler Lavabo Misericord Pall Piscina Purificator Rood Tabernacle Liturgical objects Altar bell Ashes Aspergillum Bugia Censer Chalice Ciborium Crotalus Collection basket Communion-plate Cruet Evangeliary Fistula Flabellum Funghellino Holy water Incense use Manuterge Paten Processional cross Pyx Sacramental bread wafer Sacramental wine (or must ) Thurible Liturgical books Antiphonary Ceremonial of Bishops Customary Roman Gradual Graduale Simplex Roman Missal Divine Worship: The Missal Sacramentary and Lectionary Roman Pontifical Tonary Vestments Alb Amice Chasuble Dalmatic Episcopal gloves Episcopal sandals Humeral veil Pallium Pontifical Stole Surplice Tunicle Vimpa Liturgical year Calendars Tridentine calendar General Roman Calendar of 1954 General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII General Roman Calendar of 1960 General Roman Calendar (current) Periods Advent Christmastide Ordinary Time Septuagesima Lent Passiontide Holy Week Paschal Triduum Eastertide Ascensiontide Eucharistic discipline Abstemius Concelebration Church etiquette Closed communion Canon 844 Canon 915 Communion and the developmentally disabled Communion under both kinds Eucharistic fast First Communion Frequent Communion Genuflection Head cover Host desecration Infant communion Intinction Reserved sacrament Sacramental bread and wine (or must ) Spiritual communion Thanksgiving after Communion Anima Christi Viaticum Eucharistic theology Body and Blood of Christ Corpus Christi Epiousion Grace ex opere operato In persona Christi Historical roots of Catholic Eucharistic theology Koinonia Liturgical colours Mirae caritatis Mysterium fidei (encyclical) Origin of the Eucharist Last Supper Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature Priesthood of Melchizedek Real presence Transubstantiation Year of the Eucharist Regulations and concepts Accentus Ad orientem and versus populum Calendar of saints Canon law Code of Rubrics Commemoration General Instruction of the Roman Missal Holy day of obligation Intercession of saints Ordinary and Propers Pro multis Sunday Lord's Day Related Agape feast Anaphora of the Apostolic Tradition Ambrosian Rite Catholic theology Christian liturgy Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Christian prayer effects of prayer Dicastery for Divine Worship Council of Trent Ecclesia de Eucharistia Eucharistic adoration and benediction Dominicae Cenae / Holy Hour Eucharistic miracle Fermentum Fourth Council of the Lateran Gelineau psalmody Gregorian chant History of the Roman Canon Lex orandi, lex credendi Liturgical Movement Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII Mediator Dei Missale Romanum (apostolic constitution) Music Pope Paul VI Sacraments of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Sacrosanctum concilium Summorum Pontificum Traditionis custodes Stercoranism Tra le sollecitudini v t e Liturgical year of the Catholic Church Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church ( 1969 Calendar ) Advent Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Immaculate Conception December 17 to 23 Christmas Season Christmas Christmas Eve Midnight Mass Holy Family Mary, Mother of God Epiphany Baptism of the Lord Ordinary Time Presentation of the Lord Lent Ash Wednesday Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Saint Joseph Annunciation Palm Sunday Holy Week Paschal Triduum Holy Thursday Chrism Mass Mass of the Lord's Supper Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Vigil Easter Season Easter Sunday Octave Sundays 2nd Divine Mercy Sunday 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th Ascension Pentecost Ordinary Time Trinity Sunday Corpus Christi Sacred Heart Visitation Nativity of John the Baptist Saints Peter and Paul Transfiguration Assumption Nativity of Mary Exaltation of the Cross All Saints' Day / All Hallows' Day All Saints' Eve / All Hallows' Eve All Souls' Day Presentation of Mary Christ the King Tridentine Mass of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church ( 1960 Calendar ) Advent Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Rorate Mass Immaculate Conception Greater Ferias Winter Ember Days Christmas Season Christmas Christmas Eve Octave Day of Christmas Holy Name of Jesus Epiphany Season Epiphany Holy Family Baptism of the Lord Purification of Mary P Lent Pre-Lent Septuagesima Sexagesima Quinquagesima Lent Ash Wednesday Sundays 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Spring Ember Days Saint Joseph Annunciation Passiontide Passion Sunday Palm Sunday P Holy Week P Paschal Triduum Tenebrae Holy Thursday Chrism Mass Mass of the Lord's Supper Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Vigil Easter Season Easter Sunday P Octave Sundays after Easter 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th Rogation Days P Ascension P Pentecost Season Pentecost Summer Ember Days Trinity Sunday Corpus Christi P Sacred Heart Saint John the Baptist Saints Peter and Paul Precious Blood Visitation Transfiguration Assumption Nativity of Mary Exaltation of the Cross P Autumn Ember Days Maternity of Mary Christ the King All Saints' Day / All Hallows' Day All Saints' Eve / All Hallows' Eve All Souls' Day Presentation of Mary Legend P = Ordinary Procession according to the Roman Ritual Legend Italic font marks the 10 holy days of obligation in the universal calendar which do not normally fall on a Sunday.

Older calendars 1955 pre-1955 Tridentine Liturgical colours Ranking Computus Easter cycle Catholic Church portal v t e Sacraments , rites , and liturgies of the Catholic Church Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy Orders Matrimony Eucharistic liturgies Divine Liturgy Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts Divine Liturgy of St. Basil the Great Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom Holy Qurbana Holy Qurbono Mass Low Mass Missa Cantata Solemn Mass Pontifical High Mass Papal Mass Canonical hours , Liturgical hours Matins (nighttime) Lauds (early morning) Prime (first hour of daylight) Terce (third hour) Sext (noon) None (ninth hour) Vespers (sunset/evening) Evensong (Anglican Use Vespers) Ramsha (West Syriac Vespers) Compline (end of the day) Other liturgical services Asperges Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament Exorcism Funeral Requiem Liturgy of the Hours Procession Liturgical literature Agpeya Antiphonary Book of hours Breviary Roman Breviary Customary Euchologion Gospel Book Gradual Horologion Lectionary Liturgy of the Hours Divine Worship: Daily Office Martyrology Ordo Exsequiarum Romani Pontificis Pontifical Roman Pontifical Psalter Missal Divine Worship: The Missal Roman Missal Tonary Roman Ritual Sacramentary Liturgical language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Latin Church ( Latin liturgical rites ) Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI Extraordinary Form Tridentine Mass Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass Eastern Catholic Churches ( Eastern Catholic liturgy ) Alexandrian Rite Armenian Rite Antiochene Rite West Syriac Malankara Byzantine Rite East Syriac Rite Syro-Malabar Catholic Church portal v t e Sui iuris particular churches of the Catholic Church By ecclesiastical jurisdiction Patriarchal churches Ancient patriarchates Latin Coptic Antiochian Maronite Melkite Syriac Junior patriarchates Chaldean Armenian Major archiepiscopal churches Ukrainian Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Romania Metropolitan churches Ethiopian Ruthenian Slovak Eritrean Hungarian Other sui iuris churches Albanian Belarusian Bulgarian Croat and Serbian Greek Italo-Albanian Macedonian Russian Catholicism portal Christianity portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Western Christianity Cultural sphere of Christian traditions that developed in the Latin Church in the Western Roman Empire , further diversified starting from the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century Main divisions Catholic Church * Latin Church Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Baptists Calvinism Lutheranism Methodism Pentecostalism more Anglicanism Anglican Communion Anglo-Catholicism Old Catholic Church Union of Utrecht Union of Scranton Independent Catholicism List of Independent Catholic denominations Others Western Rite Orthodoxy History Early Christianity State church of the Roman Empire Latin Church East–West Schism (1054) Western Schism (1378-1417) Bohemian Reformation (15th century) Protestant Reformation (16th century) Independent Catholicism History of Protestantism Theology Catholic theology Protestant theology Anglican theology *The Catholic Church also comprises the Eastern Catholic Churches Christianity portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin_Church&oldid=1305330069 " Categories : Latin Church Religious organisations based in Italy Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Latin Church 48 languages Add topic

