Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cos sequences 2 Cosmid features and uses 3 Examples of cosmid vectors 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cosmid 17 languages العربية Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of hybrid plasmid This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cosmid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A cosmid is a type of hybrid plasmid that contains a Lambda phage cos sequence.

[ 1 ] Often used as cloning vectors in genetic engineering , cosmids can be used to build genomic libraries . They were first described by Collins and Hohn in 1978.

[ 2 ] Cosmids can contain 37 to 52 (normally 45) kb of DNA, limits based on the normal bacteriophage packaging size. They can replicate as plasmids if they have a suitable origin of replication (ori): for example SV40 ori in mammalian cells, ColE1 ori for double-stranded DNA replication, or f1 ori for single-stranded DNA replication in prokaryotes . They frequently also contain a gene for selection such as antibiotic resistance , so that the transformed cells can be identified by plating on a medium containing the antibiotic. Those cells which did not take up the cosmid would be unable to grow.

[ 3 ] Unlike plasmids, they can also be packaged in vitro into phage capsids , a step which requires cohesive ends , also known as cos sites also used in cloning with a lambda phage as a vector, however nearly all the lambda genes have been deleted with the exception of the cos sequence. The hybrid cosmid DNA in the capsids can then be transferred into bacterial cells by transduction . Since there is a requirement for in vitro packaging whereby at least 38 kb of DNA is required between the cos sites, the vector without insert DNA will not be packaged (plasmids instability is increased if the novel inserted DNA contains many direct repeats or palindromic (inverted repeats) DNA. This instability can largely be counteracted by using a host bacterium with specific mutations affecting DNA recombination (N.B. Absence of inverted repeats was noted in the first Hohn & Collins publication cited above; see also [ 4 ] ).

Cos sequences [ edit ] Cos sequences are ~200 base pairs long and essential for packaging. They contain a cosN site where DNA is nicked at each strand, 12 bp apart, by terminase . This causes linearization of the circular cosmid with two "cohesive" or "sticky ends" of 12bp. (The DNA must be linear to fit into a phage head.) The cosB site holds the terminase while it is nicking and separating the strands. The cosQ site of next cosmid (as rolling circle replication often results in linear concatemers ) is held by the terminase after the previous cosmid has been packaged, to prevent degradation by cellular DNases .

[ citation needed ] Cosmid features and uses [ edit ] Scheme of DNA cloning in a cosmid vector.

Cosmids are predominantly plasmids with a bacterial oriV , an antibiotic selection marker and a cloning site, but they carry one, or more recently two, cos sites derived from bacteriophage lambda. Depending on the particular aim of the experiment, broad host range cosmids, shuttle cosmids or 'mammalian' cosmids (linked to SV40 oriV and mammalian selection markers) are available. The loading capacity of cosmids varies depending on the size of the vector itself but usually lies around 40–45 kb. The cloning procedure involves the generation of two vector arms which are then joined to the foreign DNA. Selection against wild type cosmid DNA is simply done via size exclusion. Cosmids, therefore, always form colonies and not plaques. Also the clone density is much lower with around 10 5 – 10 6 CFU per μg of ligated DNA.

After the construction of recombinant lambda or cosmid libraries the total DNA is transferred into an appropriate E. coli host via a technique called in vitro packaging. The necessary packaging extracts are derived from E. coli cI857 lysogens (red- gam- Sam and Dam (head assembly) and Eam (tail assembly) respectively). These extracts will recognize and package the recombinant molecules in vitro , generating either mature phage particles (lambda-based vectors) or recombinant plasmids contained in phage shells (cosmids). These differences are reflected in the different infection frequencies seen in favour of lambda-replacement vectors. This compensates for their slightly lower loading capacity. Phage libraries are also stored and screened more easily than cosmid libraries.

Target DNA: the genomic DNA to be cloned has to be cut into the appropriate size range of restriction fragments. This is usually done by partial restriction followed by either size fractionation or dephosphorylation (using calf-intestine phosphatase) to avoid chromosome scrambling, i.e. the ligation of physically unlinked fragments.

Examples of cosmid vectors [ edit ] Commonly used vectors include "SuperCos 1" References [ edit ] ^ Hohn B, Murray K (August 1977).

"Packaging recombinant DNA molecules into bacteriophage particles in vitro" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

74 (8): 3259– 63.

Bibcode : 1977PNAS...74.3259H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.74.8.3259 .

PMC 431522 .

PMID 333431 .

^ Collins J, Hohn B (September 1978).

"Cosmids: a type of plasmid gene-cloning vector that is packageable in vitro in bacteriophage lambda heads" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

75 (9): 4242– 6.

Bibcode : 1978PNAS...75.4242C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.75.9.4242 .

PMC 336088 .

PMID 360212 .

^ "Cosmids" . Phillip McClean . Retrieved April 4, 2014 .

^ Collins J (1981). "Instability of palindromic DNA in Escherichia coli".

Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology . 45 Pt 1: 409– 16.

doi : 10.1101/SQB.1981.045.01.055 .

PMID 6271486 .

Further reading [ edit ] Stryer, Lubert (1995) Biochemistry 4th ed.

ISBN 0-7167-2009-4 Eurekah Biosciences Collection: Viruses, @NCBI v t e Self-replicating organic structures Cellular life Bacteria Archaea Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae Protista Incertae sedis Parakaryon Biological dark matter Virus dsDNA virus Giant virus ssDNA virus dsRNA virus (+)ssRNA virus (−)ssRNA virus ssRNA-RT virus dsDNA-RT virus Subviral agents Viroid Pospiviroidae Avsunviroidae Helper-virus dependent Satellite ssRNA satellite virus dsDNA satellite virus ( Virophage ) ssDNA satellite virus ssDNA satellite dsRNA satellite ssRNA satellite ( Virusoid ) Satellite-like nucleic acids RNA DNA Other Defective interfering particle RNA DNA Prion Mammalian prion Fungal prion Nucleic acid self-replication Mobile genetic elements Mobilome Horizontal gene transfer Genomic island Transposable element Class I or retrotransposon Class II or DNA transposon Plasmid Fertility Resistance Col Degradative Virulence / Ti Cryptic Cosmid Fosmid Phagemid Group I intron Group II intron Retrozyme Other aspects DNA replication RNA replication Chromosome Linear Circular Extrachromosomal DNA Secondary chromosome Genome Gene Gene duplication Non-coding DNA Origin of replication Replicon Endogenous viral element Provirus Prophage Endogenous retrovirus Transpoviron Repeated sequences in DNA Tandem repeat Interspersed repeat Endosymbiosis Mitochondrion Mitosome Hydrogenosome Plastid Chloroplast Chromoplast Gerontoplast Leucoplast Apicoplast Kappa organism Organs Bacteriome Trophosome Nitroplast Abiogenesis Last universal common ancestor Earliest known life forms ?

RNA life Ribozyme † Protocell Coacervate Proteinoid Sulphobe Research Model lipid bilayer Jeewanu See also Organism Cell Cell division Artificial cell Non-cellular life Synthetic virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus ?

Nanobacterium ?

Nanobe Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Virome v t e Life , non-cellular life , and comparable structures Cellular life " Prokaryota " Archaea Bacteria Mitochondrion Plastid LUCA Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae " Protista " Incertae sedis Parakaryon Microbes with highly unusual DNA (?) Non-cellular life Virus Viroid Satellite Realms Adnaviria Duplodnaviria Monodnaviria Riboviria Ribozyviria Varidnaviria Unassigned Classes Naldaviricetes Families Alphasatellitidae Ampullaviridae Anelloviridae Avsunviroidae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Finnlakeviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Pospiviroidae Spiraviridae Thaspiviridae Tolecusatellitidae Genera Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus Other Nanobe (?) Obelisk Comparable structures Bio-like structure Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Cosmid Defective interfering particle Endogenous viral element Fosmid Integrative and conjugative element Jeewanu " Nanobacterium " Phagemid Plasmid Prion Fungal prion Proteinoid microsphere Retroelements not elsewhere classified Retron Diversity-generating retroelement Telomerase reverse transcriptase Reverse transcriptase-related cellular gene Ribozyme Spiegelman's Monster Tandem repeat Transposable element Retroposon Transpoviron Xenobot Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cosmid&oldid=1301317590 " Categories : Molecular biology Genetic engineering Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from April 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cosmid 17 languages Add topic

