Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key collections 2 List of archives, libraries, museums, and collections Toggle List of archives, libraries, museums, and collections subsection 2.1 Research collections 2.2 Museums 2.3 Important databases and portals 3 References Toggle the table of contents Science fiction libraries and museums Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia See also: Science fiction and Science fiction studies With the growth of science fiction studies as an academic discipline as well as a popular media genre, a number of libraries, museums, archives, and special collections have been established to collect and organize works of scholarly and historical value in the field.

Key collections [ edit ] The Merril Collection of Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Speculation is a leading collection of science fiction . It was founded in Toronto in 1970 by Judith Merril . This public library collection contains over 63,000 items, including books, magazines, audiovisual works, original manuscripts, and other items of interest to both casual users and academic researchers.

[ 1 ] Paul Allen and Jody Patton founded the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame in 2004, located at the base of Space Needle in Seattle . Prominent authors such as Greg Bear serve as advisers to the museum.

An important museum of the genre is Maison d’Ailleurs ("House of Elsewhere") in Yverdon-les-Bains , Switzerland , housing a large collection of literature relating to science fiction, utopias , and extraordinary journeys. It was founded by the French encyclopedist Pierre Versins in 1976 and now owns over 70,000 books, as well as many other items (60,000) related to science fiction and its imagery.

List of archives, libraries, museums, and collections [ edit ] Research collections [ edit ] Jack Williamson Science Fiction Library lending library of over 20,000 volumes of speculative fiction at Eastern New Mexico University . Includes archival materials from authors.

J. Lloyd Eaton Collection of Science Fiction, Fantasy, Horror, and Utopian Literature ( University of California, Riverside ) ( Collection description ) [ 2 ] The Science Fiction Foundation Collection , Special Collections and Archives, Sydney Jones Library, University of Liverpool M. Horvat Collection of Science Fiction Fanzines , University of Iowa Libraries, Special Collections Dept.

H.G Wells Literary Papers at The Rare Book & Manuscript Library (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) The Judith Merril Collection of Science Fiction, Speculation and Fantasy , Toronto Public Library (founded 1970) Michigan State University Libraries, Science Fiction Collection ; includes collection of Tiptree Award , Clarion archives , and Science Fiction Writers of America depository MIT Science Fiction Society ("the world's largest open-shelf collection of science fiction"); local index Caltech S.P.E.C.T.R.E.

lending library of over 12,000 volumes of speculative fiction at the California Institute of Technology Paskow Science Fiction Collection , Temple University Libraries (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania), including a significant collection of fanzines University of Maryland Baltimore County, ca. 10,000 book volumes and serials, and the Coslet Collection of 15,000 SF fanzines Maison d’Ailleurs ("House of Elsewhere"), Yverdon-les-Bains , Switzerland (founded 1976 and holding more than 40,000 books and other items) Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America Collection Northern Illinois University.

Science Fiction Writers of America depository, pulps, and collects the papers of current SF authors.

University of Delaware 's Special Collections, including the "Roland Bounds Science Fiction Collection" (30,000 volumes) Georgia Tech 's "Bud Foote Science Fiction Collection" (established 1999; 8,000+ volumes) Texas A&M University 's "Science Fiction and Fantasy Research Collection" (More than 20,000 titles and "over ninety percent of the American science fiction pulp magazines published prior to 1980") San Diego State University 's "Elizabeth Chater Collection of Science Fiction and Fantasy" Seoul Science Fiction & Fantasy Library Science Fiction Collections at the University of South Florida Science Fiction Collections at the Kenneth Spencer Research Library , University of Kansas Phantastische Bibliothek Wetzlar, Germany (270,000 volumes of speculative fiction, mainly in German, including a significant collection of pulp magazines and fanzines) Villa Fantastica, Vienna, Austria public library founded 2010 by de:Helmuth W. Mommers , holding 50,000 volumes mainly in German, including a broad collection of German "Dime Novels" University of Oslo Science Library (8,000 volumes of science fiction as of 2017 [update] ) Murdoch University Science Fiction Collection (including over 13,000 book titles and a significant number of fanzines) J. Francis McComas Science Fiction Collection , San Francisco Public Library The University of Alabama in Huntsville Special Collections and Archives collects science fiction in English and German and has archival collections from Willy Ley and Robert Forward.

City Tech Science Fiction Collection , Ursula C. Schwerin Library, New York City College of Technology The University of Calgary Bob Gibson Collection of Speculative Fiction is a collection of 28,000 hardcover books, paperbacks, pulp magazines and other materials collected by the late Bob (William Robert) Gibson and donated by his son Andrew. These items can be viewed in the archive and portions of the collection have been digitized.

Popular culture collections with strong SF Bowling Green State University Popular Culture Collection Dime Novel and Story Paper Collection , Stanford University Library ("Dime Novels and Penny Dreadfuls") Museums [ edit ] Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame , Seattle, Washington , founded in 2004.

Maison d’Ailleurs ("House of Elsewhere"), Yverdon-les-Bains , Switzerland (founded 1976 and holding more than 70,000 books and 60,000 other items) Museum of Science Fiction , Washington, DC , founded in 2013 with a goal of becoming the world's first comprehensive science fiction museum.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Important databases and portals [ edit ] SF Hub , the University of Liverpool Library's "Science Fiction Foundation" collection Science Fiction & Fantasy Research Database , Texas A&M University, College Station; A freely available online resource (more than 145,000 items) designed to help students and researchers locate secondary sources for the study of the science fiction and fantasy and associated genres; these include: historical material; books; articles; news reports; interviews; film reviews; commentary; and fan writing.

Center for the Study of Science Fiction , University of Kansas ISFDB , the Internet Speculative Fiction DataBase Locus Index to Science Fiction (1984-1999) Map of major SF Archival Collections maintained by The Eaton Journal of Archival Research in Science Fiction SF Archival Collections Wiki , a growing wiki of the locations of SF writers' papers, crowd-sourced by librarians.

References [ edit ] ^ "The Merril Collection of Science Fiction, Speculation and Fantasy" . Toronto Public Library. 2006-07-16. Archived from the original on 2006-12-11 . Retrieved 2007-01-08 .

^ Sara Lin, " In a university not far away, sci-fi heaven ", Los Angeles Times , June 21, 2007.

^ "Help Build The Museum of Science Fiction in Washington, D.C.!" . Tor.com. 2013-11-05 . Retrieved 2014-07-30 .

^ Snider, Mike (November 4, 2013).

"Funds sought for science fiction museum lift-off" . Usatoday.com . Retrieved 2014-07-30 .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_fiction_libraries_and_museums&oldid=1300074940 " Categories : Science fiction culture Science fiction studies Science fiction studies organizations Museum collections Lists of museums by subject Museums in popular culture Types of museums Libraries by subject Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 04:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science fiction libraries and museums Add languages Add topic

