Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 Historical usage 3 Nyctalopia in animals 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nyctalopia 60 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dagbanli Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taclḥit తెలుగు Українська اردو Vahcuengh 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Condition making it difficult or impossible to see in relatively low light Medical condition Nyctalopia Other names Night blindness Effect of night blindness. Left: normal night vision. Right: night-blind vision.

Specialty Ophthalmology Nyctalopia ( / ˌ n ɪ k t ə ˈ l oʊ p i ə / ; from Ancient Greek νύκτ- (núkt-) ' night ' ἀλαός (alaós) ' blind, invisible ' and ὄψ (óps) ' eye ' ), [ 1 ] also called night blindness , is a condition making it difficult or impossible to see in relatively low light. It is a symptom of several eye diseases. Night blindness may exist from birth, or be caused by injury or malnutrition (for example, vitamin A deficiency ). It can be described as insufficient adaptation to darkness.

The most common cause of nyctalopia is retinitis pigmentosa , a disorder in which the rod cells in the retina gradually lose their ability to respond to the light. Patients with this genetic condition have progressive nyctalopia and, eventually, their daytime vision may also be affected. In X-linked congenital stationary night blindness , from birth the rods either do not work at all, or work very little, but the condition does not get worse.

Another cause of night blindness is a deficiency of retinol , or vitamin A 1 , found in fish oils, liver, and dairy products.

The opposite problem, the inability to see in bright light, is known as hemeralopia and is much rarer.

Since the outer area of the retina is made up of more rods than cones, loss of peripheral vision often results in night blindness. Individuals with night blindness not only see poorly at night but also require extra time for their eyes to adjust from brightly lit areas to dim ones. Contrast vision may also be greatly reduced.

Rods contain a receptor-protein called rhodopsin . When light falls on rhodopsin, it undergoes a series of conformational changes ultimately generating electrical signals which are carried to the brain via the optic nerve . In the absence of light, rhodopsin is regenerated. The body synthesizes rhodopsin from vitamin A, which is why a deficiency in vitamin A causes poor night vision.

Refractive "vision correction" surgery (especially PRK with the complication of "haze") may rarely cause a reduction in best night-time acuity due to the impairment of contrast sensitivity function (CSF) which is induced by intraocular light-scatter resulting from surgical intervention in the natural structural integrity of the cornea.

[ 2 ] Causes [ edit ] Cataract (peripheral cortical) Certain medications, such as phenothiazines [ 3 ] Choroideremia Chronic pancreatitis - Presumably due to malabsorption of vitamin A [ 4 ] Glaucoma Oguchi disease Pathological myopia Refractive surgery ( LASIK , photorefractive keratectomy , radial keratotomy ) Retinal detachment Retinitis pigmentosa Sorsby's Fundus Dystrophy ( Macular degeneration ) Visual snow Vitamin A deficiency ; often via xerophthalmia Historical usage [ edit ] Aulus Cornelius Celsus , writing ca. 30 AD, described night blindness and recommended an effective dietary supplement, liver being a good source of vitamin A: "There is besides a weakness of the eyes, owing to which people see well enough indeed in the daytime but not at all at night; in women whose menstruation is regular this does not happen. But success sufferers should anoint their eyeballs with the stuff dripping from a liver while roasting, preferably of a he-goat, or failing that of a she-goat; and as well they should eat some of the liver itself." [ citation needed ] Historically, nyctalopia, also known as moonblink , was a temporary night blindness believed to be caused by sleeping in moonlight in the tropics.

[ 5 ] In the French language , nyctalopie and héméralopie have inverse meanings, the first naming the ability to see in the dark as well as in plain light, and the second the inability to do so. It is thought that this inversion from Latin happened during the 2nd century AD, [ 6 ] even though the Ancient Greek νυκτάλωψ ( nuktálōps ) has been used in both senses.

Night blindness, sometimes referred to as gravel , was occasionally documented during the American Civil War , particularly within the Confederate States of America . Like rheumatism , night blindness was viewed as a condition that could be easily faked or exaggerated and, initially, people with night blindness were regarded with some suspicion. Some soldiers who reported symptoms of nyctalopia also presented with symptoms of scurvy , suggesting a fundamental cause of poor nutrition.

[ 7 ] Nyctalopia in animals [ edit ] See also: Horse eye Congenital stationary night blindness is also an ophthalmologic disorder in horses with leopard spotting patterns, such as the Appaloosa . It is present at birth (congenital), not sex-linked, non-progressive, and affects the animal's vision in conditions of low lighting.

[ 8 ] Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is usually diagnosed based on the owner's observations, but some horses have visibly abnormal eyes: poorly aligned eyes (dorsomedial strabismus) or involuntary eye movement (nystagmus).

[ 8 ] In horses, CSNB has been linked with the leopard complex color pattern since the 1970s.

[ 9 ] A 2008 study theorizes that both CSNB and leopard complex spotting patterns are linked to the TRPM1 gene.

[ 10 ] The region on horse chromosome 1 to which the Lp gene has now been localized also encodes a protein that channels calcium ions , a key factor in the transmission of nerve impulses. This protein, found in the retina and the skin, exists in fractional percentages of the normal levels found in homozygous Lp/Lp horses and so compromises the basic chemical reaction for nerve impulse transmission.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ "nyctalopia" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d . Retrieved 28 September 2015 .

^ Quesnel, NM; Lovasik, JV; Ferremi, C; Boileau, M; Ieraci, C (Jun 2004). "Laser in situ keratomileusis for myopia and the contrast sensitivity function".

Journal of Cataract and Refractive Surgery .

30 (6): 1209– 18.

doi : 10.1016/j.jcrs.2003.11.040 .

PMID 15177594 .

S2CID 21916978 .

^ Goldman, Lee (2012).

Goldman's Cecil Medicine (24th ed.). Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. pp.

2429 .

ISBN 978-1-4377-2788-3 .

^ Lee A, Tran N, Monarrez J, Mietzner D (2019). "Case Report: Vitamin A Deficiency and Nyctalopia in a Patient with Chronic Pancreatitis".

Optom Vis Sci .

96 (6): 453– 458.

doi : 10.1097/OPX.0000000000001385 .

PMID 31107845 .

^ Smyth, W. H. (1867).

The Sailor's Word-Book . BLACKIE AND SON. p. 483.

ISBN 0-85177-972-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Dimitrios Brouzas et al.

, Nyctalopia in antiquity: a review of the ancient Greek, Latin, and Byzantine literature.

, Ophthalmology, 108(10):1917-21, 2001.

^ Wiley, Bell Irvin (2008) [First published 1948].

The Life of Johnny Reb: The Common Soldier of the Confederacy (Updated ed.).

Louisiana State University Press . p.

255 .

ISBN 978-0-8071-3325-5 .

^ a b c Bellone, Rebecca R; Brooks SA; Sandmeyer L; Murphy BA; Forsyth G; Archer S; Bailey E; Grahn B (August 2008).

"Differential Gene Expression of TRPM1, the Potential Cause of Congenital Stationary Night Blindness and Coat Spotting Patterns (LP) in the Appaloosa Horse (Equus caballus)" .

Genetics .

179 (4). Genetics Society of America: 1861– 1870.

doi : 10.1534/genetics.108.088807 .

PMC 2516064 .

PMID 18660533 .

^ Witzel CA, Joyce JR, Smith EL.

Electroretinography of congenital night blindness in an Appaloosa filly.

Journal of Equine Medicine and Surgery 1977; 1: 226–229.

^ Oke, Stacey, DVM, MSc (August 31, 2008).

"Shedding Light on Night Blindness in Appaloosas" .

The Horse . Retrieved 2009-02-07 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : H53.6 ICD - 9-CM : 368.6 MeSH : D009755 DiseasesDB : 32761 SNOMED CT : 75390007 External resources MedlinePlus : 003039 v t e Diseases of the human eye Adnexa Eyelid Inflammation Stye Chalazion Blepharitis Meibomian gland dysfunction Entropion Ectropion Lagophthalmos Blepharochalasis Ptosis Blepharophimosis Xanthelasma Ankyloblepharon Eyelash Trichiasis Madarosis Distichiasis Trichomegaly Lacrimal apparatus Dacryoadenitis Epiphora Dacryocystitis Xerophthalmia Orbit Exophthalmos Enophthalmos Orbital cellulitis Orbital lymphoma Periorbital cellulitis Conjunctiva Chemosis Conjunctivitis allergic Pterygium Pseudopterygium Pinguecula Subconjunctival hemorrhage Globe Fibrous tunic Sclera Scleritis Episcleritis Cornea Keratitis herpetic acanthamoebic fungal Exposure Photokeratitis Corneal ulcer Thygeson's superficial punctate keratopathy Corneal dystrophy Fuchs' Meesmann Corneal ectasia Keratoconus Pellucid marginal degeneration Keratoglobus Terrien's marginal degeneration Post-LASIK ectasia Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Corneal opacity Corneal neovascularization Kayser–Fleischer ring Haab's striae Arcus senilis Band keratopathy Vascular tunic Iris Ciliary body Uveitis Intermediate uveitis Hyphema Rubeosis iridis Persistent pupillary membrane Iridodialysis Synechia Choroid Choroideremia Choroiditis Chorioretinitis Focal choroidal excavation Polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy Lens Cataract Congenital cataract Childhood cataract Aphakia Ectopia lentis Retina Retinitis Chorioretinitis Cytomegalovirus retinitis Retinal detachment Posterior vitreous detachment Retinoschisis Ocular ischemic syndrome / Central retinal vein occlusion Central retinal artery occlusion Branch retinal artery occlusion Retinopathy diabetic hypertensive Purtscher's of prematurity Bietti's crystalline dystrophy Coats' disease Sickle cell photic Macular degeneration Retinitis pigmentosa Retinal haemorrhage Central serous retinopathy Macular edema Epiretinal membrane (Macular pucker) Vitelliform macular dystrophy Leber's congenital amaurosis Birdshot chorioretinopathy Other Glaucoma / Ocular hypertension / Primary juvenile glaucoma Floater Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy Ocular hypotony Red eye Globe rupture Keratomycosis Phthisis bulbi Persistent fetal vasculature Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease Pathways Optic nerve Optic disc Optic neuritis optic papillitis Papilledema Foster Kennedy syndrome Optic atrophy Optic disc drusen Optic neuropathy Ischemic anterior (AION) posterior (PION) arteritic anterior (AAION or arteritic AION) non-arteritic anterior (NAION) Kjer's Leber's hereditary Toxic and nutritional Strabismus Extraocular muscles Binocular vision Accommodation Paralytic strabismus Ophthalmoparesis Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia Kearns–Sayre syndrome palsies Oculomotor (III) Fourth-nerve (IV) Sixth-nerve (VI) Other strabismus Esotropia / Exotropia Hypertropia Heterophoria Esophoria Exophoria Cyclotropia Brown's syndrome Duane syndrome Other binocular Conjugate gaze palsy Convergence insufficiency Internuclear ophthalmoplegia One and a half syndrome Refraction Refractive error Hyperopia Myopia Astigmatism Anisometropia / Aniseikonia Presbyopia Vision disorders Blindness Amblyopia Leber's congenital amaurosis Diplopia Scotoma Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Monochromacy Nyctalopia Oguchi disease Blindness / Vision loss / Visual impairment Anopsia Hemianopsia binasal bitemporal homonymous Quadrantanopia subjective Asthenopia Hemeralopia Photophobia Scintillating scotoma Pupil Anisocoria Argyll Robertson pupil Marcus Gunn pupil Adie syndrome Miosis Mydriasis Cycloplegia Parinaud's syndrome Other Nystagmus Childhood blindness Infections Trachoma Onchocerciasis Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nyctalopia&oldid=1300703070 " Categories : Blindness Visual disturbances and blindness Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 23:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nyctalopia 60 languages Add topic

