Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sequence 2 Polynucleotides in organisms 3 Polynucleotides in scientific experiments 4 Prebiotic condensation of nucleobases with ribose 5 Medical use 6 References Toggle the table of contents Polynucleotide 23 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Қазақша Lietuvių 日本語 Português Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biopolymer molecule composed of nucleotide monomers In molecular biology , a polynucleotide (from Ancient Greek πολυς (polys) ' many ' ) is a biopolymer composed of nucleotide monomers that are covalently bonded in a chain.

[ 1 ] DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid) are examples of polynucleotides with distinct biological functions. DNA consists of two chains of polynucleotides, with each chain in the form of a helix (like a spiral staircase).

[ citation needed ] Sequence [ edit ] Although DNA and RNA do not generally occur in the same polynucleotide, the four species of nucleotides may occur in any order in the chain. The sequence of DNA or RNA species for a given polynucleotide is the main factor determining its function  in a living organism or a scientific experiment .

[ citation needed ] Polynucleotides in organisms [ edit ] Polynucleotides occur naturally in all living organisms. The genome of an organism consists of complementary pairs of enormously long polynucleotides wound around each other in the form of a double helix . Polynucleotides have a variety of other roles in organisms.

[ citation needed ] Polynucleotides in scientific experiments [ edit ] Polynucleotides are used in biochemical experiments such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR)  or DNA sequencing . Polynucleotides are made artificially from oligonucleotides , smaller nucleotide chains with generally fewer than 30 subunits. A polymerase enzyme is used to extend the chain by adding nucleotides according to a pattern specified by the scientist.

[ citation needed ] Prebiotic condensation of nucleobases with ribose [ edit ] In order to understand how life arose, knowledge is required of the chemical pathways that permit formation of the key building blocks of life under plausible prebiotic conditions .  According to the RNA world hypothesis free-floating ribonucleotides were present in the primitive soup.  These were the fundamental molecules that combined in series to form RNA .  Molecules as complex as RNA must have arisen from small molecules whose reactivity was governed by physico-chemical processes.  RNA is composed of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, both of which are necessary for reliable information transfer, and thus Darwinian natural selection and evolution . Nam et al.

[ 2 ] demonstrated the direct condensation of nucleobases with ribose to give ribonucleosides in aqueous microdroplets, a key step leading to RNA formation. Similar results were obtained using wet-dry cycles by Becker et al.

[ 3 ] Medical use [ edit ] Fish derived polynucleotide is used in aesthetic medicine as a dermal filler.

[ 1 ] It has also been found effective in alleviating knee osteoarthritic pain.

[ 2 ] [ failed verification ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Polynucleotides at the U.S. National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) ^ a b Nam I, Nam HG, Zare RN (January 2018).

"Abiotic synthesis of purine and pyrimidine ribonucleosides in aqueous microdroplets" .

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A .

115 (1): 36– 40.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1718559115 .

PMC 5776833 .

PMID 29255025 .

^ Becker S, Feldmann J, Wiedemann S, Okamura H, Schneider C, Iwan K, Crisp A, Rossa M, Amatov T, Carell T (October 2019). "Unified prebiotically plausible synthesis of pyrimidine and purine RNA ribonucleotides".

Science .

366 (6461): 76– 82.

doi : 10.1126/science.aax2747 .

PMID 31604305 .

v t e Nucleic acid constituents Nucleobase Purine Adenine Guanine Hypoxanthine Xanthine Purine analogue Pyrimidine Uracil Thymine Cytosine Pyrimidine analogue Unnatural base pair (UBP) Nucleoside Ribonucleoside Adenosine Guanosine 5-Methyluridine Uridine 5-Methylcytidine Cytidine Pseudouridine Inosine N 6 -Methyladenosine Xanthosine Wybutosine Deoxyribonucleoside Deoxyadenosine Deoxyguanosine Thymidine Deoxyuridine Deoxycytidine Deoxyinosine Deoxyxanthosine Nucleotide (Nucleoside monophosphate) Ribonucleotide AMP GMP m 5 UMP UMP CMP IMP XMP Deoxyribonucleotide dAMP dGMP dTMP dUMP dCMP dIMP dXMP Cyclic nucleotide cAMP cGMP c-di-GMP c-di-AMP cADPR cGAMP Nucleoside diphosphate ADP GDP m 5 UDP UDP CDP Xanthosine diphosphate dADP dGDP dTDP dUDP dCDP Nucleoside triphosphate ATP GTP m 5 UTP UTP CTP ITP XTP dATP dGTP dTTP dUTP dCTP dITP dXTP Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polynucleotide&oldid=1302796182 " Categories : Organic polymers Nucleotides Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2023 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 13:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polynucleotide 23 languages Add topic

