Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Harvard University coat of arms Toggle Harvard University coat of arms subsection 1.1 Description 1.2 History 2 Faculty of Arts and Sciences (FAS) Toggle Faculty of Arts and Sciences (FAS) subsection 2.1 Harvard College 2.2 Graduate School of Arts and Science (GSAS) 2.3 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS) 2.4 Extension School 3 Graduate and Professional Schools 4 Radcliffe Arms 5 Other arms 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Heraldry of Harvard University 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Official seal of Harvard University This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Heraldry of Harvard University" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Arms of Harvard University Versions Great Seal Armiger Harvard University Adopted 1643 ; 382 years ago ( 1643 ) Shield Gules, three open books Argent, edges, covers, and clasps Or, on the books the letters VE RI TAS Sable.

Motto Veritas Harvard University adopted an official seal soon after it was founded in 1636 and named "Harvard College" in 1638; a variant is still used.

Each school within the university ( Harvard College , Harvard Medical School , Harvard Law School , Harvard Extension School , Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , etc.) has its own distinctive shield as well, as do many other internal administrative units such as the Harvard College residential "Houses" and the Harvard Library . Many extracurricular organizations‍—‌such as clubs, societies, and athletic teams‍—‌also have their own shield, often based on the coat of arms of Harvard itself.

Harvard University coat of arms [ edit ] Description [ edit ] The Harvard University coat of arms , or shield , has a field of the color 'Harvard Crimson '. In the foreground are three open books with the word VERITAS ( Latin for 'truth') inscribed across them.

[ 1 ] The two open books at the top symbolize the Old and New Testaments, reflecting the belief that biblical truth is accessible to all who read the Scriptures. The third book at the bottom was interpreted by Puritans as symbolizing the yet unwritten truths of the future — to be fulfilled with the anticipated second coming of Christ. In some versions of the seal, the third book appears closed — a detail interpreted by some as a symbol of knowledge yet to be revealed.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Harvard Board of Overseers originally designed the coat of arms during meetings in December 1643 and January 1644. However, the design was forgotten until rediscovered by University President Josiah Quincy and revealed in the bicentennial celebrations of 1836.

[ 1 ] In 1843, the Harvard Corporation officially adopted it as a seal, and the seal in use today is very similar.

[ citation needed ] 1643 Original Sketch 1885 "Appleton" Design Present Design Faculty of Arts and Sciences (FAS) [ edit ] Harvard College [ edit ] Blazon: Arms of Harvard, differenced by a chevron argent between the books.

Each of the residential houses of Harvard College has its own arms, which are used commonly on merchandise, in architectural ornaments, on dining hall china, etc.

Residential Houses of Harvard College House Arms Blazon Symbolism Adams House Or, five sprigs of oak gules in saltire, each with a single leaf and an acorn.

[ 3 ] The arms reference the Adams family of Quincy, Massachusetts, who had used an oak leaf logo in several family papers.

Cabot House Or, three chabots haurient, with dorsaI fins sinister gules.

[ 4 ] Canting arms, used by the Cabot family, assumed from the French Chabot family.

Currier House Gules, in base an apple tree surrounded by a bench or, in chief a barrulet sable engrailed and fimbriated argent.

[ 5 ] The apple tree references an apple tree which used to stand in the Radcliffe Yard, and was used as a symbol in a fundraising campaign in 1969 to complete Currier House.

Dunster House Gules, three facing stags' heads caboched within an orle, all or.

[ 6 ] A differenced version of an unrelated Dunster family, on a mistaken attribution by the College of Heralds.

Dudley House Or, a lion rampant vert armed and langued within a bordure gules.

[ 7 ] A differenced version of the arms of Governor Thomas Dudley.

Eliot House Argent, a fess gules between two bars gemel wavy.

[ 8 ] The arms come from a 16th-century adopted arms by the Devonshire Eliots, from whom the Massachusetts Eliot family descended.

Kirkland House Gules, on a cross sable fimbriated argent, three mullets argent of five points in fess.

[ 9 ] Arms of the Kirkland family of Carlisle.

Leverett House Argent, a chevron between three leverets courant, all sable.

[ 10 ] Canting arms—a "leveret" is a young hare—found on the tombs of many of the family: perhaps inherited, perhaps granted by Charles II for service in King Philip's War.

Lowell House Sable, a hand dexter couped at the wrist and grasping three darts blunted with points down, one in pale, and two in saltire, all argent.

[ 11 ] Taken from the genuine arms of the Lowell family, as documented from at least 1563.

Mather House Ermine, on a fess wavy gules three lions rampant and langued sable.

[ 12 ] Probably assumed arms, pace Samuel Mather, of an unrelated William Mather of Shropshire.

Pforzheimer House Per bend gules and sable; four squares per bend, each divided per bend and countercharged sable and gules.

[ 13 ] Preserved temporary arms from "North House", the Pforzheimers having given no arms. Colors represent Harvard and Radcliffe, and the squares the four buildings included. Colors violate heraldic rules.

Quincy House Gules, seven mascles conjoined, three, three, and one, or.

[ 14 ] Probably assumed arms, but found on a silver cup belonging to Edmund Quincy, a second generation settler.

Winthrop House Argent, three chevronels gules and over them a lion rampant sable armed and langued gules.

[ 15 ] Genuine arms of the Winthrop family, brought from England in 1548.

Graduate School of Arts and Science (GSAS) [ edit ] John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS) [ edit ] The School of Engineering and Applied Science has its roots in the Lawrence Scientific School , which was endowed by Abbott Lawrence . Since its incorporation as a division of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences in 1977, according to Mason Hammond, "it is properly no longer entitled to the use of separate arms." Nevertheless, SEAS continues to use its arms informally.

Blazon: Argent, a cross raguly (or ragged) gules, and a chief of Harvard (see below).

Extension School [ edit ] The coat of arms for the Harvard Extension School was approved in 1983.

[ 16 ] At the top of the shield the three books spelling out Veritas (Latin, "truth") represent graduate education; a similar arrangement is seen on the arms of Harvard's law school, medical school, and other graduate schools.

[ 16 ] Instead of a straight line separating it from the rest of the shield, as is found in the other schools, a line with six arcs pointing up was used instead.

[ 16 ] A silver chevron was used to represent undergraduate education, a device used in the shield of Harvard College in the 17th to 19th centuries.

[ 16 ] Two bushels of wheat are included to represent John Lowell's stipulation that courses should not cost more than two bushels of wheat.

[ 16 ] A golden lamp symbolizes both learning and the fact that some classes are taught at night.

[ 16 ] Graduate and Professional Schools [ edit ] Diagram showing how most shields were constructed The shields of each of the graduate and professional schools have a standard chief (or top bar) of Harvard, taken from the University shield, formally blazoned "on a chief gules three open books argent with edges of leaves and covers on the two sides and bottom and clasps or, on the books VE - RI - TAS sable," abbreviated "a chief of Harvard." Most of the arms were designed by Pierre de Chaignon la Rose , an alumnus of Harvard College and expert on heraldry, on commission from the University as part of the preparations for the Tercentenary celebrations in 1936.

[ 17 ] According to  Hammond, "La Rose used as the bases for arms of eight of the remaining ten Graduate Schools arms of  families of the founders or benefactors. Only for the Dental School and the then School of Public Administration, later the Kennedy School of Government, did he invent the arms described below. He felt, however, that since the Graduate Schools had long used the ordinary Harvard Arms, he should incorporate in the arms which he designed an upper compartment in red (a chief gules) on which are displayed in a row the three white books bearing the VE - RI - TAS, i.e., a chief of Harvard...according to his practice." School Arms Blazon Symbolism Family Arms Harvard Medical School Gules, a lion rampant argent, and, sustained by a fillet compony or and azure, a chief of Harvard Assumed arms of the Warren family, distinguished medical family of Boston, including Joseph Warren , John Warren , John Collins Warren , with chief chequy of three rows, or and azure, reduced to a fillet Harvard School of Dental Medicine Argent, a keep gules, and a chief of Harvard Canting arms based on Nathan Cooley Keep , founding professor of dentistry Harvard Divinity School Argent, on a chevron azure between three sprigs of holly proper and fruited three wood-pigeons of the field, beaked and legged gules, and a chief of Harvard Arms of Thomas Hollis , who gave Harvard its first endowed professorship, that of Divinity Harvard Law School A representation of Red plaster throughout proper surmounted by four circular lines issuant from dexter base and four similar lines issuant from sinister base Sable on a Fess enhanced Argent the Letters LEX ET IUSTITIA Sable a chief of Harvard The circular lines on the Red building represent the boundless opportunities of the discipline of Law Harvard Business School Argent, on a saltire engrailed sable five escallops of the field and a chief of Harvard Purported arms of the Baker family, for George Fisher Baker , who financed buildings and endowed a Professorship of Business Administration Harvard Graduate School of Design Gules, a fret (or perhaps fretty) argent surmounted by a bend vairy, and, sustained by a fillet compony or and azure, a chief of Harvard Possibly assumed arms of the Norton family, for Charles Eliot Norton , Professor of Art and instrumental in introducing study of architecture at Harvard. Small band below chief taken from arms of Warren (as with Medical School), for first Dean, Herbert L. Warren Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Argent, on a cross fleury sable five fleur-de-lis or, and a chief of Harvard Possibly assumed arms of Walcott family, for Henry P. Walcott, Overseer, Fellow, and Acting President, important figure in public health in Massachusetts Harvard Graduate School of Education Per bend dancetty argent and azure, three pierced cinquefoils counter-charged, two in chief and one in base, and a chief of Harvard Assumed arms of Cheever family, for Ezekiel Cheever , "patron saint" of secondary education in New England Harvard Kennedy School Thirteen bars, argent and gules, and a chief of Harvard Based on the Flag of the United States Radcliffe Arms [ edit ] Year Arms Blazon Symbolism 1895 Gules, chaveron sable between three mullets argent of five points; impaled with a shield argent, two bendlets engrailed sable.

Combination of arms of Sir. Thomas Mowlson and Ann Radcliffe.

1936 Argent two bendlets engrailed Sable a bordure Gules.

2021 Argent two bendlets Sable a bordure Gules.

Other arms [ edit ] Other arms of Harvard departments and groups Department Arms Blazon Symbolism Family Arms Harvard Crimson (Athletics) Gules, charged in the fess point with a letter H within a bordure argent Harvard Faculty Club Ermine, charged in the fess point with a lion's head erased proper, langued gules, and collared or and a chief of Harvard dancetty Possibly assumed arms of Burr family of Dorchester, for Allston Burr, the Club's first benefactor Harvard University Health Services Ermine, a chief gules bearing three lions rampant argent and below a pale gules bearing a caduceus argent Based on arms of Oliver family, for Henry Kemble Oliver, who endowed a Professorship and a Department of Hygiene, which became the Health Services Memorial Church of Harvard University Blue celeste, an eagle displayed with wings inverted or, armed gules, holding an open book argent with covers gules; impaled with a shield argent, a fess sable between three apples gules palewise inverted leaved and stemmed proper, two in chief and one in base; over all, a chief of Harvard Right (sinister) arms are the canting arms of the Appleton family, for Samuel Appleton , who funded the construction of the Appleton Chapel, the original chapel which was torn down and replaced by the Memorial Church. Left (dexter) arms feature traditional symbols of the Church.

Former arms School/Department Arms Blazon Symbolism Notes Harvard Law School Azure, three wheat sheaves or, two in chief and one in base, and a chief of Harvard Incorporates the arms of Isaac Royall Jr.

, who endowed the first Professorship of Law The arms were replaced in 2016, due to Royall's wealth from slavery in Antigua See also [ edit ] Heraldry of Columbia University Coat of arms of Yale University References [ edit ] ^ a b Samuel Eliot Morison (1968).

The Founding of Harvard College . Harvard University Press. p. 329.

ISBN 978-0-674-31450-4 .

^ Writer, Corydon Ireland/Harvard Staff (May 14, 2015).

"Seal of approval" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved July 11, 2025 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Adams House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Cabot House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Currier House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Dunster House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Dudley House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Eliot House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Kirkland House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Leverett House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Lowell House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Mather House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Pforzheimer House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Quincy House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ "U.S. Heraldic Registry, Winthrop House" .

www.usheraldicregistry.com . Retrieved May 21, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Shinagel, Michael (2010).

The Gates Unbarred: A History of University Extension at Harvard, 1910–2009 . Harvard University Press. p. 137.

ISBN 978-0674051355 .

^ Hammond, Mason (1981). "A Harvard Armory: Part 1".

Harvard Library Bulletin .

XXIX (3).

Sources [ edit ] Hammond, Mason (July 1981). "A Harvard Armory: Part I".

Harvard Library Bulletin .

XXIX (3): 261– 297.

Hammond, Mason (October 1981). "A Harvard Armory: Part II".

Harvard Library Bulletin .

XXIX (4): 361– 402.

Hammond, Mason (Summer 1986). "A Harvard Armory: Part III".

Harvard Library Bulletin .

XXXIV (3): 251– 293.

Hammond, Mason (Summer 1987). "Official Terms in Latin and English for Harvard College or University".

Harvard Library Bulletin .

XXXV (3): 294– 310.

Harvard University. Corporation. Seals, 1650-[1926]. UAI 15.1310, Harvard University Archives.

Morison, Samuel Eliot (September 1933). "Harvard Seals and Arms".

Harvard Graduates' Magazine .

42 .

Morison, Samuel Eliot (1936), Harvard College in the Seventeenth Century. Part I , p. 11 Morison, Samuel Eliot (1995), The Founding of Harvard College , pp. 3, 193, 325, 328– 30 Rosenmeier, Jesper (January 1968). "Veritas: The Sealing of the Promise".

Harvard Library Bulletin .

XVI (1): 26– 37.

Spindle, Robert B. (May–June 1996). "02138. Arms and the (10,000) men".

Harvard Magazine . Vol. 98, no. 5. Letter to the editor.

Bethell, John T. (March–April 1996). "Variations on a Theme".

Harvard Magazine . Vol. 98, no. 4.

Williams, George Huntston (2014).

Divinings: Religion at Harvard: From Its Origins in New England Ecclesiastical History to the 175th Anniversary of The Harvard Divinity School, 1636–1992 . Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. p. 82.

ISBN 978-3-525-55056-4 .

External links [ edit ] Seal of approval , May 14, 2015, Harvard Gazette v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons v t e Academic heraldry Canada McGill Toronto United Kingdom Cambridge Imperial King's Lancaster Oxford Sheffield United States Brown Chicago Columbia Harvard Notre Dame Penn Yale Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heraldry_of_Harvard_University&oldid=1299920096 " Categories : Coats of arms of universities in the United States Harvard University Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles lacking reliable references from August 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use mdy dates from November 2023 Use American English from November 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heraldry of Harvard University 1 language Add topic

