Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 Parts 1.2 Materials 1.3 Paleographic elements 1.4 Reproduction 2 History 3 Islamic world 4 Africa 5 Western world Toggle Western world subsection 5.1 Scripts 5.2 Genres 5.2.1 Biblical 5.2.2 Book of hours 5.2.3 Liturgical books and calendars 6 Modern variations Toggle Modern variations subsection 6.1 Publishing 6.2 Film and theatre 6.3 Insurance 7 Preservation 8 Repositories 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 Examples 9.2 General 10 Notes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Manuscript 82 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Document written by hand For other uses, see Manuscript (disambiguation) .

This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christ Pantocrator seated in a capital "U" in an illuminated manuscript from the Badische Landesbibliothek, Germany (from c.

1220 ).

Image of two facing pages of the illuminated manuscript of "Isagoge", fols. 42b and 43a. On the top of the left hand page is an illuminated letter "D" – initial of "De urinarum differencia negocium" (The matter of the differences of urines). Inside the letter is a picture of a master on bench pointing at a raised flask while lecturing on the "Book on urines" of Theophilus. The right hand page is only shown in part. On its very bottom is an illuminated letter "U" – initial of "Urina ergo est colamentum sanguinis" (Urine is thus the filtrate of the blood). Inside the letter is a picture of a master holding up a flask while explaining the diagnostic significance of urine to a student or a patient. HMD Collection, MS E 78.

Inside the letter is a picture of a master in cathedra expounding on the Aphorisms of Hippocrates. Initial "V" rendered as "U" of "Vita brevis, ars vero longa", or "Life is short, but the art is long". "Isagoge", fol. 15b. HMD Collection, MS E 78.

A manuscript (abbreviated MS for singular and MSS for plural) was, traditionally, any document written by hand or typewritten , as opposed to mechanically printed or reproduced in some indirect or automated way.

[ 1 ] More recently, the term has come to be understood to further include any written, typed, or word-processed copy of an author's work, as distinguished from the rendition as a printed version of the same.

[ 2 ] Before the arrival of prints, all documents and books were manuscripts. Manuscripts are not defined by their contents, which may combine writing with mathematical calculations, maps, music notation , explanatory figures, or illustrations.

Terminology [ edit ] Manuscript, Codex Manesse . Most manuscripts were ruled with horizontal lines that served as the baselines on which the text was entered.

10th-century minuscule manuscript of Thucydides 's History of the Peloponnesian War First page of Satie 's Sports et divertissements (published as a facsimile in 1923) The word "manuscript" derives from the Latin : manūscriptum (from manus , hand and scriptum from scribere , to write ), and is first recorded in English in 1597.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] An earlier term in English that shares the meaning of a handwritten document is "hand-writ" (or "handwrit"), which is first attested around 1175 and is now rarely used.

[ 5 ] The study of the writing (the "hand") in surviving manuscripts is termed palaeography (or paleography). The traditional abbreviations are MS for manuscript and MSS for manuscripts, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] while the forms MS.

, ms or ms.

for singular, and MSS.

, mss or mss.

for plural (with or without the full stop, all uppercase or all lowercase) are also accepted.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] The second s is not simply the plural; by an old convention, a doubling of the last letter of the abbreviation expresses the plural, just as pp.

means "pages".

A manuscript may be a codex (i.e.

bound as a book ), a scroll , or bound differently or consist of loose pages.

Illuminated manuscripts are enriched with pictures, border decorations, elaborately embossed initial letters or full-page illustrations.

Parts [ edit ] Cover Flyleaf (blank sheet) Colophon (publication information) incipit (the first few words of the text) decoration; illustrations dimensions Shelfmark or Signature in holding library (as opposed to printed Catalog number). Paper size number often precedes signature number with a circulus ( degree symbol ) following, but many libraries prefer spelling out the word (sometimes only in abbreviation) of the paper size (e.g. Fol[ia]., Qu[arto], Oct[avo, etc.). Some libraries use an equal sign instead of the circulus and may change the side on which the paper size number appears (8=3456 vs 3456=8) for indexing purposes.

works/compositions included in same ms codicological elements: deletions method: erasure?

overstrike ?

dots above letters ?

headers/footers page format/layout: columns? text and surrounding commentary/additions/glosses?

interpolations (passage not written by the original author) owners' marginal notations/corrections owner signatures dedication/ inscription censor signatures collation (quires) (binding order) foliation page numeration binding manuscripts bound together in a single volume: convolute: volume containing different manuscripts fascicle : individual manuscript, part of a set (called a convolute ).

Materials [ edit ] paper parchment papyrus to preserve text ink writing implement used pencil to help with the writing process pastedown (blank paper for inside cover) Paleographic elements [ edit ] script (one or more) dating line fillers rubrication (red ink text) ruled lines catchwords historical elements of the ms: blood, wine etc. stains condition: smokiness evidence of fire mold wormed Reproduction [ edit ] See also: Facsimile The mechanical reproduction of a manuscript is called facsimile . Digital reproductions can be called (high-resolution) scans or digital images .

History [ edit ] The Isha Upanishad manuscript Gharib al-Hadith, by Abu 'Ubaid al-Qasim ibn Sallam al-Harawi (d. 837 AD). The oldest known dated Arabic manuscript on paper in Leiden University Library , dated 319 AH (931 AD) A 14th-century Armenian manuscript , with painting by Sargis Pitsak . The first page of the Gospel of Mark . Cod. 2627, fol. 436 r. ( Matenadaran ) Before the inventions of printing, in China by woodblock and in Europe by movable type in a printing press , all written documents had to be both produced and reproduced by hand. In the west, manuscripts were produced in form of scrolls ( volumen in Latin) or books ( codex , plural codices ). Manuscripts were produced on vellum and other parchment, on papyrus , and on paper.

In Indian Subcontinent and Southeast Asia , palm leaf manuscripts , with a distinctive long rectangular shape, were used dating back to the 5th century BCE [ 12 ] or earlier, and in some cases continued to be used until the 19th century. In China, bamboo and wooden slips were used prior to the introduction of paper . In Russia, birch bark documents as old as from the 11th century have survived.

Paper spread from China via the Islamic world to Europe by the 14th century, and by the late 15th century had largely replaced parchment for many purposes there. When Greek or Latin works were published, numerous professional copies were sometimes made simultaneously by scribes in a scriptorium , each making a single copy from an original that was declaimed aloud.

The oldest written manuscripts have been preserved by the perfect dryness of their Middle Eastern resting places, whether placed within sarcophagi in Egyptian tombs, or reused as mummy -wrappings, discarded in the middens of Oxyrhynchus or secreted for safe-keeping in jars and buried ( Nag Hammadi library ) or stored in dry caves ( Dead Sea Scrolls ). Volcanic ash preserved some of the Roman library of the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum . Manuscripts in Tocharian languages , written on palm leaves, survived in desert burials in the Tarim Basin of Central Asia.

Ironically, the manuscripts that were being most carefully preserved in the libraries of antiquity are virtually all lost. Papyrus has a life of at most a century or two in relatively humid Italian or Greek conditions; only those works copied onto parchment, usually after the general conversion to Christianity, have survived, and by no means all of those.

Originally, all books were in manuscript form. In China, and later other parts of East Asia, woodblock printing was used for books from about the 7th century. The earliest dated example is the Diamond Sutra of 868. In the Islamic world and the West, all books were in manuscript until the introduction of movable type printing in about 1450.

[ clarification needed ] Manuscript copying of books continued for a least a century, as printing remained expensive. Private or government documents remained hand-written until the invention of the typewriter in the late 19th century. Because of the likelihood of errors being introduced each time a manuscript was copied, the filiation of different versions of the same text is a fundamental part of the study and criticism of all texts that have been transmitted in manuscript.

In Southeast Asia , in the first millennium, documents of sufficiently great importance were inscribed on soft metallic sheets such as copperplate , softened by refiner's fire and inscribed with a metal stylus. In the Philippines , for example, as early as 900 AD, specimen documents were not inscribed by stylus, but were punched much like the style of today's dot-matrix printers .

[ citation needed ] This type of document was rare compared to the usual leaves and bamboo staves that were inscribed. However, neither the leaves nor paper were as durable as the metal document in the hot, humid climate. In Burma , the kammavaca, Buddhist manuscripts, were inscribed on brass, copper or ivory sheets, and even on discarded monk robes folded and lacquered. In Italy some important Etruscan texts were similarly inscribed on thin gold plates: similar sheets have been discovered in Bulgaria . Technically, these are all inscriptions rather than manuscripts.

In the Western world, from the classical period through the early centuries of the Christian era , manuscripts were written without spaces between the words ( scriptio continua ), which makes them especially hard for the untrained to read. Extant copies of these early manuscripts written in Greek or Latin and usually dating from the 4th century to the 8th century, are classified according to their use of either all upper case or all lower case letters .

Hebrew manuscripts, such as the Dead Sea scrolls make no such differentiation. Manuscripts using all upper case letters are called majuscule , those using all lower case are called minuscule . Usually, the majuscule scripts such as uncial are written with much more care. The scribe lifted his pen between each stroke, producing an unmistakable effect of regularity and formality. On the other hand, while minuscule scripts can be written with pen-lift, they may also be cursive , that is, use little or no pen-lift.

Islamic world [ edit ] Main article: Islamic Manuscripts Islamic manuscripts were produced in different ways depending on their use and time period.

Parchment (vellum) was a common way to produce manuscripts.

[ 13 ] Manuscripts eventually transitioned to using paper in later centuries with the diffusion of paper making in the Islamic empire. When Muslims encountered paper in Central Asia, its use and production spread to Iran, Iraq, Syria, Egypt, and North Africa during the 8th century.

[ 14 ] Africa [ edit ] Main article: Timbuktu Manuscripts See also: West African manuscripts 4,203 of Timbuktu's manuscripts were burned or stolen during the armed conflict in Mali between 2012 and 2013. 90% of these manuscripts were saved by the population organized around the NGO "Sauvegarde et valorisation des manuscrits pour la défense de la culture islamique" (SAVAMA-DCI).

[ 15 ] Some 350,000 manuscripts were transported to safety, and 300,000 of them were still in Bamako in 2022.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] An international consultation on the safeguarding, accessibility and promotion of ancient manuscripts in the Sahel was held at the UNESCO office in Bamako in 2020.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Western world [ edit ] After plummeting in the Early Middle Ages , the high and late medieval period witnessed a sharp increase of manuscript production.

[ 18 ] Lectionary 183 Most surviving pre-modern manuscripts use the codex format (as in a modern book), which had replaced the scroll by Late Antiquity .

Parchment or vellum , as the best type of parchment is known, had also replaced papyrus , which was not nearly so long lived and has survived to the present almost exclusively in the very dry climate of Egypt , [ Note 1 ] although it was widely used across the Roman world. Parchment is made of animal skin, normally calf, sheep, or goat, but also other animals. With all skins, the quality of the finished product is based on how much preparation and skill was put into turning the skin into parchment. Parchment made from calf or sheep was the most common in Northern Europe, while civilizations in Southern Europe preferred goatskin.

[ 19 ] Often, if the parchment is white or cream in color and veins from the animal can still be seen, it is calfskin. If it is yellow, greasy or in some cases shiny, then it was made from sheepskin.

[ 19 ] Vellum comes from the Latin word vitulinum which means "of calf"/ "made from calf". For modern parchment makers and calligraphers, and apparently often in the past, the terms parchment and vellum are used based on the different degrees of quality, preparation and thickness, and not according to which animal the skin came from, and because of this, the more neutral term "membrane" is often used by modern academics, especially where the animal has not been established by testing.

[ 19 ] Scripts [ edit ] Merovingian script , or "Luxeuil minuscule", is named after an abbey in Western France, the Luxeuil Abbey , founded by the Irish missionary St Columba c.

590 .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Caroline minuscule is a calligraphic script developed as a writing standard in Europe so that the Latin alphabet could be easily recognized by the literate class from different regions. It was used in the Holy Roman Empire between approximately 800 and 1200. Codices, classical and Christian texts, and educational material were written in Carolingian minuscule throughout the Carolingian Renaissance . The script developed into blackletter and became obsolete, though its revival in the Italian renaissance forms the basis of more recent scripts.

[ 19 ] In Introduction to Manuscript Studies , Clemens and Graham associate the beginning of this text coming from the Abby of Saint-Martin at Tours .

[ 19 ] Caroline Minuscule arrived in England in the second half of the 10th century. Its adoption there, replacing Insular script , was encouraged by the importation of continental European manuscripts by Saints Dunstan , Aethelwold , and Oswald . This script spread quite rapidly, being employed in many English centres for copying Latin texts. English scribes adapted the Carolingian script, giving it proportion and legibility. This new revision of the Caroline minuscule was called English Protogothic Bookhand.
Another script that is derived from the Caroline Minuscule was the German Protogothic Bookhand. It originated in southern Germany during the second half of the 12th century.

[ 22 ] All the individual letters are Caroline; but just as with English Protogothic Bookhand it evolved. This can be seen most notably in the arm of the letter h. It has a hairline that tapers out by curving to the left. When first read the German Protogothic h looks like the German Protogothic b.

[ 23 ] Many more scripts sprang out of the German Protogothic Bookhand. After those came Bastard Anglicana, which is best described as: [ 19 ] The coexistence in the Gothic period of formal hands employed for the copying of books and cursive scripts used for documentary purposes eventually resulted in cross-fertilization between these two fundamentally different writing styles. Notably, scribes began to upgrade some of the cursive scripts. A script that has been thus formalized is known as a bastard script (whereas a bookhand that has had cursive elements fused onto it is known as a hybrid script). The advantage of such a script was that it could be written more quickly than a pure bookhand; it thus recommended itself to scribes in a period when demand for books was increasing and authors were tending to write longer texts. In England during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, many books were written in the script known as Bastard Anglicana.

Genres [ edit ] From ancient texts to medieval maps, anything written down for study would have been done with manuscripts. Some of the most common genres were bibles, religious commentaries, philosophy, law and government texts.

Biblical [ edit ] Main article: Biblical manuscript " The Bible was the most studied book of the Middle Ages".

[ 24 ] The Bible was the center of medieval religious life. Along with the Bible came scores of commentaries. Commentaries were written in volumes, with some focusing on just single pages of scripture. Across Europe, there were universities that prided themselves on their biblical knowledge. Along with universities, certain cities also had their own celebrities of biblical knowledge during the medieval period.

Book of hours [ edit ] Illuminated letter S (for Spiritus domini ) from the Sherbrooke Missal : Aberystwyth , National Library of Wales , MS 15536E, fol. 169v, parchment, c.

1310–1320 , depicting the Holy Spirit descending on the apostles at Pentecost.

A book of hours is a type of devotional text which was widely popular during the Middle Ages. They are the most common type of surviving medieval illuminated manuscripts . Each book of hours contain a similar collection of texts, prayers , and psalms but decoration can vary between each and each example. Many have minimal illumination, often restricted to ornamented initials , but books of hours made for wealthier patrons can be extremely extravagant with full-page miniatures . These books were used for owners to recite prayers privately eight different times, or hours, of the day.

[ 25 ] Liturgical books and calendars [ edit ] Main articles: Liturgical book and Liturgical calendar Along with Bibles, large numbers of manuscripts made in the Middle Ages were received in Church [ clarification needed ] . Due to the complex church system of rituals and worship these books were the most elegantly written and finely decorated of all medieval manuscripts. Liturgical books usually came in two varieties. Those used during mass and those for divine office.

[ 19 ] Most liturgical books came with a calendar in the front. This served as a quick reference point for important dates in Jesus' life and to tell church officials which saints were to be honored and on what day.

Modern variations [ edit ] In the context of library science , a manuscript is defined as any hand-written item in the collections of a library or an archive. For example, a library's collection of hand-written letters or diaries is considered a manuscript collection. Such manuscript collections are described in finding aids, similar to an index or table of contents to the collection, in accordance with national and international content standards such as DACS and ISAD(G) .

In other contexts, however, the use of the term "manuscript" no longer necessarily means something that is hand-written. By analogy a typescript has been produced on a typewriter.

[ 26 ] Publishing [ edit ] Main article: Manuscript (publishing) In book, magazine, and music publishing, a manuscript is an autograph or copy of a work, written by an author, composer or copyist. Such manuscripts generally follow standardized typographic and formatting rules, in which case they can be called fair copy (whether original or copy). The staff paper commonly used for handwritten music is, for this reason, often called "manuscript paper".

Film and theatre [ edit ] See also: Screenplay and Play (theatre) In film and theatre, a manuscript, or script for short, is an author's or dramatist's text, used by a theatre company or film crew during the production of the work's performance or filming. More specifically, a motion picture manuscript is called a screenplay; a television manuscript, a teleplay; a manuscript for the theatre, a stage play; and a manuscript for audio-only performance is often called a radio play, even when the recorded performance is disseminated via non-radio means.

Insurance [ edit ] See also: Insurance policy In insurance, a manuscript policy is one that is negotiated between the insurer and the policyholder, as opposed to an off-the-shelf form supplied by the insurer.

Preservation [ edit ] About 300,000 Latin, 55,000 Greek, 30,000 Armenian and 12,000 Georgian medieval manuscripts have survived.

[ 27 ] National Geographic estimates that 700,000 African manuscripts have survived at the University of Timbuktu in Mali .

[ 28 ] Repositories [ edit ] Major U.S. repositories of medieval manuscripts include: The Morgan Library & Museum = 1,300 (including papyri) Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library , Yale = 1,100 Walters Art Museum = 1,000 Houghton Library , Harvard = 850 Van Pelt Library , Penn = 650 Huntington Library = 400 Robbins Collection = 300 Newberry Library = 260 Cornell University Library = 150 This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( November 2019 ) Many European libraries have far larger collections.

Arnamagnæan Institute Árni Magnússon Institute for Icelandic Studies British Library#Collections of manuscripts Kungliga biblioteket Because they are books, pre-modern manuscripts are best described using bibliographic rather than archival standards. The standard endorsed by the American Library Association is known as AMREMM.

[ 29 ] A growing digital catalog of pre-modern manuscripts is Digital Scriptorium , hosted by the University of California at Berkeley .

This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( November 2022 ) See also [ edit ] Examples [ edit ] Gandhāran Buddhist texts – Ancient Gandhāran Buddhist manuscript Dead Sea Scrolls – Ancient Jewish manuscripts Spitzer Manuscript – Oldest known or surviving philosophical manuscript in Sanskrit Archimedes Palimpsest – Greek parchment codex manuscript Codex Zouche-Nuttall – Pre-Columbian document of Mixtec pictography Codex Arundel – Book by Leonardo da Vinci Sinkang Manuscripts – Series of Chinese leases, mortgages, and other commerce contracts Heiligenstadt Testament – 1802 Letter written by Ludwig van Beethoven General [ edit ] Calligraphy – Visual art related to writing Conservation and restoration of illuminated manuscripts – Care and treatment of decorated texts Manuscript culture – Culture depending on hand-written manuscripts Miniature (illuminated manuscript) – Picture in an ancient or medieval illuminated manuscript Music manuscript – Handwritten sources of music Palm-leaf manuscript – Manuscripts made out of dried palm leaves Notes [ edit ] ^ Examples for papyri that have survived outside Egypt include the Dead Sea Scrolls (in a dry climate), the Herculaneum papyri (buried during the Eruption of Mount Vesuvius ) and the Ravenna papyri , which have survived in Italy References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of MANUSCRIPT" .

Merriam-Webster .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ "manuscript" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Manuscript" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Vol. 6. 1933. p. 145.

^ "manuscript" .

www.oed.com . Retrieved 24 December 2024 .

^ "hand-writ" .

OED . Retrieved 24 December 2024 .

^ Harper, Douglas. " Manuscript Archived 28 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine ." Online Etymology Dictionary. November 2001. Accessed 10-11-2007.

^ " Medieval English Literary Manuscripts Archived 9 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ." www.Library.Rtruuochester.Edu. 22 June 2004. University of Rochester Libraries. Accessed 10-11-2007.

^ "Manuscript" (abbreviated ms. and mss.) in British Library Glossaries Archived 12 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , The British Library . Accessed 12 March 2016.

^ "ms", "ms." and "MS" Archived 13 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine in The Free Dictionary (American Heritage 2011 and Random House Kernerman Webster's 2010). Accessed 12 March 2016.

^ "MSS", "mss" and "mss." Archived 13 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine in The Free Dictionary (American Heritage 2011, Collins 2014 and Random House Kernerman Webster's 2010). Accessed 12 March 2016.

^ "MSS" Archived 13 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (MS. and ms., MSS. and mss.) in Dictionary.com LLC(Random House 2014 and Collins 2012). Accessed 12 March 2016.

^ Zhixin Shi; Srirangaraj Setlur; Venu Govindaraju.

"Digital Enhancement of Palm Leaf Manuscript Images using Normalization Techniques" (PDF) . Amherst, US: SUNY at Buffalo.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2010 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 .

^ Bloom, Jonathan. (2001).

Paper before print : the history and impact of paper in the Islamic world . Yale University Press. pp.

12 .

ISBN 0300089554 .

OCLC 830505350 .

^ Bloom, Jonathan. (2001).

Paper before print : the history and impact of paper in the Islamic world . Yale University Press. pp.

47 .

ISBN 0300089554 .

OCLC 830505350 .

^ a b "Le sort des manuscrits anciens du Mali au centre d'une conférence internationale à Bamako" .

United Nations (in French). 28 January 2015 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ a b "Mali : les précieux manuscrits de Tombouctou – Jeune Afrique" .

JeuneAfrique.com (in French). 21 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ "The Brave Sage of Timbuktu: Abdel Kader Haidara | Innovators" .

Culture . 21 April 2014. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ Buringh, Eltjo; Van Zanden, Jan Luiten (2009). "Charting the 'Rise of the West': Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries".

The Journal of Economic History .

69 (2): 409– 445.

doi : 10.1017/s0022050709000837 .

S2CID 154362112 .

(see p. 416, table 1) ^ a b c d e f g Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. Introduction to Manuscript Studies. Ithaca: Cornell University Press , 2008.

^ Brown, Michelle P. (1991).

Anglo-Saxon Manuscripts . Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 9780802077288 .

^ Brown, Michelle P.

A Guide to Western Historical Scripts from Antiquity to 1600 . Toronto,1990.

^ Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. "English Protogothic Bookhand." In Introduction to Manuscript Studies. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008. 146–147.

^ Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. "German Protogothic Bookhand." In Introduction to Manuscript Studies. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008. 149–150.

^ Beryl Smalley, The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages. 3rd ed. (Oxford, 1983), xxvii ^ "Learn: Basic Tutorial" .

Les Enluminures .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2019 . Retrieved 28 May 2019 .

^ Merriam-Webster , Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary , Merriam-Webster, archived from the original on 22 February 2015 , retrieved 22 February 2015 .

^ Coulie, Bernard (2014). "Collections and catalogues of Armenian manuscripts". In Calzolari, Valentina (ed.).

Armenian philology in the modern era : from manuscript to digital text . Handbuch der Orientalistik. Leiden: Brill. p. 24.

ISBN 9789004259942 .

OCLC 872222210 .

^ "700,000 ancient African books survived in Timbuktu University, Mali" .

The African History . 12 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 March 2021 .

^ Pass, Gregory. Descriptive Cataloging of Ancient, Medieval, Renaissance, and Early Modern Manuscripts. Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries, 2002.

External links [ edit ] Look up manuscript or handwrit in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Manuscripts .

"British Library Glossary of manuscript terms, mostly relating to Western medieval manuscripts" . Archived from the original on 5 December 2006.

"Centre for the Studies of Manuscript Cultures, Hamburg" .

"Centre for the History of the Book, University of Edinburgh" . Archived from the original on 24 June 2008.

"Chinese Codicology" .

"Digital Scriptorium" .

"Shapell Manuscript Foundation" .

"Manuscripts Department, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" . Archived from the original on 21 December 2008.

The Sarasvati Mahal Library , has the richest collection of manuscripts in Sanskrit, Tamil, Marathi and Telugu The Schøyen Collection – the world's largest private collection of manuscripts of all types, with many descriptions and images Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Manuscripts" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Newberry Library Manuscript Search Archived 17 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine Getty Exhibitions Polish manuscripts in Sweden Medieval Manuscript Leaves, University of Colorado Boulder Libraries Manuscripts of Lichfield Cathedral – Digital facsimile of the 8th-century St Chad Gospels and Cathedral's 15th-century Wycliffe New Testament, 2010. Includes the ability to overlay images captured with 13 different bands of light, historical images (starting in 1887), and multispectral visualizations. Also includes sixteen interactive 3D renderings. College of Arts & Sciences, University of Kentucky Historical Image Overlays – See how an early medieval manuscript is aging Introduction to codicology : Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Roman and Arabic Mss by Philippe Bobichon v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Manuscripts, codices and editions of the Quran Early manuscripts Hijazi Birmingham Quran manuscript Codex Mashhad Sanaa manuscript Codex Parisino-petropolitanus Kufic Samarkand Kufic Quran Blue Qur'an Topkapi manuscript Nurse's Quran Mushafs Uthmanic codex Codex of Ibn Mas'ud Codex of Ubayy ibn Ka'b Mushaf of Ali Mushaf of Aisha Modern editions Cairo edition Flügel edition Marracci edition Hinckelmann edition Algeria Quran Bahrain Quran [ ar ] Egypt Quran [ ar ] Iraq Quran [ ar ] Libya Quran [ ar ] Mauritania Quran [ ar ] Medina Quran [ ar ] Qatar Quran [ ar ] Thaalibia Quran Uthman Taha Quran Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States Japan Czech Republic Spain 2 Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2nzz7
Cached time: 20250818051414
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.949 seconds
Real time usage: 1.172 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12457/1000000
Revision size: 36125/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 402220/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13182/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 65/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131997/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.485/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24570653/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  924.208      1 -total
 24.23%  223.910      1 Template:Historiography
 23.97%  221.576      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 23.87%  220.575     18 Template:Navbox
 19.83%  183.279      2 Template:Reflist
 13.42%  123.987     16 Template:Cite_web
 10.36%   95.744     36 Template:Ill
  8.49%   78.491      1 Template:Langx
  8.09%   74.763     14 Template:Annotated_link
  6.34%   58.612      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19167:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818051414 and revision id 1305091057. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manuscript&oldid=1305091057 " Categories : Manuscripts Book terminology Textual criticism Textual scholarship Fiction forms Copying Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 Wikipedia articles with style issues from May 2025 All articles with style issues Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016 Incomplete lists from November 2019 Incomplete lists from November 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 00:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manuscript 82 languages Add topic

