Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities 2 Disagreement with the National Rifle Association 3 National Foundation for Gun Rights 4 Political action committee 5 Reception 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents National Association for Gun Rights 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American gun group Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Association for Gun Rights, Inc.

Logo of National Association for Gun Rights Formation March 29, 2000 ; 25 years ago ( 2000-03-29 ) [ 1 ] Tax ID no.

54-2015951 [ 2 ] Legal status 501(c)(4) nonprofit organization [ 2 ] Headquarters Loveland, Colorado Board Chairman David Warrington [ 2 ] President Dudley Brown [ 2 ] Vice President Ryan Flugaur [ 3 ] Vice President Steve Humphery [ 3 ] Revenue $12,451,900 [ 2 ] (2014) Expenses $12,473,252 [ 2 ] (2014) Employees 64 [ 2 ] (2014) Website nationalgunrights .org The National Association for Gun Rights ( NAGR ) is a gun rights advocacy group in the United States.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] They maintain an affiliated PAC and a nonprofit legal foundation. Officially incorporated in Virginia on March 29, 2000, [ 1 ] NAGR was founded by Dudley Brown as a national companion organization to Rocky Mountain Gun Owners .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] NAGR is a rival to the more moderate National Rifle Association of America (NRA) and considers itself to be a more "conservative alternative" to the NRA. The group spends most of its energy focused on lawmakers and moderates who are deemed too compromising on Second Amendment issues. This is achieved via direct mail, robocalls and low-cost television ads.

[ 8 ] The group has gained notoriety for its lobbying tactics and attack ads .

[ 9 ] Activities [ edit ] National Association for Gun Rights is opposed to the United Nations Arms Trade Treaty .

[ 10 ] The organization is also opposed to legislative actions on high-capacity magazines .

[ 11 ] National Association for Gun Rights opposes efforts led by Citizens for Self-Governance to call a convention to propose amendments to the United States Constitution to rein in the powers of the federal government.

[ 12 ] When a vacancy arose in the Colorado State Legislature in 2012, NAGR supported Tim Neville over State Representative Jim Kerr , who they felt was not sufficiently supportive of Second Amendment rights.

[ 13 ] In 2012, National Association for Gun Rights sued the state of Montana over state laws that may require the organization to register as a political committee prior to mailing postcards critical of Montana Attorney General Steve Bullock 's record on gun rights.

[ 14 ] According to the IRS, "a section 501(c)(4)... may engage in some political activities, so long as that is not its primary activity." [ 15 ] National Association for Gun Rights' request for a preliminary injunction was denied in October.

[ 16 ] Bullock was elected Governor the following month.

In March 2015, National Association for Gun Rights was involved in opposing gun control measures in Vermont . The NAGR campaigned to stop the Vermont state legislature from passing SB 141.

[ 17 ] National Association for Gun Rights supports the passage of no-permit Constitutional carry .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In April 2015, NAGR supported Kansas bill SB 45, which allows for Constitutional carry .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] NAGR representatives were present at the bill signing on April 2.

[ 22 ] In June 2015, National Association for Gun Rights sent out mailers targeting Republican William J. Howell , the Speaker of the Virginia House of Delegates . According to The Washington Post , NAGR's mailer "Portrayed Howell as being friendly to rapists" by depicting a woman cowering before a knife-wielding assailant alongside the text "Speaker Bill Howell thinks you should be left vulnerable to armed thugs and rapists!" Howell had been endorsed by the NRA and said he was a "100 percent supporter of the Second Amendment". Howell described the mailers as "pretty low by even today's political standards".

[ 23 ] In 2015, the Colorado State Legislature considered amending a 2013 law that limited magazines to 15 rounds. The legislature wanted to increase the limit to 30 rounds. Brown rejected the proposed increase on the grounds that there should be no limit at all. NAGR was criticized for their position, with Jon Caldara of the libertarian Independence Institute calling NAGR head Dudley Brown a "bully".

[ 24 ] Disagreement with the National Rifle Association [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e In November 2011, the U.S. House passed legislation that would require states that issue concealed gun permits to recognize similar licenses from other states. The bill was supported by the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) which considered it to be a top priority, but opposed by the NAGR on the basis that it could become a "Trojan horse for more gun control".

[ 25 ] "As early as March 23 (2013), POLITICO had reported on rumors that the NRA and (Sen. Joe) Manchin were engaged in secret talks over background checks. Two days later, the National Association of Gun Rights sent out a bulletin to its members: “I’ve warned you from the beginning that our gravest danger was an inside-Washington driven deal,” wrote NAGR executive Dudley Brown . He added that the deal was a “Manchin-NRA compromise bill.” The Gun Owners of America followed suit a week later, urging its members to contact the NRA to voice their opinion. Neither of these groups had even a tenth of the NRA’s membership, or its political power, but they threatened to chip away at the group’s reputation. Whatever NRA HQ’s position on the bill may have been, it was fast getting outflanked by ideologues on the right." [ 26 ] In 2013, NAGR spent close to $1.9 million on gun lobbying during the first three months of the year, while the NRA reported spending $700,000 on the same issue.

[ 27 ] The NRA has referred to NAGR leader Dudley Brown as "the Al Sharpton of the gun movement".

[ 28 ] NAGR has pointed out the NRA's financial and verbal support of gun control champions such as Nevada Senator Harry Reid as an indication of just how misguided their efforts are.

[ 29 ] The Huffington Post described NAGR as "The much leaner, more pugnacious version of the NRA. Where the NRA has looked to find some common ground with gun reform advocates and at least appear to be reasonable, NAGR has been the unapologetic champion of opening up gun laws even more." [ 30 ] In a 2019 Politico article, NAGR president Dudley Brown described the differences between his organization and the NRA "As an organization, we don’t use Gucci-loafered lobbyists in Washington, D.C. in $200,000 wardrobes to grease the palms of weak-kneed politicians to vote right,” said Dudley Brown, president of the National Association for Gun Rights, referencing the NRA chief executive’s purported lavish spending. “Instead, we activate our members to do that lobbying for us and for them. That’s the power in a grassroots lobby and NRA lost that a long time ago.” [ 31 ] Dudley Brown is listed as the second most influential pro-gun advocate in America in Gunpowder Magazine's "Top 20 Most Influential Pro-Gun Advocates" article published in May 2023.

[ 32 ] National Foundation for Gun Rights [ edit ] The National Foundation for Gun Rights stated goals are twofold: "To enforce and expand pro-gun precedents issued by the courts by challenging unconstitutional laws, and seeking to enforce pro-gun statutes." And "To defend gun owners in the courts to ensure that law-abiding citizens who have had their rights violated by bureaucrats, or overzealous law enforcement, are protected." [ 33 ] Through its foundation, National Association for Gun Rights filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Postal Service , Bonidy v. USPS for prohibiting the carrying of firearms on Postal Service property.

[ 34 ] The 10th circuit ruled in favor of the gun ban, and the Supreme Court refused to consider the case, by denying a writ of certiorari .

[ 35 ] During the McDonald v. Chicago Supreme Court case, an amicus brief filed by NAGR was cited by the court prior to the victory for gun owners.

[ 36 ] The National Association for Gun Rights' legal arm, the National Foundation for Gun Rights, donated over $50,000 to benefit Kyle Rittenhouse .

[ 37 ] After the acquittal of Kyle Rittenhouse, the National Foundation for Gun Rights released this statement, "When we saw the video evidence of Kyle defending himself and others in Kenosha, WI, NFGR made the decision to support him right away, and we're thrilled to see that he is now a free man," NFGR Executive Director Dudley Brown.

[ 38 ] The foundation sent $10,000 to the legal team of Theresa Imani Bragg. Bragg, a single mother raising four children, is charged with first-degree murder in the death of her ex-boyfriend, John Laverette. Foundation Executive Director Dudley Brown said about the incident, “This is exactly who the Second Amendment is for – a single mom in a crime-ridden city with an abusive ex breathing down her neck. The Second Amendment exists so that when that gangbanger ex bursts through her door and threatens her life, she has options — she doesn’t have to die.” [ 39 ] NFGR sent San Jose California Mayor Sam Liccardo and city council members a cease-and-desist letter dated July 14, 2021. The letter calls out city leaders for their discussions about creating a citywide ordinance mandating gun liability insurance and an annual fee on gun owners. "The foundation maintains the city would violate the Second Amendment by imposing a tax on “a select group of law-abiding citizens” exercising their right to keep and bear arms." [ 40 ] "Executive Director Dudley Brown called the ordinance a “full-frontal assault” on gun owners “by the gun control zealots running the city of San Jose.”  The foundation sees the ordinance as unfair to law-abiding citizens, Brown said." [ 40 ] On January 25, 2022 the San Jose California city council voted to "adopt a first-in-the-nation ordinance requiring most gun owners to pay a fee and carry liability insurance." "We've opposed this ordinance every step of the way and we will see this through to the end," Dudley Brown, president of the National Association for Gun Rights and executive director of the National Foundation for Gun Rights, told CNN in a statement before the vote.

[ 41 ] Also in response to the proposed San Jose legislation, policy director Hannah Hill defined the organization's stance on the origin of the right to bear arms. Hill asserted that the right is "God-given" and the ordnance would be unconstitutional.

[ 42 ] "If the San Jose City Council actually votes to impose this ridiculous tax on the Constitutional right to gun ownership, our message is clear and simple: see you in court," Brown said.

[ 41 ] The National Foundation for Gun Rights filed an amicus brief in the U.S. Supreme Court on July 20, 2021 challenging New York’s permit laws, which prohibit concealed carry without a permit – but deny permits unless the applicant can demonstrate a “special” need to carry a gun (which does not include a general desire for self-defense, according to state courts). As a result, ordinary citizens are functionally prohibited from exercising their Second Amendment right to bear arms.

[ 43 ] NFGR’s amicus brief argues that the Second Amendment is NOT a second-class right — as state legislatures, lower federal courts, and even the Supreme Court itself have treated it — and that the right to public carry is protected by the Second Amendment as understood by the Founders.

[ 44 ] Political action committee [ edit ] The National Association for Gun Rights PAC (NAGR-PAC) is an affiliated political action committee registered with the Federal Election Commission . Founded in 2010, it endorsed and donated to several candidates for federal office, including Paul Broun (R-GA), Cory Gardner (R-CO), [ 45 ] Sharron Angle , Ken Buck , and Rand Paul (R-KY).

[ 46 ] In the 2012 election cycle, NAGR-PAC endorsed Richard Mourdock , who defeated Dick Lugar for the Republican U.S. Senate nomination in Indiana, with an initial contribution of $4,500 to his campaign; [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Steve Daines , who ran a successful campaign for Montana's at-large seat in the U.S. House of Representatives ; [ 49 ] and Steve Stockman who ran a successful campaign for Texas's 36th congressional district .

[ 50 ] NAGR-PAC spent $83,312 in election-related expenses during the 2012 election cycle.

[ 51 ] NAGR hired its first federal lobbyist in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting that occurred in December 2012.

[ 52 ] In the 2014 election cycle, NAGR's endorsements included Chris McDaniel (R-MS), Scott Renfroe (R-CO), Joe Miller (R-AK) and Mike Turner (R-OH).

[ 53 ] NAGR sent out mailers in the 2016 Texas state legislative primary season that "walked a fine line under new and still untested state ethics law", according to the Houston Chronicle .

[ 54 ] In October 2021 NAGR PAC endorsed Ohio Candidate Josh Mandel in the 2022 U.S. Senate Race.

[ 55 ] Reception [ edit ] In August 2013, National Association for Gun Rights and Dudley Brown were profiled in a 5280 magazine story. According to the article, Brown "savagely and routinely attacks candidates and officeholders unwilling to pledge, in writing, their absolute loyalty to Brown on Second Amendment issues". NAGR was described as a "fund-raising machine that bullies anyone who compromises Brown's pro-gun, anti-abortion, anti-gay agenda." Former Colorado Republican State Representative B.J. Nikkel said Brown "is a political terrorist and a modern-day charlatan who operates in the shadows and portrays himself as a supposed 'Christian,' but he uses the people naive enough to believe him and financially support him".

[ 28 ] Mother Jones magazine included NAGR on a list of "7 Gun Groups That Make the NRA Look Reasonable".

[ 56 ] In 2013, FactCheck.org , in a piece called "Gun Rights Group's Aim Is Way Off", found that NAGR "is going after three congressmen with 'A' ratings from the National Rifle Association by falsely claiming they support President Obama's gun control agenda".

[ 57 ] National Association for Gun Rights has been criticized for its fundraising practices. Former Republican Colorado Governor Bill Owens said Brown "makes his money when there's turmoil, real or perceived, because that's what gets his members to write him checks".

Ammoland wrote that Brown's "rhetoric has done more to marginalize Second Amendment activism than all of the slanders from gun prohibition lobbying groups combined".

[ 58 ] See also [ edit ] Firearms Policy Coalition References [ edit ] ^ a b "National Association for Gun Rights, Inc" . Virginia State Corporation Commission . Retrieved April 15, 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g "Form 990: Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax" .

National Association for Gun Rights, Inc.

Guidestar . December 31, 2014.

^ a b "Staff" . National Association for Gun Rights.

^ Schouten, Fredreka (May 2, 2013).

"Ultra-conservative gun group outspends NRA on lobbying" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2013 . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ Corn, David (April 21, 2015).

"Cruz Campaign Accuses Paul and Rubio of Wimping Out on Gun Rights After Newtown" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2015 . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ O'Conell, Vanessa (April 19, 2010).

"Gun Advocates Open a New Front:Saying NRA Isn't Imaginative, Splinter Groups Seek More Aggressive Tactics" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2015 . Retrieved November 13, 2013 .

^ Richardson, Valerie (April 20, 2015).

"Colorado gun advocates in firefight over raising magazine limits to 30 rounds" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2015 . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ Stokols, Eli (April 9, 2015).

"The truth about the NRA's snub of Rand Paul" .

Politico . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ Childress, Sarah (December 10, 2013).

"How the Gun-Rights Lobby Won After Newtown" .

Frontline . PBS.

Archived from the original on December 3, 2015 . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ "EDITORIAL: The U.N. gun grabber" .

The Washington Times . May 27, 2010 . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ Jervis, Jervis (July 31, 2012).

"Gun control advocates target high-capacity magazines" .

USA Today . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ Menges, Bob.

"Response to the National Association for Gun Rights" .

Convention of States . Citizens for Self-Governance. Archived from the original on March 29, 2016 . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ Marcus, Peter (February 3, 2012).

"Rival pro-gun groups' explosive relationship triggers political hits" .

The Colorado Statesman . Archived from the original on October 16, 2013 . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ Youderian, Annie.

"Gun-Rights Group Takes Aim at Montana Laws" . Courthouse News Service . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ "Requirements for Exemption" . Internal Revenue Service.

^ "Judge denies request to bypass disclosure law" .

Billings Gazette . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ "A Gun Battle in Vermont" . True North Reports. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015 . Retrieved April 9, 2015 .

^ "Memorandum HB 1092 - Priola -2/9/12" (PDF) . National Association for Gun Rights . Retrieved November 13, 2012 – via Colorado House Judiciary Committee.

^ "Hearings on Constitutional Carry and Preemption this Thursday" . New Hampshire Firearms Coalition, Inc . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ Daniel Xu (April 6, 2015).

"Kansas Governor Signs Constitutional Carry Bill into Law" . Outdoorhub . Retrieved April 9, 2015 .

^ Tim Carpenter (March 26, 2015).

"Kansas House OKs no-permit carry law" .

Hays Daily News . Archived from the original on April 15, 2015 . Retrieved February 15, 2015 .

^ "Gov. Sam Brownback to sign bill allowing unlicensed conceal-carry" .

Topeka Capital Journal . Retrieved April 9, 2015 .

^ Vozzella, Laura (June 6, 2015).

"Gun rights group targets Virginia's House speaker with graphic mailer" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ Caldara, Jon (May 6, 2015).

"Caldara: Stand up to Dudley Brown's gun-rights bullying" .

Greeley Tribune . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ "House approves bill making travel easier for gun owners" .

The New York Times . November 17, 2011.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2011 . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ Mak, Tim (November 8, 2021).

"The Moment the NRA Decided to Embrace the Culture Wars" .

POLITICO . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .

^ Schouten, Fredreka (May 2, 2013).

"Ultra-conservative gun group outspends NRA on lobbying" .

USA Today . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ a b Stokols, Eli (August 2013).

"Dudley Brown's War" .

5280 . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ "NRA's Wayne LaPierre praising Democrat Harry Reid - YouTube" .

www.youtube.com . February 7, 2013 . Retrieved July 22, 2020 .

^ Fuller, Matt (August 1, 2016).

"How Republican Gun Legislation Died In Congress" .

HuffPost . Retrieved November 1, 2019 .

^ Levine, Marianne; Arkin, James (August 18, 2019).

"Rival gun groups look to fill the NRA's void" .

POLITICO . Retrieved November 1, 2019 .

^ GPM.

"Top 20 Most Influential Pro-Gun Advocates" .

Gunpowder Magazine . Retrieved October 31, 2023 .

^ "About Us" .

^ "Suit over Postal Service gun ban proceeds" . United Press International. November 28, 2011.

^ "Bonidy v USPS 13-1391 (Bonidy Appeal) 10th Circuit – CERT DENIED" . California Right To Carry. Archived from the original on March 29, 2016 . Retrieved April 16, 2016 .

^ James M. Manley; Steven J. Lechner (November 23, 2009). "Amicus Brief in McDonald v. Chicago: On Behalf of Rocky Mountain Gun Owners and National Association for Gun Rights".

SSRN 1684688 .

^ Deese, Kaelan (September 18, 2020).

"Gun rights group raises $50,000 for teen charged in deadly Kenosha shooting" .

TheHill . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ "Kyle Rittenhouse awarded AR-15 for "defense of gun rights" following acquittal" .

Newsweek . November 20, 2021.

^ "National gun rights group backs River Rouge mom in shooting" . July 14, 2021.

^ a b "National Gun Rights Group Threatens to Sue San Jose over Proposed Gun Ordinance" . July 15, 2021.

^ a b Cheri Mossburg and Amir Vera (January 26, 2022).

"This Silicon Valley city just voted to institute first-in-the-nation gun ownership requirements" .

CNN . Retrieved February 10, 2022 .

^ "San Jose gun owners to be fined up to $1,000 for breaking new firearm law" . October 8, 2022.

^ "JUST FILED: Amicus brief in Supreme Court gun case" . July 20, 2021.

^ "New York State Rifle & pistol association, et aL., v. Kevin P. Bruen, et al" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 20, 2021.

^ Sandoval, Michael (September 16, 2010).

"NRA Set to Endorse Democrat Markey (CO-4)" .

National Review Online . Retrieved March 28, 2013 .

^ "Committees And Candidates Supported/Opposed" . Archived from the original on October 23, 2015.

^ "Report shows where the money is going in Congressional races" .

The Indianapolis Star . February 1, 2012 . Retrieved April 15, 2012 .

^ "Editing National Association for Gun Rights Inc PAC" . Federal Election Commission. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ "Top Contributors, 2012 Race: Montana District 01" .

OpenSecrets . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ "Top Contributors, 2012 Race: Texas District 36" .

OpenSecrets . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ "National Assn for Gun Rights Expenditures" .

OpenSecrets . Retrieved November 13, 2012 .

^ Choma, Russ (May 2, 2013).

"No-Compromise Gun Group Drives Lobbying" .

OpenSecrets . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ Thompson, D. (May 19, 2014).

"NAGR: These 12 men will protect your gun rights" . Bearing Arms. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved April 22, 2015 .

^ Saleh Rauf, David (March 10, 2016).

"Sham issues ads or advocacy?" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ "NAGR PAC Endorses Josh Mandel" .

Twitter . October 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 13, 2021 .

^ Suebsaeng, Asawin (January 19, 2013).

"7 Gun Groups That Make the NRA Look Reasonable" .

Mother Jones . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ Farley, Robert (April 5, 2013).

"Gun Rights Group's Aim Is Way Off" . FactCheck.org . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

^ "Dudley Brown & NAGR's Despicable Deception" . Ammoland. May 21, 2014 . Retrieved March 31, 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] Official website National Association for Gun Rights on OpenSecrets.org National Association for Gun Rights on Ballotpedia Beyond the NRA: The other pro-gun political spenders v t e Gun politics interest groups in the United States Pro- gun rights A Girl & A Gun Black Guns Matter GeorgiaCarry.org Huey P. Newton Gun Club Liberal Gun Club Gun Owners of America International Association for the Protection of Civilian Arms Rights Jews for the Preservation of Firearms Ownership Law Enforcement Alliance of America National African American Gun Association National Association for Gun Rights National Rifle Association of America National Shooting Sports Foundation New York State Rifle and Pistol Association Pink Pistols Redneck Revolt Rocky Mountain Gun Owners Second Amendment Foundation Second Amendment Sisters Socialist Rifle Association Students for Concealed Carry Virginia Citizens Defense League Pro- gun control 50 Miles More Americans for Responsible Solutions American State Legislators for Gun Violence Prevention Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence Coalition to Stop Gun Violence Everytown for Gun Safety Faiths United to Prevent Gun Violence March for Our Lives Action Fund Million Mom March National Gun Victims Action Council Stop Handgun Violence Violence Policy Center Related Evolve USA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Association_for_Gun_Rights&oldid=1303988654 " Categories : 501(c)(4) nonprofit organizations Gun rights advocacy groups in the United States 2000 establishments in the United States Organizations established in 2000 Conservative organizations in the United States Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from August 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Use mdy dates from November 2018 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 07:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Association for Gun Rights 1 language Add topic

