Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Apley Court 2 Canaday Hall 3 Grays Hall 4 Greenough Hall 5 Hollis Hall 6 Holworthy Hall 7 Hurlbut Hall 8 Lionel Hall 9 Massachusetts Hall 10 Matthews Hall 11 Mower Hall 12 Pennypacker Hall 13 Stoughton Hall 14 Straus Hall 15 Thayer Hall 16 Weld Hall 17 Wigglesworth Hall 18 Maple Yard Dorms 19 Sources 20 References 21 External links Toggle the table of contents List of Harvard College freshman dormitories Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "List of Harvard College freshman dormitories" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This is a list of dormitories at Harvard College . Only freshmen live in these dormitories, which are located in and around Harvard Yard . Sophomores, juniors and seniors live in the House system .

Apley Court [ edit ] Apley Court South of Harvard Yard on Holyoke Street, Apley Court has the most spacious rooms among the freshman dorms; accommodations include marble bathrooms. Formerly part of Adams House , it is the only one of the Gold Coast apartment buildings – luxurious private apartments built south of the Yard in the late 1890s – to now be a freshman dormitory. Notable residents have included T. S. Eliot .

Canaday Hall [ edit ] Canaday Hall Completed in 1974, Canaday Hall is the newest dormitory in Harvard Yard . Seen from the air, its seven buildings resemble a question mark. It is named after Ward M. Canaday, former president and major shareholder of Willys , manufacturer of Jeeps during World War II .

Canaday's construction immediately followed the 1969 student takeover of University Hall , and certain features of its design were meant to confound student organizing.

[ citation needed ] There is a Muslim prayer space in the basement.

[ 1 ] Residents have included Jillian Dempsey , Alexander Fällström , Charles Lane , Eduardo Saverin , Esther Lofgren , Ben Mezrich , David Sacks , Mira Sorvino , and Paul Wylie .

[ 2 ] Grays Hall [ edit ] Grays Hall Opened in 1863, Grays became the college's first building with water taps in the basement. (Residents of other buildings in Harvard Yard had to haul water from pumps in the Yard.)
Nicknamed "The Harvard Hilton", [ 3 ] it is considered the most luxurious dormitory in the Yard.

[ 4 ] Past residents include Jeff Bingaman , Rosa Brooks , Charles Joseph Bonaparte , Michael Cohrs , Jeremy Doner , Ryan Fitzpatrick , Langdon Gilkey , Charles Grier Sellers , Swinburne Hale , Julie Hilden , Marcial Lichauco , Norman Mailer , Malia Obama , Natalie Portman , Joseph Ransohoff , Frank Rich , Mo Rocca , Joshua Sharfstein , Don Sweeney , John Weidman , and Michael Weishan .

Greenough Hall [ edit ] Located just outside the confines of Harvard Yard, Greenough is part of a group of dormitories outside the Yard called the "Union Dormitories".
Past notable residents include Elliott Abrams , Bill Kristol , Wallace Shawn , Laurence Tribe , Kyriakos Mitsotakis , and Colin Jost .

Hollis Hall [ edit ] Hollis Hall in 1934 Hollis Hall in 2007 Built in 1763 by Thomas Dawes and named for Thomas Hollis and his family, [ 5 ] Hollis is one of the oldest buildings at Harvard (after only Massachusetts Hall (1720) and Holden Chapel (1744)), and housed George Washington's troops during the American Revolution . 
Past residents include Charles Francis Adams Sr.

, John Quincy Adams , Horatio Alger Jr.

, Jim Cramer , Ralph Waldo Emerson , Edward Everett , Boisfeuillet Jones Jr.

, Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

, Wendell Phillips , Henry David Thoreau , George Santayana , Charles Sumner , John Updike , and William Weld .

Holworthy Hall [ edit ] Holworthy Hall Holworthy Hall was built in 1812 and was named after Sir Matthew Holworthy, a wealthy merchant who made what was, at the time, the largest donation to Harvard in its history.
Past residents include Pete Buttigieg , Al Jean , Horatio Alger Jr.

, Alex Biega , David Halberstam , Christian Herter , Conan O'Brien , Sumner Redstone , Henry Hobson Richardson , Noah Welch , Cornel West , and Jeff Zucker .

Hurlbut Hall [ edit ] Another "Union" dormitory, named after Byron Hurlbut, a former Dean of Harvard College.

[ 6 ] Past notable residents include James Blake , Alice Crary , Roger W. Ferguson Jr.

, Brian Greene , Amory Lovins , Roger Myerson , and Elizabeth Wurtzel .

Lionel Hall [ edit ] Lionel (built 1925) [ 7 ] : 77 was given by Harvard President A. Lawrence Lowell as a memorial to Lionel de Jersey Harvard , the first relative of John Harvard to attend Harvard, and who was killed in World War I.
Past residents include Peter Benchley , Lou Dobbs , Kevin Kallaugher , Grover Norquist , Endicott Peabody , and Erich Segal .

Massachusetts Hall [ edit ] Massachusetts Hall The oldest surviving building at Harvard and the country's oldest dormitory, Massachusetts Hall is located next to Johnston Gate . Designed by two Harvard Presidents, John Leverett and Benjamin Wadsworth , between 1718 and 1720 for the housing of sixty-four students, the building served various functions over the years, including a refuge for American soldiers during the Siege of Boston , and an observatory after Thomas Hollis ' donation of a twenty-four-foot telescope in 1722. Today, it houses the offices of Harvard's president, with a handful of freshmen living on the uppermost floor.

Five of the United States' Founding Fathers lived here: John Adams , John Hancock , Samuel Adams , Elbridge Gerry , and James Otis Jr.

Other residents have included Zabdiel Adams , John Harbison , Alan Jay Lerner , John Redcliffe-Maud , Elliot Richardson , Jared Sparks , Jones Very , and Edward Wigglesworth .

Matthews Hall [ edit ] Matthews Hall Matthews Hall was designed by Peabody & Stearns and built from 1871–1872.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Past notable residents include Philip Warren Anderson , Danny Biega , Matt Birk , Matt Damon , John Dos Passos , Maura Healey , Barney Frank , William Randolph Hearst , Mark Penn , Daniel Quillen , Robert Rubin , Chuck Schumer , Lloyd Shapley , Maurice Wertheim , and Elizabeth Wurtzel .

Mower Hall [ edit ] Past residents include Timothy Crouse , Al Franken , Al Gore , Edward Gorey , Tommy Lee Jones , Arthur Kopit , Charles Murray , Thomas Oliphant , Meredith Salenger , Tanya Selvaratnam , and Bob Somerby .

Pennypacker Hall [ edit ] Pennypacker Hall Part of the Union Dormitories, Pennypacker is named for Henry Pennypacker, a former president of Harvard's admissions committee.
The studios of radio station WHRB (95.3 FM) are in the basement.

Past residents include Kristin Goss , Hendrik Hertzberg , Nicholas Kristof , Bjorn Poonen , Peter Sagal , Andrew Tobias , Chris Wallace , and Fernando Zobel de Ayala .

Stoughton Hall [ edit ] Stoughton Hall Stoughton Hall (built 1805) is Harvard's second building to be named Stoughton Hall. Designed by Charles Bulfinch , it was built by Thomas Dawes .  The original Stoughton Hall was built in 1700 and funded by Massachusetts Lieutenant Governor William Stoughton , who also presided over the Salem witch trials .
Past residents include Francis Parkman , Philippe de Montebello , Trip Hawkins , Jeremy Lin , Eric Maskin , Mehmet Oz , Nathan Pusey , Sydney Schanberg , and Edmund Ware Sinnott .

Straus Hall [ edit ] Straus Hall Straus was built in 1926 by three brothers in memory of their parents, Isidor and Ida Straus , New York department store entrepreneurs who owned both Macy's and Abraham & Straus and died in the sinking of the RMS Titanic .

Notable residents include Darren Aronofsky , Phil Bredesen , William S. Burroughs , Peter Chiarelli , Seth Goldman , Joseph Lelyveld , Soledad O'Brien , Tom Ridge , John Roberts , David Souter , Caspar Weinberger , Tim Wirth , and Mark Zuckerberg .

[ 2 ] Thayer Hall [ edit ] Thayer was built in 1870 and originally offered housing to students who had trouble affording the ever-increasing prices of housing outside the university.
Past notable residents include James Agee , Bill Ackman , Conrad Aiken , Steve Ballmer , Virgilio Barco Isakson , Andy Borowitz , Hamzah bin al Hussein , E. E. Cummings , Roy J. Glauber , Walter Isaacson , Ji Chaozhu , Perri Klass , Bernard Francis Law , John F. Manning , Crown Princess Masako , Jonathan Mostow , Gabe Newell , Arthur Schlesinger Jr.

, Edward Seaga , Jonathan Taylor Thomas , James Tobin , Stephanie Wilson , and Owen Wister .

Weld Hall [ edit ] Weld Hall Built in 1870, Weld was the second of two important additions to the Harvard campus designed by Ware & Van Brunt (the first being Memorial Hall ).

It was a gift of William Fletcher Weld , in memory of his brother Stephen Minot Weld , and represented a new trend toward picturesque silhouettes that became important in American domestic architecture of the later nineteenth century, as can be seen in the Queen Anne style which was popular during the same period.

Past residents include Robert Bacon , Ben Bernanke , Michael Crichton , Christopher Durang , Daniel Ellsberg , Douglas J. Feith , Fred Grandy , Lionel de Jersey Harvard , Rashida Jones , John F. Kennedy , Douglas Kenney , Michael Kinsley , Neil H. McElroy , Neil deGrasse Tyson , Patrick Harlan and Scott Weinger .

Wigglesworth Hall [ edit ] Wigglesworth Hall The second largest of the freshman dormitories, and actually three buildings, Wigglesworth is located along the southern edge of the Yard, between Widener Library and Boylston Hall to the north, and Massachusetts Avenue to the south.  It was constructed in 1931 as "part of President Lowell's plan to enclose the Yard from the traffic of Harvard Square." Past residents include Leonard Bernstein , Melissa Block , Benjamin C. Bradlee , Mark Danner , Jared Diamond , Bill Gates , Andre Gregory , Donald P. Hodel , Michael J. Kennedy , Ted Kennedy , Aga Khan IV , John Lithgow , Robert Lowell , Christopher Nowinski , Pat Toomey , David Vitter , Naomi Yang , and Randi Zuckerberg .

Maple Yard Dorms [ edit ] To accommodate the unusually large freshman class in the 2021–22 academic year, Harvard College housed first-year students in that year in several additional university-owned buildings: apartments at 20–20A and 22–24 Prescott Street, apartments at 10 DeWolfe Street, and The Inn at 1201 Massachusetts Ave. These are collectively termed "Maple Yard", one of the several smaller "Yards" into which first-year dorms are organized.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Sources [ edit ] Harvard Dorm History Search for past residents References [ edit ] ^ "Canaday E Musallah" . hcs.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on June 18, 2016 . Retrieved June 19, 2016 .

^ a b "Dorm History Search" . hcs.harvard.edu . Retrieved February 16, 2015 .

^ "Freshman Dorms" .

The Unofficial Guide . Harvard Student Agencies. Archived from the original on November 14, 2010.

^ "John F. Kennedy Slept Here; Soon You Will Too" .

The Harvard Crimson . June 27, 1995 . Retrieved February 11, 2011 .

^ [1] ^ Harvard College Class of 2016 Freshman Convocation (PDF) , retrieved December 16, 2016 ^ Harvard University (1949).

Education, bricks and mortar: Harvard buildings and their contribution to the advancement of learning . Harvard University. p. 77.

ISBN 9780674238855 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Matthews Hall" .

Harvard Property Information Resource Center .

Harvard University .

^ "Historic Building Detail: CAM.189 – Matthews House - Harvard University" .

Massachusetts Cultural Resource Information System . Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , William F. Galvin . Retrieved July 28, 2023 .

^ "Maple Yard" .

dso.college.harvard.edu . Retrieved October 25, 2021 .

^ "First-Year Living" . Retrieved October 25, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] A Guide to Freshman Dorms , Harvard Student Agencies v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Harvard_College_freshman_dormitories&oldid=1298394584 " Categories : Harvard University-related lists Harvard Freshman Dormitories Lists of university and college residences in the United States Lists of university and college buildings in the United States Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles needing additional references from January 2014 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 06:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of Harvard College freshman dormitories Add languages Add topic

