Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 Sources 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Wacker von Wackenfels 3 languages Deutsch مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Johannes Matthäus Wackher von Wackhenfels ) A portrait of Wacker von Wackenfels Johannes Matthaeus Wacker von Wackenfels (1550–1619) was an active diplomat, scholar and writer, with an avid interest in history and philosophy. A follower of Neostoicism , he sought to resolve the doubts he still had about his conversion to Catholicism , according to STUDIA RUDOLPHINA - Bulletin of the Research Center for Visual Arts and Culture in the Age of Rudolf II.
He was born in Konstanz (Constance) in 1550 in a Lutheran Protestant family and studied in Strasbourg , Geneva and Padua . He was supported and promoted by Johannes Crato von Krafftheim , who put his way into the circle of Renaissance humanism in Northern Europe in  Breslau ( Wrocław ). On Crato's and Hubert Languet 's recommendation, he became tutor in noble houses. In 1574 he traveled from Vienna to Italy, where he met Jakob Monau and Fabier Ien de Dohna. In 1575 he received his doctorate in Padua. As a steward, he accompanied the son of Nicholas of Rhediger on the Grand Tour (peregrinatio Academica). In 1576 he returned to Breslau and became the confidant of bishop Andreas von Jerin. In 1591 Wackenfels was Chancellor of the Upper Silesian provincial team. In 1583 he married Sophie Poley in Dresden (1563-92), a sister of Wrocław businessman and gentleman on animal garden Christoph Poley.

[ 1 ] In 1592 Wackenfels converted to the Catholic faith and in 1594, he was in the Ennoblement . In 1595 he married his second wife Catherine of Troilo, being then Franz Troilo's brother-in-law, a sister of his first wife and second daughter of Johann Franz Troilo, and allied himself with one of the most influential families in Wrocław . In the spring of the same year, he made an invitation to his friend Valens Acidalius to go to Neisse . In 1597, he was appointed to the Aulic Council , where he served until 1612, from 1608 as a trainee. In 1611 he has devoted his friend Johannes Kepler , who dedicated to him his "Strena seu nive sexangula" (From hexagonal snow; see: Kepler conjecture ) (1611).

Works [ edit ] Wackenfels wrote courtly poems and his manuscripts contain many philological and historical studies (examples:- "Dissertatio de nummo Ptolomaei" - which he also illustrated, presently held at the Öesterreichische Nationalbiliothek in Vienna , various philosophical treatises and "De cruce et fruce veterum" - known only from correspondence).

Vota aulica super illustrissima ducum Saxoniae controversia de jure praecedentiae in dignitate et successione . Frankfurt / M. 1619 (together with Johann Müller Hegen).

Sources [ edit ] Colmar Grünhagen :  "Wacken Rock, Johann Matthaeus Wacker from". In: Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (ADB). Volume 40, Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig, 1896, pp. 448 f.

Conrad, climb, p 282f., 1571st Mountain weapons.

References [ edit ] ^ Deventer, Jörg; Rau, Susanne; Conrad, Anne, eds. (2006).

Zeitenwenden : Herrschaft, Selbstbehauptung und Integration zwischen Reformation und Liberalismus : Festgabe für Arno Herzig zum 65. Geburtstag [ Time Reversing - domination, self-assertion and integration between the Reformation and liberalism, Festschrift for Arno Herzig ]. Münster, Hamburg, Berlin, Vienna, London, Zurich: Lit Verlag. pp.

279– 310.

ISBN 3-8258-6140-6 .

External links [ edit ] STUDIA RUDOLPHINA discusses connection to Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor [1] Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Finland Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wacker_von_Wackenfels&oldid=1302071051 " Categories : 1550 births 1619 deaths 16th-century Roman Catholics 17th-century Roman Catholics People from Konstanz Converts to Roman Catholicism from Lutheranism German Roman Catholic writers Catholic philosophers This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 05:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wacker von Wackenfels 3 languages Add topic

