Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 2.1 Traditional cultural expressions 3 Declarations Toggle Declarations subsection 3.1 UNDRIP, September 2007 4 Protocols, law and legal challenges by country Toggle Protocols, law and legal challenges by country subsection 4.1 Australia 4.2 Philippines 4.3 New Zealand 4.3.1 Māori Ka Mate haka 4.3.2 The Māori and Lego's Bionicle 4.3.3 "Māori" cigarettes 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 Bibliography 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Indigenous intellectual property 5 languages العربية فارسی Français Hrvatski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Collective legal protections for cultural heritage Part of a series on Indigenous rights Rights Ancestral domain Cultural rights Intellectual property Land rights Language Traditional knowledge Treaty rights Water and sanitation Protection Governmental organizations ACHPR AID Arctic Council BIA CIP CIRNAC DTA FUNAI INPI JAKOA NCIP NIAA MCHTA TPK UNPFII United Nations initiatives 9 August UNPFII WIPO IGC BBNJ ABS Committee Indigenous Caucus International Treaties ILO 107 ILO 169 United Nations Declaration (UNDRIP) GRATK Anti-Biopiracy Treaty NGOs and political groups AFN Amazon Conservation Team Amazon Watch CAP COICA CONAECDA CONAIE Cultural Survival EZLN fPcN IPACC IPCB IWGIA Land Back NARF ONIC Survival International The Red Nation UNPO KAFFED more ...

Issues Aboriginal titles Biopiracy Civilizing mission Climate change Co-governance Discovery doctrine Discrimination Ecocide Genocide MMIW Indigenous decolonization Inhabited lands Indigenism Settler colonialism Truth commissions Uncontacted peoples Countries Argentina Australia Brazil Denmark Finland Malaysia Mexico Namibia New Zealand Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Suriname Tanzania Taiwan Venezuela United States Category v t e Intellectual property Authors' rights Copyleft Copyright Database right Farmers' rights Geographical indication Indigenous intellectual property Industrial design right Integrated circuit layout design protection Intellectual property infringement Literary property Moral rights Patent Peasants' rights Plant breeders' rights Plant genetic resources Proprietary software Related rights Supplementary protection certificate Trade dress Trade secret Trademark Utility model Patent infringement Related topics Abandonware Artificial intelligence and copyright Brand protection Copyright abolition Copyright troll Criticism of copyright Bioprospecting Biopiracy Idea–expression distinction Limitations and exceptions to copyright Fair dealing Fair use Paraphrasing Right to quote Orphan work Patent troll Pirate Party Public domain Outline of intellectual property Outline of patents Higher categories: Property and Property law v t e Indigenous intellectual property is a term used in national and international forums to describe intellectual property held to be collectively owned by various Indigenous peoples , and by extension, their legal rights to protect specific such property. This property includes cultural knowledge of their groups and many aspects of their cultural heritage and knowledge, including that held in oral history . In Australia, the term Indigenous cultural and intellectual property , abbreviated as ICIP , is commonly used.

There have been various efforts made since the late 20th century towards providing some kind of legal protection for indigenous intellectual property in colonized countries, including a number of declarations made by various conventions of Indigenous peoples. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) was created in 1970 to promote and protect intellectual property across the world by cooperating with countries as well as international organizations. The UN 's Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), passed by the General Assembly in 2007 with 143 countries in favour, includes several clauses relating specifically to the protection of intellectual property of Indigenous peoples.

Disputes around indigenous intellectual property include several cases involving the Māori people of New Zealand.

Background [ edit ] Indigenous intellectual property is a concept that has developed as an analog to predominantly western concepts of intellectual property law, and has been promoted by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), as part of a broader effort by the United Nations [ 1 ] (UN) to see the world's indigenous, intangible cultural heritage better valued and better protected against perceived, ongoing mistreatment, based on legal theories holding them to be inadequately covered by Western law.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Indigenous knowledge is an integral part of Indigenous cultural heritage. Knowledge about land, seas, places and associated songs, stories, social practices, and oral traditions are important assets for Indigenous communities. Transmitted from generation to generation, Indigenous knowledge is constantly reinterpreted by Indigenous people. Through the existence and transmission of this intangible cultural heritage, Indigenous people are able to associate with a communal identity [ 4 ] Indigenous intellectual property rights relate to the legal rights to protect specific such property, which includes cultural knowledge of their groups, aspects of their cultural heritage in the visual arts , literature , and performing arts , as well as science and traditional medicines . It may include knowledge held in oral history .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] International bodies such as the UN have become involved in the issue, [ 7 ] making more specific declarations that intellectual property also includes cultural property such as historical sites, artifacts, designs, language, ceremonies, and performing arts in addition to artwork and literature.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Nation states across the world have experienced difficulties reconciling local indigenous laws and cultural norms with a predominantly western legal system, in many cases leaving Indigenous peoples' individual and communal intellectual property rights largely unprotected.

[ 10 ] The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) has set out several goals around treaty law and intellectual property, with board member Professor Rebecca Tsosie stressing the importance of these property rights being held collectively, not by individuals: [ 11 ] The long-term goal is to actually have a legal system , and certainly a treaty could do that, that acknowledges two things. Number one, it acknowledges that Indigenous peoples are peoples with a right to self-determination that includes governance rights over all property belonging to the Indigenous people. And, number two, it acknowledges that Indigenous cultural expressions are a form of intellectual property and that traditional knowledge is a form of intellectual property, but they are collective resources – so not any one individual can give away the rights to those resources. The tribal nations actually own them collectively.

Terminology [ edit ] A term used especially in Australia is "Indigenous cultural and intellectual property", abbreviated as ICIP [ 12 ] with the term cultural heritage often applying to the same concept.

[ 13 ] The term "Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights" is abbreviated as ICIPR.

[ 14 ] Traditional cultural expressions [ edit ] " Traditional cultural expressions " is a phrase used by WIPO to refer to "any form of artistic and literary expression in which traditional culture and knowledge are embodied. They are transmitted from one generation to the next, and include handmade textiles, paintings, stories, legends, ceremonies, music, songs, rhythms and dance".

[ 15 ] "Traditional cultural expressions" can include designs and styles, which means that applying traditional Western-style international copyright laws – which apply to a specific work, rather than a style – can be problematic. Indigenous customary law often treats such concepts differently, and may apply restrictions upon the use of underlying styles and concepts.

[ 15 ] Declarations [ edit ] A number of Native American and First Nations communities have issued tribal declarations over the past 35 years. In the lead up to and during the UN International Year for the World's Indigenous Peoples (1993), [ 16 ] then during the following UN Decade of the World's Indigenous Peoples (1995–2004), [ 1 ] a number of conferences of both Indigenous and non-Indigenous specialists were held in different parts of the world, resulting in a number of unified declarations and statements identifying, explaining, refining, and defining "indigenous intellectual property" though the legal weight of most has yet to be tested.

Since the 1970s, inter-tribal groups in North American have organized demonstrations against non-Native use of Native American cultural elements, such as the sale of products and services allegedly derived from Indigenous knowledge : [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Traditional Elders Circle, October 1980 Before ceremonies and ceremonial knowledge were affirmed as protected intellectual property by the UN General Assembly , [ 8 ] smaller coalitions of Indigenous cultural leaders met to issue declarations about protection of ceremonial knowledge.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 1980, spiritual leaders of the Northern Cheyenne , Navajo , Hopi , Muskogee , Chippewa - Cree , Haudenosaunee and Lakota Nations met on the Northern Cheyenne Reservation in Montana , [ 19 ] and issued the Resolution of the 5th Annual Meeting of the Traditional Elders Circle, resolving that: [ 19 ] These [non-Native] individuals are gathering non-Indian people as followers who believe they are receiving instructions of the original people. We, the Elders and our representatives sitting in Council, give warning to these non-Indian followers that it is our understanding this is not a proper process, that the authority to carry these sacred objects is given by the people...

Belém, July 1988 The first international congress of the International Society of Ethnobiology involving scientists, environmentalists and Indigenous peoples met at Belém , Brazil . They identified themselves collectively as ethnobiologists , and announced that (amongst other matters) since "Indigenous cultures around the world are being disrupted and destroyed". The Declaration of Belém declared: [ 22 ] Mechanisms [ought to] be established by which Indigenous specialists are recognized as proper Authorities and are consulted in all programs affecting them, their resources and their environment...

Procedures must be developed to compensate native peoples for the utilization of their knowledge and their biological resources.

Kari-Oca Declaration, May 1992 A meeting of members of the Kari-Oca Indigenous group The Kari-Oca Declaration and Indigenous Peoples Earth Charter was first affirmed in Brazil in May 1992, and then re-affirmed in Indonesia in June 2002. Ratifying the document were Indigenous peoples from the Americas, Asia, Africa, Australia, Europe and the Pacific who, at Kari-Oca Villages, united in one voice to collectively express their serious concern at the way the world was exploiting the natural resources upon which Indigenous peoples depend.

Specific reference is made within the Indigenous Peoples Earth Charter to perceived abuses of Indigenous people's intellectual and cultural properties.

[ 23 ] Under the heading, "Culture, Science and Intellectual Property", among other matters, it is asserted: [ 24 ] 99 : The usurping of traditional medicines and knowledge from Indigenous peoples should be considered a crime against peoples...

102 : As creators and carriers of civilizations which have given and continue to share knowledge, experience, and values with humanity, we require that our right to intellectual and cultural properties be guaranteed and that mechanisms for each be in favour of our peoples...

104 : The protection, norms and mechanism of artistic and artisan creation of our peoples must be established and implemented in order to avoid plunder, plagiarism, undue exposure, and use...

[ 3 ] Lakota declaration, June 1993 At the Lakota Summit V, an international gathering of US and Canadian Lakota, Dakota and Nakota Nations, about 500 representatives from 40 different tribes and bands of the Lakota unanimously passed a "Declaration of War Against Exploiters of Lakota Spirituality".

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Representatives affirmed a zero-tolerance policy on the exploitation of Lakota, Dakota and Nakota ceremonial knowledge: [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Whereas we are conveners of an ongoing series of comprehensive forums on the abuse and exploitation of Lakota spirituality;...

6.

We urge traditional people, tribal leaders, and governing councils of all other Indian Nations, as well as all national Indian organizations, to join us in calling for an immediate end to this rampant exploitation of our respective American Indian sacred traditions by issuing statements denouncing such abuse; for it is not the Lakota, Dakota and Nakota people alone whose spiritual practices are being systematically violated by non-Indians.

Mātaatua Declaration, June 1993 On 18 June 1993, 150 delegates from fourteen countries, including Indigenous representatives from Japan ( Ainu ), Australia, Cook Islands , Fiji , India, Panama , Peru , Philippines , Suriname , United States and Aotearoa (New Zealand) met at Whakatane ( Bay of Plenty region of New Zealand). The assembly affirmed Indigenous peoples' knowledge is of benefit to all humanity; recognised Indigenous peoples are willing to offer their knowledge to all humanity provided their fundamental rights to define and control this knowledge is protected by the international community; insisted the first beneficiaries of Indigenous knowledge must be the direct Indigenous descendants of such knowledge; and declared all forms of exploitation of Indigenous knowledge must cease.

[ 25 ] Under Section 2 of their declaration, the Mātaatua Declaration on Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights of Indigenous Peoples, they specifically ask state, national and international agencies to: [ 25 ] 2.1 : Recognise that Indigenous peoples are the guardians of their customary knowledge and have the right to protect and control dissemination of that knowledge.

2.2 : Recognise that Indigenous peoples also have the right to create new knowledge based on cultural tradition.

2.3 : Accept that the cultural and intellectual property rights of Indigenous peoples are vested with those who created them.

[ 3 ] Julayinbul Statement, November 1993 Julayinbul Aboriginal Intellectual Property Conference Logo (1993) The Julayinbul Statement on Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights arose out of a meeting of Indigenous and non-Indigenous specialists, who, at Jingarrba , in north-eastern Australia, agreed Indigenous intellectual property rights are best determined from within the customary laws of the Indigenous groups' themselves.

[ 26 ] Within the declaration, Indigenous customary laws are (re)named 'Aboriginal common laws', and it is insisted these laws must be acknowledged and treated as equal to any other systems of law: [ 27 ] Aboriginal intellectual property, within Aboriginal Common Law, is an inherent, inalienable right which cannot be terminated, extinguished, or taken... Any use of the intellectual property of Aboriginal Nations and Peoples may only be done in accordance with Aboriginal Common Law, and any unauthorised use is strictly prohibited.

[ 3 ] [ 28 ] Hopi and Apache opt-out In 1994 a number of Native American tribal organizations demanded that museums remove certain materials from exhibition and access to the public. They cited the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) as the legal basis for these complaints. Their position was that they would only permit such uses selectively and with express permission of the living relatives of the human remains and grave goods the museums wished to exhibit.

[ 29 ] Vernon Masayesva, CEO of the Hopi Tribe, and a consortium of Apache tribes demanded a number of American museums end all public exhibition of, and access to, materials from their tribal cultures; including "images, text, ceremonies, music, songs, stories, symbols, beliefs, customs, ideas, concepts and ethnographic field-notes, feature films, historical works, and any other medium in which their culture may appear literally, imagined, expressed, parodied or embellished." [ 29 ] Many Apache tribes such as the White Mountain Apache Tribe have also asked for the return of Puebloan artifacts and bodies that were taken off of their land by various collectors overtime.

[ 30 ] Santa Cruz de la Sierra Statement, September 1994 A regional meeting was held at Santa Cruz de la Sierra , Bolivia , where Indigenous peoples from South America concerned about the way internationally prevailing intellectual property systems and regimes appeared to be favouring the appropriation of Indigenous peoples' knowledge and resources for commercial purposes, agreed in their Santa Cruz de la Sierra Statement on Intellectual Property: [ 31 ] For members of indigenous peoples, knowledge and determination of the use of resources are collective and intergenerational. No...individuals or communities, nor the Government, can sell or transfer ownership of [cultural] resources which are the property of the people and which each generation has an obligation to safeguard for the next...

There must be appropriate mechanisms for maintaining and ensuring the right of Indigenous peoples to deny indiscriminate access to the [cultural] resources of our communities or peoples and making it possible to contest patents or other exclusive rights to what is essentially Indigenous.

Tambunan Statement, February 1995 Indigenous people of Asia met at Tambunan , Sabah , East Malaysia , to assert rights of self-determination, and to express concern about, and fear of, the threat unfamiliar 'western' intellectual property rights systems may pose to them. It was agreed, in the Tambunan Statement on the Protection and Conservation of Indigenous Knowledge: [ 32 ] For the Indigenous peoples of Asia, the intellectual property rights system is not only a very new concept but it is also very western...[W]ith [western style] intellectual property rights, alien laws will be devised to exploit the Indigenous knowledge and [cultural] resources of the Indigenous peoples.

Suva Statement, April 1995 Participants from the independent countries and "nonautonomous colonised territories" of the Pacific region met in Suva , Fiji , to discuss internationally dominant intellectual property rights regimes, and at that meeting they resolved to support the Kari Oca, Mataatua, Julayinbul, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, and Tambunan initiatives [ 33 ] (above). In their statement, the Suva Statement on Indigenous Peoples Knowledge and Intellectual Property Rights, participants: [ 33 ] Declare[d] Indigenous peoples are willing to share our knowledge with humanity provided we determine when, where and how it is used: at present the international system does not recognise or respect our past, present and potential contribution...

Seek[s] repatriation of Indigenous peoples [cultural] resources already held in external collections, and seek[s] compensation and royalties from commercial developments resulting from these resources [Seek to] Strengthen the capacities of Indigenous peoples to maintain their oral traditions, and encourage initiatives by Indigenous peoples to record their knowledge... according to their customary access procedures.

Kimberley Declaration, August 2002 Indigenous people from around the world attended an international Indigenous peoples' summit on sustainable development in Khoi-San Territory, Kimberley , South Africa , in August 2002, where they reaffirmed previous declarations and statements (above), and, among other matters, declared: [ 3 ] Our traditional knowledge systems must be respected, promoted and protected; our collective intellectual property rights must be guaranteed and ensured. Our traditional knowledge is not in the public domain; it is collective, cultural and intellectual property protected under our customary law. Unauthorized use and misappropriation of traditional knowledge is theft.

UNDRIP, September 2007 [ edit ] Main article: Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples United Nations General Assembly 2003 At the United Nations General Assembly's 61st session, on 13 September 2007, an overwhelming majority of members resolved to adopt the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), a legally non-binding resolution delineating and defining the individual and collective rights of Indigenous peoples. 144 states voted in favour, 4 against (Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States) and 11 countries abstained . The four dissenting countries reversed their positions some years later.

[ 34 ] Some of UNDRIP's clauses relate to intellectual property of Indigenous peoples. The Declaration recognizes "the urgent need to respect and promote the inherent rights of Indigenous peoples which derive from their political, economic and social structures and from their cultures, spiritual traditions, histories and philosophies...;" reaffirms "...that indigenous peoples possess collective rights which are indispensable for their existence, well-being and integral development as peoples..." and proclaims as an agreed standard for member nations around the world: [ 35 ] Article 11 : Indigenous peoples have the right to practise and revitalize their cultural traditions and customs. This includes the right to maintain, protect and develop the past, present and future manifestations of their cultures, such as archaeological and historical sites, artefacts, designs, ceremonies, technologies and visual and performing arts and literature... States shall provide redress through effective mechanisms, which may include restitution, developed in conjunction with indigenous peoples, with respect to their cultural, intellectual, religious and spiritual property taken without their free, prior and informed consent or in violation of their laws, traditions and customs.

Article 24 : Indigenous peoples have the right to their traditional medicines and to maintain their health practices, including the conservation of their vital medicinal plants, animals and minerals...

Article 31 : Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural heritage, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, as well as the manifestations of their sciences, technologies and cultures, including human and genetic resources , seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora, oral traditions, literatures, designs, sports and traditional games and visual and performing arts. They also have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their intellectual property over such cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions... In conjunction with indigenous peoples, States shall take effective measures to recognize and protect the exercise of these rights.

Protocols, law and legal challenges by country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Australian law does not protect all forms of Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP).

Copyright law in Australia covers music, literature and art by people who are living or have died within 70 years, and individual creators' work is also protected by moral rights . Performers' and designers' work are covered by separate legislation.

[ 13 ] In some instances, cultural misappropriation can be protected by the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 , which was successfully tested in a 2019 court action against Birubi Art for concealing the fact that their "Aboriginal" artefacts for sale were made in Indonesia, and not by Aboriginal artists. The Federal Court of Australia ruled against the company on the basis that it had made misleading Indigenous art claims.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] However, there are significant omissions in the legal framework, including: [ 13 ] traditional Aboriginal medicines, known as bush medicine ; underlying ideas or stories behind artworks; specific techniques in visual art , such as cross-hatching (rarrk) or dot painting ; Aboriginal Australian languages and Torres Strait Island languages ; unwritten dance or music; products or processes based on traditional methods of creation, such as basket-weaving or medicine .

There is also no law that prevents the misuse, distortion or alteration of ICIP that is communally owned ( Indigenous communal moral rights , or ICMR [ 12 ] ). Because of the lack of complete protection by the legislative framework, some sectors and organisations have set up their own protocols: [ 38 ] The first edition of Protocols for using First Nations Cultural and Intellectual Property in the Arts was published by the Australia Council for the Arts , in 2002, with a revised edition published in 2007. A new edition was authored by Terri Janke in 2019.

[ 39 ] The document aims to help to provide protection of traditional knowledge by recognizing and engendering respect for customary practice, providing case studies spanning a wide variety of creations in the arts, and cites ten principles contained in the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP, see above).

[ 38 ] While it has no legal force, it explains the gaps in legislation, and "encourages culturally appropriate working practices and promotes communication between all Australians with an interest in Indigenous creative arts".

[ 39 ] Among the many organizations to have published their own sets of protocols are the Government of New South Wales , [ 40 ] National and State Libraries Australasia , [ 41 ] Screen Australia [ 42 ] and the University of Tasmania .

[ 43 ] Philippines [ edit ] The 1997 Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA; Republic Act No. 8371) has "Community Intellectual Rights" provisions which entitles Indigenous Cultural Communities/Indigenous Peoples (ICCs/IPs) to "the recognition of the full ownership and control and protection of their cultural and intellectual rights and that shall have the right to special measures to control, develop, and protect their sciences, technologies, and cultural manifestations, including but not limited to indigenous knowledge, systems, and practices, designs, and visual and performing arts". Use of such manifestations for commercial, tourism and advertisement purposes by a third-party needs Free and Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) from the ICC/IP concerned. The National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) is the government agency responsible for verifying alleged FPICs.

[ 44 ] New Zealand [ edit ] The Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand is responsible for determining some types of intellectual property in New Zealand, specifically patent , trade mark , design and plant variety rights, while copyright law of New Zealand is administered by a different unit of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment .

Māori Ka Mate haka [ edit ] Te Rauparaha , composer of Ka Mate Main article: Ka Mate Since the 19th century, Māori haka have been popularly used by New Zealanders as a cheer at sporting events ; especially for New Zealand national teams. Between 1998 and 2006, the Ngāti Toa iwi attempted to trademark the Ka Mate haka and to forbid its use by commercial organisations without their permission.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] The Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand turned their claim down in 2006, since Ka Mate had achieved wide recognition in New Zealand and abroad as representing New Zealand as a whole and not a particular trader.

[ 47 ] In 2009, as a part of a wider settlement of grievances, the New Zealand government agreed to: [ 48 ] [ 49 ] ...record the authorship and significance of the haka Ka Mate to Ngāti Toa and ... work with Ngāti Toa to address their concerns with the haka... [but] does not expect that redress will result in royalties for the use of Ka Mate or provide Ngāti Toa with a veto on the performance of Ka Mate...

The Māori and Lego's Bionicle [ edit ] In 2001 a dispute concerning the popular LEGO toy-line " Bionicle " arose between Danish toymaker Lego Group and several Māori tribal groups (fronted by lawyer Maui Solomon) and members of the online discussion forum (Aotearoa Cafe). The Bionicle product line allegedly used many words appropriated from Māori language, imagery and folklore. The dispute ended in an amicable settlement. Lego eventually agreed that it had taken the names from Māori and agreed to change certain names or spellings to help set the toy-line apart from the Māori legends.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] "Māori" cigarettes [ edit ] In 2005 a New Zealander in Jerusalem discovered that the Phillip Morris cigarette company had started producing a brand of cigarette in Israel called the "L & M Maori mix".

[ 52 ] In 2006, the head of Phillip Morris, Louis Camilleri , issued an apology to Māori: "We sincerely regret any discomfort that was caused to Māori people by our mistake and we won't be repeating it." [ 53 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Cultural appropriation § Criticism of the concept Critics of the movement for granting Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights note that the indefinite duration of such a context is "unorthodox and unmanageable" within the current IP legal structure.

[ 54 ] See also [ edit ] Biopiracy and Bioprospecting CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance Commercialization of indigenous knowledge Cultural appropriation Darrell A. Posey Decolonization of knowledge Indigenous communal moral rights Intangible Cultural Heritage Indigenous mapping Intellectual property Intellectual property issues in cultural heritage (IPinCH) Pretendian Traditional knowledge References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (2007).

"Indigenous peoples" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights. Geneva. Archived from the original on 7 November 2007 . Retrieved 29 November 2007 .

^ DODSON, Page 12.

^ a b c d e Archived 2 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Janke, Terri (2008).

"Indigenous Knowledge & Intellectual Property: Negotiating the Spaces" .

The Australian Journal of Indigenous Education .

37 : 14– 24.

doi : 10.1375/S1326011100000338 .

S2CID 112405840 .

^ Ann Marie Sullivan, Cultural Heritage & New Media: A Future for the Past, 15 J. MARSHALL REV. INTELL. PROP. L. 604 (2016) ^ Rainforest Aboriginal Network (1993).

Julayinbul: Aboriginal Intellectual and Cultural Property: Definitions, Ownership and Strategies for Protection in the Wet Tropics World Heritage Area, 25-27 November, 1993 Daintree, Far North Queensland . Rainforest Aboriginal Network. p. 65 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ a b "United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: United Nations Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 September 2007 [Article 31]" (PDF) . United Nations. 2007.

Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural heritage, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, as well as the manifestations of their sciences, technologies and cultures, including human and genetic resources, seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora, oral traditions, literatures, designs, sports and traditional games and visual and performing arts. They also have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their intellectual property over such cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions.

^ a b "United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: United Nations Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 September 2007 [Article 11]" (PDF) . United Nations. 2007.

Indigenous peoples have the right to practise and revitalize their cultural traditions and customs. This includes the right to maintain, protect and develop the past, present and future manifestations of their cultures, such as archaeological and historical sites, artefacts, designs, ceremonies, technologies and visual and performing arts and literature." ^ Office of the United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights (2007).

"Indigenous peoples" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights. Geneva. Archived from the original on 7 November 2007 . Retrieved 29 November 2007 .

The Declaration addresses both individual and collective rights; cultural rights and identity; rights to education, health, employment, language, and others.

^ Hadley, Marie (2009).

"Lack of Political Will or Academic Inertia? - The need for non-legal responses to the issue of Indigenous art and copyright" .

Alternative Law Journal .

34 (3). Melbourne: Legal Service Bulletin Co-operative Ltd: 152– 156.

doi : 10.1177/1037969X0903400302 .

S2CID 148729597 .

^ Tsosie, Rebecca (25 June 2017).

"Current Issues in Intellectual Property Rights to Cultural Resources" .

Native American Rights Fund . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ a b "Chapter 11 Indigenous cultural and intellectual property rights" . Indigenous Art - Securing the Future:Australia's Indigenous visual arts and craft sector.

Parliament of Australia (Report). 20 June 2007.

ISBN 978-0-642-71788-7 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

Index and PDFs here .

^ a b c "Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property (ICIP) (AITB)" .

Arts Law Centre of Australia . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ "Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights" .

Smartcopying . 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

^ a b Zuckermann, Ghil'ad ; et al. (2015), Engaging – A Guide to Interacting Respectfully and Reciprocally with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People, and their Arts Practices and Intellectual Property (PDF) , Australian Government: Indigenous Culture Support, p. 7, archived from the original (PDF) on 30 March 2016 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Watson, Irene. (1992).

"1993 : International Year for Indigenous Peoples" .

Aboriginal Law Bulletin .

2 (59): 11– 13 – via Informit.

^ Hagan, Helene E.

"The Plastic Medicine People Circle." Archived 5 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine Sonoma Free County Press . Accessed 31 January 2013: "Shequish...came to the attention of Native American people two years ago as an impostor who pretended to have Shumash ancestry... Shumash people took the decision to put a stop to Shequish Ohoho's activities in the Bay area as an 'Indian woman.' A group of real Indian women of San Francisco led a protest against Shequish and effectively terminated her money making seminars and ceremonies in this area." ^ Sieg, Katrin, Ethnic Drag: Performing Race, Nation, Sexuality in West Germany ; University of Michigan Press (20 August 2002) p.232 ^ a b c Yellowtail, Tom, et al ; " Resolution of the 5th Annual Meeting of the Traditional Elders Circle " Northern Cheyenne Nation, Two Moons' Camp, Rosebud Creek, Montana; 5 October 1980 ^ a b c Mesteth, Wilmer, et al (10 June 1993) " Declaration of War Against Exploiters of Lakota Spirituality ." "At the Lakota Summit V, an international gathering of US and Canadian Lakota, Dakota and Nakota (LDN) Nations, about 500 representatives from 40 different tribes and bands of the LDN peoples unanimously passed a "Declaration of War Against Exploiters of Lakota Spirituality." The following declaration was unanimously passed." ^ a b c Taliman, Valerie (1993) " Article On The 'Lakota Declaration of War' ." ^ "Declaration of Belem" . 1988 . Retrieved 3 June 2019 .

^ Fourmile, Henrietta (1996) "Making things work: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Involvement in Bioregional Planning" in Approaches to bioregional planning. Part 2. Background Papers to the conference; 30 October – 1 November 1995, Melbourne ; Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories. Canberra. p.235 ^ Fourmile pages 260–261 ^ a b Fourmile page 262 ^ Fourmile page 236 ^ Fourmile pages 264 ^ Rainforest Aboriginal Network (1993).

Julayinbul: Aboriginal Intellectual and Cultural Property: Definitions, Ownership and Strategies for Protection in the Wet Tropics World Heritage Area, 25-27 November, 1993 Daintree, Far North Queensland . Rainforest Aboriginal Network. pp.

9– 13 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ a b Brown, Michael F. (April 1998).

"Can Culture Be Copyrighted?" (PDF) .

Current Anthropology .

39 (2): 193– 222.

doi : 10.1086/204721 .

JSTOR 10.1086/204721 .

S2CID 56117654 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 June 2019 .

^ Hoerig, Karl A. (March 2010).

"FROM THIRD PERSON TO FIRST: A Call for Reciprocity Among Non-Native and Native Museums" .

Museum Anthropology .

33 (1): 62– 74.

doi : 10.1111/j.1548-1379.2010.01076.x .

^ Fourmile 1996: Pages 266–267.

^ Fourmile 1996: Pages 268–269.

^ a b Fourmile 1996: Pages 270–272.

^ "United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" .

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs : Indigenous Peoples . 5 June 2015 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ "United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: United Nations Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 September 2007" (PDF) . United Nations. 2007.

^ Burke, Kelly (26 June 2019).

"Queensland company fined $2.3 million for fake Indonesian-made 'Aboriginal' artwork" .

Seven News . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ "Action over alleged misleading Indigenous art claims" .

Australian Competition & Consumer Commission . 22 March 2018 . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ a b Adjei, Patricia (December 2020).

"Working ethically with Indigenous cultural and intellectual property: Australia launches new protocols" .

WIPO Magazine .

WIPO . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

Attribution 3.0 IGO (CC BY 3.0 IGO) licence.

^ a b "Protocols for using First Nations Cultural and Intellectual Property in the Arts" .

Australia Council . 2019 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

PDF ^ "Aboriginal Cultural and Intellectual Property (ACIP) Protocol" .

Aboriginal Affairs . 6 July 2020 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

Text may have been copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence. ( [1] ) ^ "Position statement: Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property (ICIP)" .

National and State Libraries Australasia . 28 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ "First Nations Australian Content or Participation - Doing business with us - About us" .

Screen Australia . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ "Indigenous cultural and intellectual property" .

University of Tasmania . Governance Instruments Framework. 14 July 2020 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ "NCIP probes Nas Academy, Whang-Od controversy; public urged to report any 'exploitation, violation' against IPs" .

Manila Bulletin . 10 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 .

^ "All Blacks fight to keep haka" .

BBC News . 16 July 2000 . Retrieved 3 May 2008 .

^ "Iwi threatens to place trademark on All Black haka" .

The New Zealand Herald . 22 May 2005 . Retrieved 3 May 2008 .

^ "Iwi claim to All Black haka turned down" .

The New Zealand Herald . 2 July 2007 . Retrieved 3 May 2008 .

^ Ngāti Toa Rangatira Letter of Agreement Archived 21 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "New Zealand Maori win haka fight" .

BBC News . 11 February 2009.

^ Olaloye, Tolu (July 2020).

"A Factsheet on the Intersection of Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights and Intellectual Property Rights in Africa; Amidst Covid-19 Outbreak" (PDF) .

Legal Pages (5): 24.

^ Griggs, Kim (21 November 2002).

"Lego Site Irks Maori Sympathizer" .

Wired .

[ dead link ] ^ "Disgust over 'Maori' brand cigarettes" .

TVNZ . 12 December 2005. Archived from the original on 13 June 2011.

^ Stokes, Jon (29 April 2006).

"Tobacco giant apologises to Maori" .

The New Zealand Herald .

^ Okediji, Ruth L.

(June 2018).

Traditional Knowledge and the Public Domain (PDF) (Report). CIGI Papers No. 176. Centre for International Governance Innovation. p. 5.

Bibliography [ edit ] DODSON, Michael (2007).

"Report of the Secretariat on Indigenous traditional knowledge" (PDF) .

Report to the United Nations Economic and Social Council's Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Sixth Session, New York, 14–25 May . United Nations Economic and Social Council. New York . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

DRAHOS, Peter (2001).

"The Universality of Intellectual Property Rights: Origins and Development" (PDF) . World Intellectual Property Organisation, Geneva. Archived from the original (DOC) on 2 December 2007 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

JONES, Peter (2008).

"Intellectual Property, Indigenous Peoples, and the Law" . Indigenous Peoples, Issues & Resources Website. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2010 .

United Nations General Assembly (2007).

"United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" (PDF) . United Nations General Assembly. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 February 2009 . Retrieved 26 November 2007 .

World Intellectual Property Organisation (2001).

"Intellectual Property Needs and Expectations of Traditional Knowledge Holders" .

WIPO Report on Fact-finding Missions on Intellectual Property and Traditional Knowledge (1998–1999) . World Intellectual Property Organisation, Geneva. Archived from the original on 12 February 2006 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Google Scholar search "Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property icip" " .

Anderson, Jane (2020).

"Indigenous/Traditional Knowledge & Intellectual Property" .

Duke University School of Law .

Davis, Michael (1997).

"Indigenous Peoples and Intellectual Property Rights" .

Parliament of Australia . Research Paper 20 1996-97.

Janke, Terri (5 July 2021).

"True Tracks: How to protect Indigenous knowledge and culture from exploitation" (Audio) .

ABC Radio National (Interview). Late Night Live. Interviewed by Adams, Phillip . 33min 56sec.

Moran, Alexis (14 May 2020).

"What is Indigenous cultural intellectual property and copyright and how can I respect it?" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation .

Terri Janke and Company; Janke, Terri; Sentina, Maiko (28 March 2018).

Indigenous Knowledge: Issues for Protection and Management: Discussion paper (PDF) . Commissioned by IP Australia & the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science . Commonwealth of Australia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2022 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

Sentina, Maiko; Mason, Elizabeth; Janke, Terri; Terri Janke and Company (28 March 2018).

Legal protection of Indigenous Knowledge in Australia: Supplementary Paper 1 (PDF) . A supplementary paper to the discussion paper: Indigenous Knowledge: Issues for Protection and Management . Commonwealth of Australia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

Sentina, Maiko; Mason, Elizabeth; Janke, Terri; Wenitong, David; Terri Janke and Company (28 March 2018).

International Laws and Developments relating to Indigenous Knowledge in Australia: Supplementary Paper 2 (PDF) . A supplementary paper to the discussion paper: Indigenous Knowledge: Issues for Protection and Management . Commonwealth of Australia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

Yang, Chih-Chieh (2010).

"A Comparative Study of the Models Employed to Protect Indigenous Traditional Cultural Expressions" (PDF) .

Asian-Pacific Law & Policy Journal .

11 (2): 50– 84. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2011.

"Intellectual Property Issues in Cultural Heritage - Theory, Practice, Policy, Ethics" .

IPinCH . Simon Fraser University.

The Intellectual Property Issues in Cultural Heritage project at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver , Canada External links [ edit ] Codes, guidelines and practices relating to the recording, digitization and dissemination of TCEs (WIPO searchable database) v t e International Indigenous and minority rights Rights Ancestral domain Free, prior and informed consent Intellectual property Land rights Language Self-determination in Australia in Canada in the United States Traditional knowledge ecological medical Treaty rights in Australia in New Zealand Non-governmental and political organizations Amazon Watch Assembly of First Nations Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador Congress of Aboriginal Peoples Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin Cultural Survival Indigenous Environmental Network Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs National Indigenous Organization of Colombia Native American Rights Fund Survival International Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization Zapatista Army of National Liberation ( more ...

) Issues Civilizing mission Colonialism Internal colonialism Settler colonialism Biopiracy Bioprospecting Cultural appropriation Sports mascots Redface Dakota Access Pipeline protests Discovery doctrine Fortress conservation Green grabbing Homeland Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples Bantustan Autonomous okrugs American Indian reservation Indian colony Indian reserve Ranchería Rancherie Russian republics Urban Indian reserve Manifest destiny Plastic shaman Rainbow Warriors Two-spirit Legal representation Governmental bodies Aotearoa-New Zealand Te Puni Kōkiri Brazil Fundação Nacional do Índio Canada Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada Mexico National Institute of Indigenous Peoples Philippines National Commission on Indigenous Peoples Russia Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East and Arctic Government of Bashkortostan Government of the Sakha Republic Government of Tatarstan Taiwan Council of Indigenous Peoples US Bureau of Indian Affairs Intergovernmental bodies African Union African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights Arctic Council WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and Folklore BBNJ ABS Committee Indigenous-led international bodies UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Treaties and Declarations of Rights 1989: Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention (ILO C169) 1992: Convention on Biological Diversity 2007: UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) 2010: Nagoya Protocol on Fair Access and Benefit-Sharing 2018: UN Declaration on the Rights of Peasants (UNDROP) 2023: High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement) 2024: Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge (GRATK) Historical cases Chechen–Russian conflict Sri Lankan Civil War 2009 Peruvian political crisis Alta controversy Chiapas conflict Expulsion of the Chagossians High Arctic relocation Human rights in Tibet Indian removal Little Danes experiment Mapuche conflict Oka Crisis Residential schools Canada New Zealand South Africa United States Rubber boom San controversy Stolen Generations Persecution of Uyghurs in China Indigenous rights • Minority rights v t e Indigenous peoples of the world by continent Africa Eurasia North America Oceania South America Indigenous peoples by geographic regions v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Native American mascot controversy Professional sports teams Atlanta Braves Tomahawk chop and name controversy Chief Noc-A-Homa Chicago Blackhawks name and logo controversy Kansas City Chiefs name controversy Prior usage Washington Redskins Name controversy Name change advocates Trademark dispute Opinion polls Original Americans Foundation Chief Zee Washington Redhawks Other teams Cleveland Indians name and logo controversy Chief Wahoo Edmonton Eskimos Golden State Warriors College teams NCAA Native American mascot decision Chief Illiniwek Florida State Seminoles Osceola and Renegade Sammy Seminole Fighting Sioux name controversy San Diego State Aztec Warrior List of college teams Youth and school teams Sports teams named Redskins List of secondary school teams Change advocates Amanda Blackhorse Brett Chapman Gregg Deal Stephanie Fryberg Deb Haaland Suzan Shown Harjo Adrienne Keene Jacqueline Keeler Mary Kathryn Nagle Robert Roche Sundance Charlene Teters Philip Yenyo Related Contemporary Native American issues in the United States Cultural appropriation Indigenous intellectual property List of teams Native American mascot laws and regulations Pretendian Redface Redskin Stereotypes of Indigenous peoples of Canada and the United States Tomahawk chop NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4fv4b
Cached time: 20250817103701
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.723 seconds
Real time usage: 0.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3798/1000000
Revision size: 54403/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 220967/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1702/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 237004/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.404/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6943744/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  634.706      1 -total
 46.24%  293.472      1 Template:Reflist
 31.23%  198.221     33 Template:Cite_web
 12.39%   78.616      1 Template:Indigenous_rights
 12.16%   77.166      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.78%   62.046      6 Template:Navbox
  9.28%   58.893      1 Template:Short_description
  6.35%   40.321      1 Template:Indigenous_rights_footer
  5.48%   34.786      7 Template:Cite_journal
  5.43%   34.488      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14478375:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817103701 and revision id 1306297456. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indigenous_intellectual_property&oldid=1306297456 " Categories : Indigenous politics Intellectual property law Traditional knowledge Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: publisher location All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 01:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indigenous intellectual property 5 languages Add topic

