Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 UBS inclusion rationale 3 Service definitions and examples Toggle Service definitions and examples subsection 3.1 Shelter 3.2 Sustenance 3.3 Health and care 3.4 Education 3.5 Transport 3.6 Information 3.7 Legal 3.8 Local service definitions 4 Funding Toggle Funding subsection 4.1 Model costing 4.2 Cost justifications for UBS 5 Labour market effects 6 Environmental benefits 7 Criticisms and conditions 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources Toggle the table of contents Universal basic services 1 language Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social security system Not to be confused with Universal basic income .

Part of a series on Universalism Philosophical Moral universalism Universal value Universality Universalizability Economic and societal Cultural universal Universal basic income Universal basic services Universal design Universal health care Universal preschool Universal suffrage Christian Beliefs Apocatastasis Theosis Trinitarian universalism Universal reconciliation Churches and groups Unitarian Universalism International Council of Unitarians and Universalists Primitive Baptist Universalists Universalist Church of America Other History Unlimited atonement Other religions Baháʼí Faith Brahmoism Hinduism (Neo-Vedanta) Sufism Universalism and the Latter Day Saint movement Spiritual Mysticism Nondualism Perennialism Theosophy Category v t e Universal basic services ( UBS ) is an idea [ 1 ] of a form of social security in which all citizens or residents of a community, region, or country receive unconditional access to a range of free, basic, public services , funded by taxpayers and provided collectively by a government or public institution .

[ 2 ] The basic services commonly include: [ 3 ] Education Health care Housing Essential food Water and sanitation Buses and trains Basic internet Legal aid and representation Further services, where there are low or zero marginal costs for adding further users are: Electricity and heating Retail banking Public broadcast media History [ edit ] Universal Basic Services is a development of the welfare state model. The term appeared in 2017 in press [ 4 ] and the first modelling in a report from University College London (UCL) 's Institute for Global Prosperity.

[ 5 ] The British Labour Party welcomed [ 6 ] the report and announced in 2018 [ 7 ] that UBS would be incorporated into the party's platform.

UBS inclusion rationale [ edit ] Universal Basic Services are provided on the basis that they are necessary to sustain and enable each citizen's material safety, opportunity to contribute, or participate in the decision-making processes of their community, region or country, even if they lack any financial income. The UBS model extends the notion of a social safety net to include those elements necessary to fulfil a larger role [ 8 ] in society.

To substantiate inclusion in a UBS provision services meet at least one of these conditions: necessary to maintain the individual's or the society's material safety necessary to enable the individual's personal effort to use their skills and abilities to contribute to their society, either for remuneration or not necessary to allow the individual to participate in the political system(s) within which they live The following table represents rationales used for the inclusion of certain services in a UBS definition: UBS inclusion rationales UBS Material safety Opportunity Participation Housing ♦ Electricity and heating ♦ Food and water ♦ Health and care ♦ Education ♦ ♦ Transport ♦ ♦ Information ♦ ♦ Legal ♦ ♦ ♦ The specific content of any set of UBS varies according to the resources available to the society and their political definitions of what constitutes basic provision - see UBS Inclusion Rationale . Many societies already provide some elements of UBS, such as public education and public healthcare services.

Service definitions and examples [ edit ] Shelter [ edit ] Homeless shelter Housing First Public housing Right to housing Public housing are built to provide affordable or subsidized housing for lower income earners. This is inline with rationale behind the UBS, to sustain social inclusion.

UN-Habitat estimate that approximately 40% of the total world population will lack access to affordable housing by 2030.

[ 9 ] Sustenance [ edit ] Food bank Food security Human right to water and sanitation Right to food Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Soup kitchen Health and care [ edit ] Services that support health, and services which provide for care of disabled , elderly and others.

Publicly funded health care Right to health Universal health care In The Case for Universal Basic Services Coote and Percy argue for the expansion of the Care service definition to include childcare .

[ 10 ] Education [ edit ] Schooling and training.

Free education Public education Right to education Universal access to education Transport [ edit ] Local transport to access other services, shops and employment.

Free public transport Information [ edit ] Access to communications that enable participation in society as well as access to the other services.

Freedom of information Municipal wireless network Public library Right to Internet access Legal [ edit ] The Legal category UBS is a broad definition to include safety services, legal assistance and the apparatus necessary to sustain the society's legal system and political system . The courts, assemblies, political salaries, civil services and other aspects of the structure of the society are included in the definition of Legal UBS.

Emergency medical services Policing Firefighting Legal aid Courts Right to counsel Social services agencies Local service definitions [ edit ] UBS are designed and delivered by governments and institutions which tailor the exact content of the services to meet the particular circumstances of the local community.

Funding [ edit ] In the standardised definition of UBS the cost of the services is funded by revenues derived from income taxes , which are hypothecated to the delivery of the UBS.

Most UBS services in societies around the world today are funded out of general government revenues , such as publicly funded healthcare .

Model costing [ edit ] In October 2017 the Institute for Global Prosperity at University College London (UCL) produced a report [ 5 ] modelling the cost of UBS for the United Kingdom .
The report modelled funding the UBS services (£42.16Bn) from a reduction in the Personal Tax Allowance .

Cost justifications for UBS [ edit ] The cost of extending public services as universal entitlements is justified through some combination of the following savings: increased productivity through greater support for deeper specialisation substitution of cash benefits enhanced efficiency of delivery resulting from local design and demand management [ 11 ] long term savings in labour costs as UBS substitute for increases in pay [ 12 ] Labour market effects [ edit ] The two most common effects on operagraphics ( labour markets ) are: increased flexibility through enhanced access to job opportunities (e.g. transport access [ 13 ] ) reduced upward pressure on labour rates through the substitution of direct financial cost ("social wage" [ 12 ] ) The 2017 UCL report shows potential cost replacement of 80% of average pay for the lowest income decile [ 5 ] Environmental benefits [ edit ] UBS can lead to lower emissions, particularly through greater use of public transport.

[ 14 ] Criticisms and conditions [ edit ] UBS may be an inefficient method to cover the personal and necessarily individual living costs associated with needs such as toiletries, requiring any UBS to be supplemented by some form of cash transfers or credit system that can be used by citizens to satisfy personally specific living costs. This component could be delivered as a form of basic income , as modelled in the UCL report, [ 5 ] albeit at the low end of the scale within which basic income distributions are commonly proposed.

See also [ edit ] Basic needs Right to a healthy environment Right to clothing Social protection floor UK enterprise law Universal design References [ edit ] ^ Percy et al. 2017 .

^ Gough, Ian (2020).

"The Case for Universal Basic Services" .

LSE Public Policy Review .

1 (2).

doi : 10.31389/lseppr.12 .

^ Percy, Moore, Portes et al (2017) ^ Coyle, Diane (4 April 2017).

"Universal basic services are more important than income" .

Financial Times . Financial Times . Retrieved 20 April 2017 .

^ a b c d Percy, Moore, Portes, Reed (23 December 2016).

"Social prosperity for the future: A proposal for Universal Basic Services" .

UCL . IGP UCL . Retrieved 28 April 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ McDonnell, John.

"John McDonnell response to the Institute for Global Prosperity's report on Universal Basic Services" .

Labour Party . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ McDonnell, John.

"The new economics of Labour" .

Open Democracy . Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ Unger, Roberto (11 December 2013).

"Freedom, Equality and a Future Political Economy: the structural change we need - Unger at RSA 2013" .

RSA . Retrieved 19 April 2017 .

^ "The challenge" . Archived from the original on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2020 .

^ Coote, Anna; Percy, Andrew.

"The Case for Universal Basic Services" .

Wiley . Retrieved 19 December 2020 .

^ Randle, Kippin.

"Beyond Nudge to Demand Management" .

RSA . RSA LGA . Retrieved 20 April 2017 .

^ a b Adams, Paul (January 1978).

"Social Control or Social Wage: On the Political Economy of the Welfare State" .

The Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare .

5 (1) . Retrieved 20 April 2017 .

^ Fisher, Impink (28 March 2017).

"The socioeconomic stakes of transit" .

The Brookings Institution . Retrieved 20 April 2017 .

^ "Getting Beyond the Economy: A Journey with Extinction Rebellion" .

Sources [ edit ] Percy, Andrew; Moore, Henrietta; Portes, Jonathan; Reed, Howard (Oct 3, 2017).

Social prosperity for the future: A proposal for Universal Basic Services .

UCL Institute for Global Prosperity .

Coote, Anna; Kasliwal, Pritika; Percy, Andrew (May 16, 2019).

Universal Basic Services: Theory and Practice - A literature review .

UCL Institute for Global Prosperity .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Universal_basic_services&oldid=1288123433 " Categories : Employment compensation Labor relations Public administration Public services Social security Universalism Welfare state Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 16:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Universal basic services 1 language Add topic

