Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions and terminology Toggle Definitions and terminology subsection 1.1 Origin 1.2 Usage 1.3 Similar terms 2 Causes 3 Evidence of adultism 4 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 4.1 Internalized adultism 4.2 Institutional adultism 4.3 Cultural adultism 5 Results Toggle Results subsection 5.1 Social stratification 5.2 Cultural responses 5.3 Academic developments 6 Addressing adultism 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Adultism 13 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Hausa 日本語 Polski Português Shqip Српски / srpski 文言 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discrimination favoring adults over children Not to be confused with Adulting , Autism , or Adultery .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Youth rights Activities Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.

Child Labor Deterrence Act Children's Online Privacy Protection Act Kids Online Safety Act Convention on the Rights of the Child Fair Labor Standards Act Hammer v. Dagenhart History of youth rights in the United States Morse v. Frederick Newsboys' strike of 1899 Prez Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms Wild in the Streets Theory / concepts Adultcentrism Adultism Ageism Criminalization Democracy Ephebiphobia Fear of children Free-range parenting Intergenerational equity Future generations Paternalism Social class Suffrage Taking Children Seriously Universal suffrage Unschooling Youth activism Youth detention center Youth empowerment Youth exclusion Youth suffrage Youth voice Issues Adolescent sexuality Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of majority Age of marriage Behavior modification facility Child labour Children in the military Child marriage Compulsory education Conscription Corporal punishment at home at school in law Curfew Child abuse Emancipation of minors Gambling age Human rights and youth sport In loco parentis Juvenile delinquency Juvenile court Juvenile law Legal drinking age ( U.S. history ) Legal working age Minimum driving age Marriageable age Minor (law) Minors and abortion Restavec School leaving age Smoking age ( U.S. history ) Status offense Underage drinking in the US Voting age Youth-adult partnership Youth participation Youth politics Youth unemployment Youth voting Organizations United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child Akt Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions Canadian Youth for Choice Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission Common Cents Community Alliance for the Ethical Treatment of Youth DoSomething Future Coalition Global Youth Action Network High School Democrats of America Indian Youth Climate Network International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International Mermaids National Union of Students LGBT+ Campaign National Youth Rights Association One World Youth Project Queer Youth Network Students for a Democratic Society Freechild Project Three O'Clock Lobby UK Youth Parliament Youth International Party Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor The Youth Cafe Young Communist League of Canada Young Democrats of America World Federation of Democratic Youth People Fletcher Hanson Henry Holt Koroknay-Palicz Duff Males Postman Yaco Related Ages of consent in Asia Ages of consent in Europe Ages of consent in North America Ages of consent in Oceania Ages of consent in South America Ages of consent in the United States Animal rights Anti-racism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Feminism French petitions against age-of-consent laws Legal status of tattooing in European countries Legal status of tattooing in the United States Libertarianism Students' rights Youth Olympic Games Youth sports Youth wing Liberation theology Communism Socialism Marxism Youth rights Society portal v t e Adultism is a bias or prejudice against children or youth.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It has been defined as "the power adults have over children", or the abuse thereof, [ 2 ] as well as "prejudice and accompanying systematic discrimination against young people", [ 3 ] and "bias towards adults... and the social addiction to adults, including their ideas, activities, and attitudes".  It can be considered a subtype of ageism , or prejudice and discrimination due to age in general.

This phenomenon is said to affect families, schools, justice systems and the economy, in addition to other areas of society. Its impacts are largely regarded as negative, except in cases related to child protection and the overriding social contract .

[ 4 ] Increased study of adultism has recently occurred in the fields of education, psychology , civic engagement , higher education and further, with contributions from Europe , North America and South America .

[ 5 ] Definitions and terminology [ edit ] Origin [ edit ] According to one writer, "the term 'adultism' has been varyingly employed since at least the 1840s, when it was used to describe traits of an animal that matured faster than expected." [ 6 ] More familiar to current usage, the word was used by Patterson Du Bois in 1903, [ 7 ] with a meaning broadly similar to that used by Jack Flasher in a journal article seventy-five years later.

In France in the 1930s, the same word was used for an entirely different topic, the author describing a condition wherein a child possessed adult-like "physique and spirit": A boy of 12 and a girl of 13 who had the spirit and personality of adults.... They were placed in institutions because of stealing and prostitution. These forms of precocity lead the individual into difficulties and should be recognized early in the development of the individual.

[ 8 ] That 1930s usage of the word in France was superseded by a late 1970s American journal article proposing that adultism is the abuse of the power that adults have over children. The author identified examples not only in parents but also in teachers, psychotherapists, the clergy, police, judges, and juries.

[ 2 ] Usage [ edit ] John Bell in 1995 defined adultism as "behaviors and attitudes based on the assumptions that adults are better than young people, and entitled to act upon young people without agreement".

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Adam Fletcher in 2016 called it "an addiction to the attitudes, ideas, beliefs, and actions of adults." [ 11 ] Adultism is popularly used to describe any discrimination against young people and is sometimes distinguished from ageism , which is simply prejudice on the grounds of age, although it commonly refers to prejudice against older people, not specifically against youth. It has been suggested that adultism, which is associated with a view of the self that trades on rejecting and excluding child-subjectivity, has always been present in Western culture.

[ 12 ] Fletcher [ 4 ] suggests that adultism has three main expressions in society: Attitudinal adultism: Personal feelings, assumptions, and beliefs that form a person's attitudes about young people. This is also called internalized adultism .

Cultural adultism: The shared attitudes, including beliefs and customs, promoting the assumption that adults are superior to anyone who is not identified as an adult, simply because of their age. This is also called social adultism .

Structural adultism: The normalization and legitimization of historical, cultural, institutional, and interpersonal dynamics that routinely advantage adults while producing cumulative and chronic adverse outcomes for young people. This is also referred to as institutional adultism .

A study by the Crisis Prevention Institute on the prevalence of adultism found an increasing number of local youth-serving organizations addressing the issue.

[ 13 ] For instance, a local program (Youth Together) in Oakland , California , describes the impact of adultism, which "hinders the development of youth, in particular, their self-esteem and self-worth, ability to form positive relationships with caring adults, or even see adults as allies", on their website.

[ 14 ] Adultism has been used to describe the oppression of children and young people by adults, which is seen as having the same power dimension in the lives of young people as racism and sexism.

[ 15 ] When used in this sense it is a generalization of paternalism , describing the force of all adults rather than only male adults, and may be witnessed in the infantilization of children and youth.

Pedophobia (the fear of children) and ephebiphobia (the fear of youth) have been proposed as antecedents to adultism.

[ 16 ] Similar terms [ edit ] Terms such as adult privilege, adultarchy, and adultcentrism have been proposed as descriptions of particular aspects or variants of adultism.

[ 17 ] National Youth Rights Association describes discrimination against youth as ageism , taking that word as any form of discrimination against anyone due to their age. Advocates of using the term 'ageism' for this issue also believe it makes common cause with older people fighting against their own form of age discrimination.

[ 18 ] However, a national organization called Youth On Board counters this based on a different meaning of "ageism", arguing that "addressing adultist behavior by calling it ageism is discrimination against youth in itself." [ 19 ] Causes [ edit ] In his seminal 1978 article, Flasher says that adultism is born of the belief that children are inferior, and he says it can be manifested as excessive nurturing, possessiveness, or over-restrictiveness, all of which are consciously or unconsciously geared toward excessive control of a child.

[ 20 ] Adultism has been associated with psychological projection and splitting , a process whereby 'the one with the power attributes his or her unconscious, unresolved sexual and aggressive material' to the child – 'both the dark and the light side...hence the divine child /deficit child' [ 21 ] split.

Theologians Heather Eaton and Matthew Fox proposed, "Adultism derives from adults repressing the inner child." [ 22 ] John Holt stated, "An understanding of adultism might begin to explain what I mean when I say that much of what is known as children's art is an adult invention." [ 23 ] That perspective is seemingly supported by Maya Angelou , who remarked: We are all creative, but by the time we are three or four years old, someone has knocked the creativity out of us. Some people shut up the kids who start to tell stories. Kids dance in their cribs, but someone will insist they sit still. By the time the creative people are ten or twelve, they want to be like everyone else.

[ 24 ] Evidence of adultism [ edit ] A 2006/2007 survey conducted by the Children's Rights Alliance for England and the National Children's Bureau asked 4,060 children and young people whether they have ever been treated unfairly based on various criteria (race, age, sex, sexual orientation, etc.).  A total of 43% of British youth surveyed reported experiencing discrimination based on their age, substantially more than other categories of discrimination like sex (27%), race (11%), or sexual orientation (6%).

[ 25 ] Classification [ edit ] In addition to Fletcher, [ 4 ] other experts have identified multiple forms of adultism, offering a typology that includes the above categories of internalized adultism, [ 26 ] institutionalized adultism, [ 27 ] cultural adultism, and other forms.

Internalized adultism [ edit ] In a publication published by the W. K. Kellogg Foundation , University of Michigan professor Barry Checkoway asserts that internalized adultism causes youth to "question their own legitimacy, doubt their ability to make a difference" and perpetuate a "culture of silence" among young people.

[ 28 ] "Adultism convinces us as children that children don't really count," reports an investigative study, and it "becomes extremely important to us [children] to have the approval of adults and be 'in good' with them, even if it means betraying our fellow children. This aspect of internalized adultism leads to such phenomena tattling on our siblings or being the 'teacher's pet,' to name just two examples." Other examples of internalized adultism include many forms of violence imposed upon children and youth by adults who are reliving the violence they faced as young people, such as corporal punishment , sexual abuse , verbal abuse , and community incidents that include store policies prohibiting youth from visiting shops without adults, and police, teachers, or parents chasing young people from areas without just cause.

[ 9 ] Institutional adultism [ edit ] Institutional adultism may be apparent in any instance of systemic bias , where formalized limitations or demands are placed on people simply because of their young age. Policies, laws, rules, organizational structures, and systematic procedures each serve as mechanisms to leverage, perpetuate, and instill adultism throughout society. These limitations are often reinforced through physical force, coercion or police actions and are often seen as double standards.

[ 29 ] This treatment is increasingly seen as a form of gerontocracy .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Institutions perpetuating adultism may include the fiduciary, legal, educational, communal, religious, and governmental sectors of a community.

Social science literature has identified adultism as "within the context of the social inequality and the oppression of children, where children are denied human rights and are disproportionately victims of maltreatment and exploitation." [ 32 ] Institutional adultism may be present in: adoption of new parents access to healthcare [ 33 ] age of candidacy age of consent age of majority Age-based segregation birth control cohabitation with relatives/close friends compulsory education conscription curfews criminalization [ 34 ] drinking age emancipation of minors in each state/country freedom of religion military use of children over-medicating children [ 35 ] Policing Public school choice voluntary employment when legal or approved by parent/the state voting age as well as legal issues affecting adolescence and total institutions .

Cultural adultism [ edit ] Cultural adultism is a much more ambiguous, yet much more prevalent, form of " discrimination or intolerance towards youth".

[ 36 ] Any restriction or exploitation of people because of their youth, as opposed to their ability, comprehension, or capacity, may be said to be adultist.  These restrictions are often attributed to euphemisms afforded to adults on the basis of age alone, such as "better judgment" or "the wisdom of age".   A parenting magazine editor comments, "Most of the time people talk differently to kids than to adults, and often they act differently, too." [ 37 ] Results [ edit ] Social stratification [ edit ] Discrimination against age is increasingly recognized as a form of bigotry in social and cultural settings around the world. An increasing number of social institutions are acknowledging the positions of children and teenagers as an oppressed minority group .

[ 38 ] Many youth are rallying against the adultist myths spread through mass media from the 1970s through the 1990s.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Research compiled from two sources (a Cornell University nationwide study, and a Harvard University study on youth) has shown that social stratification between age groups causes stereotyping and generalization; for instance, the media-perpetuated myth that all adolescents are immature, violent and rebellious.

[ 41 ] Opponents of adultism contend that this has led to growing number of youth, academics, researchers, and other adults rallying against adultism and ageism, such as organizing education programs, protesting statements, and creating organizations devoted to publicizing the concept and addressing it.

[ 42 ] Simultaneously, research shows that young people who struggle against adultism within community organizations have a high rate of impact upon said agencies, as well as their peers, the adults who work with them, and the larger community to which the organization belongs.

[ 43 ] Cultural responses [ edit ] There may be many negative effects of adultism, including ephebiphobia and a growing generation gap . A reactive social response to adultism takes the form of the children's rights movement , led by young people who strike against being exploited for their labor. Numerous popular outlets are employed to strike out against adultism, particularly music and movies. Additionally, many youth-led social change efforts have inherently responded to adultism, particularly those associated with youth activism and student activism , each of which in their own respects have struggled with the effects of institutionalized and cultural adultism.

[ 42 ] Academic developments [ edit ] A growing number of governmental, academic, and educational institutions around the globe have created policy, conducted studies, and created publications that respond to many of the insinuations and implications of adultism. Much of popular researcher Margaret Mead 's work can be said to be a response to adultism.

[ 44 ] Current researchers whose work analyzes the effects of adultism include sociologist Mike Males [ 45 ] and critical theorist Henry Giroux . The topic has recently been addressed in liberation psychology literature, as well.

[ 46 ] Addressing adultism [ edit ] Any inanimate or animate exhibition of adultism is said to be "adultist". This may include behaviors, policies, practices, institutions, or individuals. It is legal in most countries, towards people under 18.

Educator John Holt proposed that teaching adults about adultism is a vital step to addressing the effects of adultism, [ 47 ] and at least one organization [ 48 ] and one curriculum [ 49 ] do just that. Several educators have created curricula that seek to teach youth about adultism, as well.

[ 50 ] Currently, organizations responding to the negative effects of adultism include the United Nations, which has conducted a great deal of research [ 51 ] in addition to recognizing the need to counter adultism through policy and programs. The CRC has particular Articles (5 and 12) which are specifically committed to combating adultism.

[ citation needed ] The international organization Human Rights Watch has done the same.

[ 52 ] Common practice accepts the engagement of youth voice and the formation of youth-adult partnerships as essential steps to resisting adultism.

[ 53 ] Some ways to challenge adultism also include youth-led programming and participating in youth-led organizations . These are both ways of children stepping up and taking action to call out the bias towards adults. Youth-led programming allows the voices of the youth to be heard and taken into consideration.

[ 54 ] Taking control of their autonomy can help children take control of their sexuality, as well. Moving away from an adultist framework leads to moving away from the idea that children are not capable of handling information about sex and their own sexuality. Accepting that children are ready to learn about themselves will decrease the amount of misinformation spread to them by their peers and allow them to receive accurate information from individuals educated on the topic.

[ 55 ] See also [ edit ] Legal age Ageism Age discrimination Children's Online Privacy Protection Act Childism Adultcentrism Ephebiphobia Gerontocracy Pedophobia Prejudice National Youth Rights Association The Freechild Project Taking Children Seriously Children's rights Youth rights References [ edit ] ^ Fletcher, A. (2015).

Facing Adultism . Olympia, WA: CommonAction Publishing.

^ a b c Flasher, J. (1978). "Adultism".

Adolescence .

13 (51): 517– 523.

PMID 735921 .

^ J. Gregoire/C. M. Jungers, The Counsellor's Companion (2007) p. 65 ^ a b c Fletcher2013 ^ "Taboo: The Journal of Culture and Education, Volume 22, Number 1, Spring 2024: 22.1" . Caddo Gap Press. March 10, 2024 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

Special edition on Adultism ^ Fletcher, Adam F.C. (Spring 2024) "A Future Without Adultism," Taboo; Vol. 22 , Iss. 1: 61-70.

^ Du Bois, Patterson (1903).

Fireside Child-Study: The Art of Being Fair and Kind . Dodd, Mead and company. p.

17 .

^ Courbon, P. (1933). "Mental adultism and precocious growth of the personality".

Annales médico-psychologiques .

87 : 355– 362.

^ a b Bell, John (March 1995).

"Understanding Adultism: A Major Obstacle to Developing Positive Youth-Adult Relationships" (PDF) .

YouthBuild USA – via Sacramento County Office of Education.

^ Gong, Jennifer; Wright, Dana (September 2007). "The Context of Power: Young People as Evaluators".

American Journal of Evaluation .

28 (3): 327– 333.

doi : 10.1177/1098214007306680 .

S2CID 143435849 .

^ Fletcher, Adam.

"Adultism" .

Freechild Institute .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24.

^ David Kennedy, The Well of Being (2006) p. 67 ^ Tate, Thomas F. and Copas, Randall L. (Spring 2003) "Insist or Enlist?: Adultism versus Climates of Excellence," Reclaiming Children and Youth: The Journal of Strength-based Interventions, v12 n1. p 40-45.

^ Youth Together Glossary Archived June 23, 2007, at the Wayback Machine . Youth Together. Retrieved 4/1/2008.

^ Roche, Jeremy (November 1999). "Children: Rights, Participation and Citizenship".

Childhood .

6 (4): 475– 493.

doi : 10.1177/0907568299006004006 .

S2CID 144444977 .

^ Fletcher, A. (2006) Washington Youth Voice Handbook Olympia, WA: CommonAction.

^ Bonnichsen, Sven.

"Three Types of Youth Liberation: Youth Equality, Youth Power, Youth Culture" . National Youth Rights Association. Archived from the original on February 1, 2011 . Retrieved January 4, 2011 .

^ Alex Koroknay-Palicz's blog Archived May 23, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 7/20/08.

^ Young, K & Sazama, J (2006) 15 Points to Successfully Involving Youth in Decision-Making.

Boston: Youth On Board .

^ Flasher, J. (1978) "Adultism." Adolescence 13(51) Fal 1978, 521.

^ Kennedy, p. 64 ^ Eaton, H & Fox, M. "Chapter 10: Transcendent Spirit: Child Honoring and Religion." in Cavoukian, R. (Ed) & Olfman, S. (Ed). (2006).

Child Honoring: How to Turn This World Around . Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers/Greenwood Publishing Group.

^ Holt, J. (Ed) Teach Your Own: The John Holt Book of Homeschooling . Perseus Publishing.

^ Iraki, X.N.; Mukurima, Muriuki.

"Kenya Times News, Opinion--Education new vehicle of a class society" .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2007 . Retrieved 2007-03-21 .

^ Willow, C., Franklin, A. and Shaw, C. (2007).  Meeting the obligations of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in England. Children and young people's messages to Government. DCSF.

^ Get The Word Out!

Archived 2007-09-26 at the Wayback Machine Jenny Sazama (2004). p.12 ^ Hernandez, D. & Rehman, B. (eds). (2002) Colonize This!: Young Women of Color on Today's Feminism . Seal Press ^ Adults as Allies Archived September 26, 2007, at the Wayback Machine (1998) WK Kellogg Foundation. Retrieved 4/1/2008.

^ Males, M. (1997) Framing Youth: 10 Myths about the Next Generation.

"Courts have explicitly ruled that policy-makers may impose adult responsibilities and punishments on individual youths as if they were adults at the same time laws and policies abrogate adolescents’ rights en masse as if they were children." ^ Monitor Breakfast with James Carville and Stanley Greenberg "This is not class warfare, this is generational warfare. This administration and old wealthy people have declared war on young people. That is the real war that is going on here. And that is the war we've got to talk about." - James Carville ^ Gatto, J.T. (2002) The Underground History of American Education Archived December 10, 2006, at the Wayback Machine "Children allowed to take responsibility and given a serious part in the larger world are always superior to those merely permitted to play and be passive. At the age of twelve, Admiral Farragut got his first command." ^ Lombardo, Lucien; Polonko, Karen A.

"Interdisciplinary Contributions to the Prevention of Child Maltreatment" .

International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences .

4 (12): 89– 112. Archived from the original on 2016-06-03 . Retrieved 2016-05-20 .

^ Institutionalized discrimination is also viewed as structural violence . See Kelly, P. "Fighting for Hope" (1984) for specific evidence of institutional adultism in healthcare, identified as structural violence. "A third of the 2,000 million people in the developing countries are starving or suffering from malnutrition. Twenty-five per cent of their children die before their fifth birthday... Less than 10 per cent of the 15 million children who died this year had been vaccinated against the six most common and dangerous children's diseases. Vaccinating every child costs £3 per child. But not doing so costs us five million lives a year. These are classic examples of structural violence ." ^ Giroux, H.

Take Back Higher Education: Race, Youth, and the Crisis of Democracy in the Post-Civil Rights Era (2004).

^ Breeding, smJ. (n.d.) Does ADHD Even Exist? The Ritalin Sham Sunriver, OR: The Natural Child Project.

^ Fletcher, ~ Adam F. C. (2016-02-05).

"Cultural Adultism" .

Freechild Institute . Retrieved 2021-03-19 .

^ Treating children as equals.

Wright, J. New Renaissance Magazine (2001)." ^ (2006) 15 Points to Successfully Involving Youth in Decision-Making.

Boston: Youth On Board. p 95.

^ (2004) "Making Space - Making Change: Profiles of Youth-Led and Youth-Driven Organizations" . Movement Strategy Center. p 17. Retrieved 9/7/07.

^ Giroux, H. "The Abandoned Generation: Democracy Beyond the Culture of Fear" (2003).

^ (2006) 15 Points to Successfully Involving Youth in Decision-Making.

Boston: Youth On Board. p 94.

^ a b (2006) 15 Points to Successfully Involving Youth in Decision-Making.

Boston: Youth On Board. p 92.

^ Zeldin, S, Kusgen-McDaniel, A, & Topitzes, D.

"Youth In Decision-Making: A Study on The Impacts of Youth on Adults and Organizations" Archived August 19, 2006, at the Wayback Machine (2001).

^ Mitchell, Lisa M. (Spring 2006). "Child-Centered? Thinking Critically about Children's Drawings as a Visual Research Method".

Visual Anthropology Review .

22 (1): 68.

doi : 10.1525/var.2006.22.1.60 .

^ Chu, Julie (Fall 1997). "Navigating the Media Environment: How Youth Claim a Place Through Zines".

Social Justice .

24 (3): 71– 85.

JSTOR 29767022 .

^ Watts, Roderick J.; Flanagan, Constance (August 2007). "Pushing the envelope on youth civic engagement: A developmental and liberation psychology perspective".

Journal of Community Psychology .

35 (6): 779– 792.

doi : 10.1002/jcop.20178 .

^ Holt, J. (2003) Teach Your Own Perseus Publishing.

^ "Youth on Board - Massachusetts" .

youthonboard .

^ Creighton, A. & Kivel, P. (1992) Helping Teens Stop Violence: A Practical Guide for Counselors, Educators, and Parents Hunter House.

^ Miller-McLemore, B. (2003) Let the Children Come: Reimagining Childhood from a Christian Perspective Josey-Bass.

^ The Evolving Capacities of the Child UNICEF. (2005) ^ The Difference between Youth and Adults HRW online.

^ (n.d.) Adultism Resources The Freechild Project website.

^ "Adultism" .

Freechild Institute . 22 December 2015.

^ "Let's Talk About Sex – TAASA" . Archived from the original on 2016-10-24 . Retrieved 2016-05-05 .

[ better source needed ] External links [ edit ] Look up adultism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Bell, J. (n.d.) Understanding Adultism: A Key to Developing Positive Youth-Adult Relationships.

Archived 2015-11-12 at the Wayback Machine Olympia, WA: The Freechild Project.

Adultism and the Roots of Authoritarianism Velázquez, J. and Garin-Jones, M. (2003) "Adultism and Cultural Competence" Children's Voice Child Welfare League of America. January/February 2003.

Unit on Adultism from SocialJusticeEducation.org, originally located at Creighton University .

Tate, T. (2003). "Insist or enlist? Adultism versus climates of excellence".

Reclaiming Children and Youth .

12 (1): 40– 46.

v t e Youth empowerment Elements Evolving capacities Free-range parenting Future generations Intergenerational equity Leaving the nest Student voice Youth-adult partnership Youth mainstreaming Youth rights Youth voice Types Anarchistic free school Community youth development Democratic education Popular education Positive youth development Student activism Student-centered learning Student rights Teen court Youth activism Youth council Youth engagement Youth leadership Youth-led media Youth organizations Youth participation Youth philanthropy Youth politics Youth service Youth suffrage Youth vote Youth work Barriers Adultcentrism Adultism Age restrictions Ageism Control freak Eleutherophobia Ephebiphobia Fear of children Gerontocracy Grounding Helicopter parent Infantilization Intrusiveness Narcissism Parental respect Paternalism Patriarchy School-to-prison pipeline Vicariousness Youth control complex Youth exclusion Related topics Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of criminal responsibility Beat Generation Beatnik The Catcher in the Rye Counterculture of the 1960s Greaser Hippies Hungry generation International Youth Year LGBTQ student movement Subcultures of the 1950s Taking Children Seriously The Teenage Liberation Handbook Teenage rebellion UK underground Voting age Index of youth rights–related articles v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adultism&oldid=1306136714 " Categories : Prejudice and discrimination by type Youth rights Youth Ageism Children's rights Identity politics Human rights by issue Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 04:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adultism 13 languages Add topic

