Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hammer and sickle 2 Red star 3 Red flag 4 Red-and-black flag 5 The Internationale 6 Plough or Starry Plough 7 National emblems 8 Other communist symbols 9 Gallery Toggle Gallery subsection 9.1 Hammer and sickle 9.2 Red flag 9.3 Red star 9.4 Red and black flag 9.5 Plough 9.6 Arabic-Communist Symbols 9.7 Other symbols 10 See also 11 References 12 Bibliography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Communist symbolism 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Symbols central to communist imagery This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Communist symbolism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Communist symbolism represents a variety of themes, including revolution , the proletariat , the peasantry , agriculture , or international solidarity . The red flag , the hammer and sickle , and the red star - or variations thereof - are some of the symbols adopted by communist movements , governments , and parties worldwide.

A tradition of including communist symbolism in socialist-style emblems and flags began with the flag of the Soviet Union and has since been taken up by a long line of socialist states .

In Indonesia , Latvia , Lithuania , and Ukraine , communist symbols are banned and displays in public for non-educational use are considered a criminal offense.

[ 1 ] Hammer and sickle [ edit ] Main article: Hammer and sickle A tableau in a communist rally in Kerala , India showing two farmers forming the hammer and sickle , the most famous communist symbol The hammer and sickle appears on the flags of most communist parties around the world. Some parties have a modified version of the hammer and sickle as their symbol, most notably the Workers' Party of Korea which includes a hammer representing industrial workers, a hoe representing agricultural workers, and a brush (traditional writing-implement) representing the intelligentsia.

The hammer stands for the industrial working class and the sickle represents the agricultural workers, therefore together they represent the unity of the two groups.

[ 2 ] The hammer and sickle was first used during the 1917 Russian Revolution ; however, it did not appear on the official flag of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics until 1924.

[ 2 ] Since the Russian Revolution, the hammer and sickle has been used by various communist parties and communist states .

Red star [ edit ] Main article: Red star The red five-pointed star is a symbol of the ultimate triumph of the ideas of communism on the five (inhabited, excluding Antarctica) continents of the globe . It first appeared as a military symbol in Tsarist Russia . It was then called the “Mars star,” reminiscent of Mars, the ancient Roman god of war . On January 1, 1827, the law was signed that put a five-pointed star on the epaulets of officers and generals. In 1854, the star began to be used on shoulder straps. Later, the five-pointed star with a two-headed eagle inside it was used to mark military trains and carriages. In Soviet Russia, the five-pointed star symbolized the protection of peacetime labor by the Red Army (again, like in Ancient Rome, where Mars was also the protector of the agricultural workers). In 1918, the drawing of the badge for the soldiers of the Red Army in the form of a red star with a golden image of a plough and a hammer in the center was approved. The star symbolized protection, while the plough and the hammer were read as a union of peasants and workers. By the 1920s, the red star began to be used as an official symbol of the state; and finally, in 1924, it became part of the Soviet flag and the official emblem of the Soviet Union.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In the succeeding years, the five-pointed red star came to be considered a symbol of communism as well as of broader socialism in general. It was widely used by anti-fascist resisting parties and underground socialist organizations in Europe leading up to and during World War II . Most states in the Eastern Bloc incorporated the red star into state symbols to signify their socialist nature.

Red flag [ edit ] Main article: Red flag (politics) The red flag is often seen in combination with other communist symbols and party names. The flag is used at various communist and socialist rallies like May Day . The flag, being a symbol of socialism itself, is also commonly associated with non-communist variants of socialism.

The red flag has had multiple meanings in history. It is associated with courage, sacrifice, blood and war in general, but it was first used as a flag of defiance.

[ 5 ] The red flag gained its modern association with communism in the 1871 French Revolution .

[ citation needed ] After the October Revolution , the Soviet government adopted the red flag with a superimposed hammer and sickle as its national flag. Since the October Revolution, various socialist states and movements have used the red flag.

Red-and-black flag [ edit ] See also: Bisected flag and Anarchist symbolism The red-and-black flag has been a symbol of general communist movements, though generally used by anarcho-communists . The flag was used as the symbol of the anarcho-syndicalists during the Spanish Civil War . The black represents anarchism and the red represents leftist and socialist ideals.

[ 6 ] Over time, the flag spilled into statist leftist movements, these movements include the Sandinistas and the 26th of July Movement , where the flags colors are not divided diagonally, but horizontally. As in the case of the Sandinistas, they adopted the flag due to the movement's anarchist roots.

[ 7 ] The Internationale [ edit ] Main article: The Internationale Orchestral arrangement Problems playing this file? See media help .

The Internationale is an anthem of the Communist movement .

[ 8 ] It is one of the most universally recognized songs in the world and has been translated into nearly every spoken language. Its original French refrain is C'est la lutte finale / Groupons-nous et demain / L'Internationale / Sera le genre humain ( English : This is the final struggle/Let's group together and tomorrow/The International/Will be the human race). It is often sung with a raised fist salute.

The song has been used by communists all over the world since it was composed in the 19th century and adopted as the official anthem of the Second International . It later became the anthem of Soviet Russia in 1918 and of the Soviet Union in 1922. It was superseded as the Soviet Union anthem in 1944 with the adoption of the State Anthem of the Soviet Union , which placed more emphasis on patriotism . The song was also sung in defiance to Communist governments, such as in the German Democratic Republic in 1989 prior to reunification as well as in the People's Republic of China during the Tiananmen Square protests of the same year.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Plough or Starry Plough [ edit ] Main articles: Starry Plough (flag) and Plough flag The original Starry Plough was designed by William H. Megahy, though the concept may have originated with George William Russell , for the Irish Citizen Army [ 11 ] and showed silver stars on a green background.

[ 12 ] The flag depicts an asterism (an identified part) of the constellation Ursa Major , called The Plough (or "Starry Plough") in Ireland and Britain , the Big Dipper in North America, and various other names worldwide. Two of the Plough's seven stars point to Polaris , the North Star.

James Connolly , co-founder of the Irish Citizen Army with Jack White and James Larkin , said the significance of the banner was that a free Ireland would control its own destiny from the plough to the stars.

[ 13 ] The sword as the plowshare is also a biblical reference in Isaiah 2 : 3-4 . In the bible verse, God pushes his followers to turn their weapons into tools, turning the means for war into the means for peace. The marriage of Catholic tradition, the biblical reference being integral to the flag's design, with socialist concepts, like the working class and the oppressor forcing them to take up their plowshares as arms, leaves the Starry Plough flag with complexity and nuanced implications, which culminate in a very wide range of interpretations.

[ 14 ] During the 1930s the design changed to a blue banner which was designed by members of the Republican Congress , and was adopted as the emblem of the Irish Labour movement, including the Labour Party . Labour adopted the rose as its official emblem in 1991 but continued to use the Starry Plough for ceremonial occasions, and in 2021 the party reverted to using the Starry Plough as their primary symbol (this time with white stars on a red background).

In China, the Plough flag ( Chinese : 犁头旗 ), a red flag with white or yellow plough, was widely used in the period of the First Revolutionary Civil War as the flag of the Chinese Peasants' Association , an organization led by the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] It is believed that Peng Pai ( Chinese : 彭湃 ) was the first user in 1923 at the peasants' association of Hailufeng .

[ 17 ] The Plough flag has many different versions and some are combined with the flag of Blue Sky, White Sun or Red Field; [ 18 ] other are different on the details of the plough.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] National emblems [ edit ] Main article: Socialist-style emblems Soviet leaders sought to distinguish their insignia from the emblems used by the Russian emperor and aristocracy as they replaced and omitted the traditional heraldic devices, substituting an emblem that did not conform to traditional European practices Many communist governments purposely diverged from the traditional forms of European heraldry in order to distance themselves from the monarchies that they usually replaced, with actual coats of arms being seen as symbols of the monarchs. Instead, they followed the pattern of the national emblems adopted in the late 1910s and early 1920s in Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union.

[ citation needed ] Other communist symbols [ edit ] While not necessarily communist in nature, the following graphic elements are often incorporated into the flags, seals and propaganda of communist countries and movements.

Socialist realism , an art style developed in the Soviet Union.

Crossed proletarian implements, including picks, hoes, scythes and in the case of the Workers' Party of Korea a brush to represent the intelligentsia. The ubiquitous hammer and sickle also belongs in this category.

Rising sun, exemplified on the state emblems of the Soviet Union , Turkmenistan , Croatia , Romania and PASOK .

Cogwheels, exemplified on the emblems of Angola and China .

Wreaths of wheat, cotton, corn or other crops, present on the emblems of almost every historical Communist-ruled state.

Cherries resemblance from the Le Temps des cerises exemplified in the emblem of the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia .

Rifle such as the AK-47 on the flag of Mozambique and Mosin–Nagant on Albanian lek .

Red banners with yellow lettering, exemplified on the emblems of Vietnam and Soviet Union .

Red or yellow stars, perhaps the most common communist symbol behind the hammer and sickle.

Open books, exemplified on the state emblems of Mozambique and Angola ; and also on the party emblems of Communist parties of Russia and Ukraine .

Factories or industrial equipment, exemplified on the emblems of North Korea , Bosnia and Herzegovina , emblem of CPUSA and Azerbaijan .

Natural landscapes, exemplified on the emblems of Armenia , Macedonia , Romania , and Karelo-Finland .

Torches, exemplified on the Emblem of Yugoslavia .

Sword and shield, exemplified on the Soviet Committee for State Security emblem and the Mother Motherland .

Cross and sickle, the symbols of the Christian communism and Christian socialism Portraits of various communist leaders, such as Vladimir Lenin , Joseph Stalin , Mao Zedong , Josip Broz Tito , etc.

Che Guevara 's image,  in particular as it appears in Guerrillero Heroico (“Heroic Guerilla”), is a common symbol of the Cuban Revolution , [ 21 ] : 19 Guevarism , and revolution in general.

[ 21 ] : 73 [ 22 ] The Arm and hammer , exemplified in the logo of the Socialist Labor Party of America Notable examples of communist states that use no overtly communist imagery on their flags, emblems or other graphic representations are Cuba and the former Polish People's Republic .

Gallery [ edit ] Examples of these symbols in use.

Hammer and sickle [ edit ] Flag of the Soviet Union Emblem of the Chinese Communist Party Flag of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army Flag of the Workers' Party of Korea with a hammer, sickle and paintbrush.

Flag of the Communist Party of Turkey (historical) Flag of the Turkish Revolutionary People's Liberation Party/Front Flag of the Communist Party of Bangladesh Flag of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic from 1954 to 1991 Flag of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1950 to 1992 Flag of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1951 to 1991 Flag of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic from 1952 to 1991 Flag of the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1992 Flag of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1951 to 1990 Flag of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic from 1956 to 1991 Flag of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1988 Flag of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1952 to 1990 Flag of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1990 Flag of the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic from 1952 to 1992 Flag of the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1991 Flag of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1952 to 1990 Flag of the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1992 Flag of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1990 Flag of the Karelo-Finnish Soviet Socialist Republic from 1953 to 1956 Emblem of the Soviet Army Logo of the Communist International Symbol of the Fourth International First State Emblem of the Soviet Union (1923–1936) State emblem of Lao People's Democratic Republic (1975–1991) Logo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Logo of the Communist Party of Vietnam Logo of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party Logo of the Nepal Communist Party Logo of the Italian Communist Party Logo of the Communist Party USA with a hammer, sickle and gear.

The cross and sickle, symbol of Christian communism and Christian socialism .

Logo of the Communist Party of India with a sickle and wheat.

The National emblem of East Germany , a compass, hammer and circle of rye.

The Emblem of the Hungarian People's Republic from 1946 to 1949, a hammer and ear of wheat.

The Emblem of Angola .

Logo of FRELIMO used from 1987 to 2004 with a hammer and hoe.

Coat of arms of the People's Republic of the Congo with a gold hammer, hoe, and star.

Flag of the Communist Party of Ireland, a red and yellow version of the Sunburst flag .

Flag of the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova, including a Book.

Red flag [ edit ] The flag of the Communist Party of Cuba .

Flag of the Maoist Communist Party of China .

Flag of the Polish United Workers' Party .

Red star [ edit ] Flag of People's Republic of Benin (1975–1990) Flag of the Workers' Party of North Korea Flag of the Workers' Party of South Korea Flag of North Korea Emblem of North Korea Flag of the EZLN and the Neozapatista ideology Flag of the Kurdistan Workers' Party Catalan socialist independentist red estelada Flag of the Popular Front Flag of the Youth International Party Flag of South Yemen (1967–1990) Coat of Arms of South Yemen (1970–1990) Emblem of SFR Yugoslavia (1945–1992) Flag of Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1992) Emblem of the Transcaucasian SFSR (1930–1936) Flag of the Transcaucasian SFSR Flag of the Hungarian Working People's Party .

Coat of arms of Hungarian People's Republic (1957–1990) Soviet Order of Victory Award (1945) Emblem of the Chinese People's Liberation Army Logo of the Red Army Faction ( West Germany ) Logo of the Revolutionary Movement Tupamaro (Venezuela) Logo of the United Socialist Party of Venezuela Logo of the French Communist Party Logo of the Red Party (Norway) Flag of the American Party of Labor Red and black flag [ edit ] Flag of the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (Spain) Flag of the Sandinistas (Nicaragua) Flag of the 26th of July Movement (Cuba) Flag of the National Liberation Army (Colombia) Flag of the Rebel Armed Forces (Guatemala) Flag of the Revolutionary Movement 13th November (Guatemala) Flag of the Partido por la Victoria del Pueblo (Uruguay) Flag of the Revolutionary Left Movement (Chile) Flag of the People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola The flag of Angola Flag of the Awami Tahreek (Pakistan) Flag of the Revolutionary Movement Tupamaro (Venezuela) Flag of the Intransigent Party (Argentina) The logo for Antifa Plough [ edit ] The Starry Plough flag used by the Irish Citizen Army A modern variant of the Starry Plough used by the Irish National Liberation Army Flag of the Irish Republican Socialist Party and the Irish People's Liberation Organisation 2021 logo of the Labour Party (Ireland) Flag of the Chinese Peasants' Association Flag of the Guangdong Peasants' Association during the period of the First United Front Star, hammer and plough cockade of the Red Army (1918, soon replaced with a hammer and sickle cockade).

Arabic-Communist Symbols [ edit ] Tatarstani USSR Emblem by an unknown artist showcasing the friendship between two farmers Other symbols [ edit ] Flag of the Communist Party of Turkey (modern) with a gear and hammer.

The emblem of the Japanese Communist Party . It represents the two aspects of industry and agriculture, with the ear of rice and the cog in front of four red flags.

The flag of Vietnam , an example of a red flag with a gold star.

Flag of the People's Republic of China .

Logo of the Swiss Party of Labour , a Phrygian cap with a Swiss cross on it.

Emblem of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan , with a gold ear of grain and a gear on a red background.

Emblem of the Socialist Labor Party of America , an arm and hammer.

Emblem of the American Labor Party , a cogwheel with two hands shaking.

Young Pioneers pin featuring a stylized portrait of Vladimir Lenin .

Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (aka the "Little Red Book"), associated with Maoism.

Flag featuring the "Three Heads" of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , and Vladimir Lenin .

The "Four Heads" of Marxism: Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Stalin.

The "Five Heads" of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin, and Mao.

Che Guevara's image , symbol of Guevarism .

A flag with the faces of Camilo Cienfuegos , Fidel Castro , and Che Guevara .

A revolutionary worker in socialist realist style.

Stylized raised fist , used both as a symbol in itself and as a salute.

The portraits of Karl Marx , Emiliano Zapata , and Subcomandante Marcos , all symbols used in the Neozapatismo ideology.

See also [ edit ] Communism portal Heraldry portal Anarchist symbolism Bans on communist symbols Communist chic Fascist symbolism Fist and rose Hammer and sickle List of socialist songs Nazi symbolism Raised fist Red flag (politics) Red star Rose symbolism Socialist-style emblems The Internationale National symbols Emblem of Yugoslavia Emblems of the Soviet Republics Flag of East Germany Flags of the Soviet Republics National Emblem of the People's Republic of China National emblem of East Germany Workers of the world, unite!

References [ edit ] ^ "Het spook van het communisme waart nog steeds door Europa" (in Dutch). 22 December 2009. Archived from the original on 5 November 2020 . Retrieved July 14, 2012 .

^ a b "Flag of Union of Soviet Socialist Republics | Symbol, Colors & Meanings | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

^ "The Soviet flag EXPLAINED" . 20 June 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

^ "The Soviet flag EXPLAINED" . 21 June 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

^ 1602 Dekker Satirom.

Wks.

1873 I. 233 What, dost summon a parlie, my little Drumsticke? tis too late: thou seest my red flag is hung out.

1666 Lond. Gaz.

No. 91/4 That the Red Flag was out, both Fleets in sight of each other, expecting every hour fit weather to Engage.

Flags of the World , "Flag of Defiance" .

^ "Anarchist FAQ Appendix" Archived 2015-09-01 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "El socialismo libertario de" (in Spanish). Centro Para la Promoción, Investigación Rural y Social. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 30 March 2009 .

^ The Guardian, Australia (25 October 2009).

"The International" . pp. first paragraph. Archived from the original on 27 October 2009 . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Telling the Story with Music: The Internationale AT TIANANMEN SQUARE" .

Association for Asian Studies . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

^ Tuohy, William (1989-10-09).

"E. German Police Beat Protesters : Brutality in Berlin Comes on 2nd Day of Demonstrations" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

^ "Irish Literary Portraits" ed. W. R. Rodgers p.195 ^ "History of Starry Plough Flag" . Angelfire.com. 1989-11-06 . Retrieved 2010-07-23 .

^ "The Plough and the Stars Irish Theatre Players Perth" .

www.dfa.ie .

Department of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 20 February 2017 .

^ "The Starry Plough Flag" . Irish Studies Group at SUNY Geneseo.

^ "002这是好的很 毛泽东发表《湖南农民运动考察报告》发表四十四周年" .

^ "土地革命时期农民秋收暴动旗帜" Archived 2017-09-26 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "彭湃与陆丰农民运动" Archived 2021-04-28 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "广明龙农会会旗" Archived 2016-10-25 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "#消夏计划#石塘双峰寨——中国的意大利费拉拉式水" Archived 2018-10-20 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "【网络媒体走转改】湖北红安这条古街记录过革命时期的壮怀激烈，更见证了新中国的巨大变迁" .

^ a b “Che Guevara: Revolutionary & Icon”, by Trisha Ziff, Abrams Image, 2006 ^ “Communists, Capitalists still buy into Iconic Che Photo, Author says” by Brian Byrnes, CNN , May 5, 2009 Bibliography [ edit ] Arvidsson, Stefan (2017).

Style and mythology of socialism: socialist idealism, 1871-1914 . Routledge.

Barisone, Silvia, Czech, Hans-Jörg & Doll, Nikola (2007).

Kunst und Propaganda im Streit der Nationen 1930 - 1945: eine Ausstellung des Deutschen Historischen Museums Berlin in Zusammenarbeit mit The Wolfsonian-Florida International University . Dresden: Sandstein.

Groys, Boris (2011 [1992]).

The total art of Stalinism: avant-garde, aesthetic dictatorship, and beyond . Verso Books.

King, David (2009).

Red star over Russia: a visual history of the Soviet Union from 1917 to the death of Stalin : posters, photographs and graphics from the David King collection . London: Tate.

External links [ edit ] "Blog: Heart in a Hearless World" v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐462xt
Cached time: 20250818003232
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.600 seconds
Real time usage: 0.755 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2901/1000000
Revision size: 33909/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113025/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2036/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 176579/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.285/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7910644/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  585.353      1 -total
 22.42%  131.209      1 Template:Reflist
 18.54%  108.547      2 Template:Communism
 18.26%  106.890     11 Template:Cite_web
 14.27%   83.504      1 Template:Communism_sidebar
 13.56%   79.376      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.44%   55.270      1 Template:Short_description
  7.91%   46.288      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.37%   43.135      1 Template:Ambox
  5.52%   32.329      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44379747:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818003232 and revision id 1306486870. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communist_symbolism&oldid=1306486870 " Categories : Red symbols Symbols of communism Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with hAudio microformats Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communist symbolism 27 languages Add topic

