Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 René Descartes 3 Gottfried Leibniz Toggle Gottfried Leibniz subsection 3.1 Ars inveniendi 3.2 Ars combinatoria 3.3 Ars judicandi 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Mathesis universalis 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano Latina 日本語 Occitan Português Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy that mathematics can be used to define all aspects of the universe Frontispiece of Operum Mathematicorum Pars Prima (1657) by John Wallis , the first volume of Opera Mathematica including a chapter entitled Mathesis Universalis .

Mathesis universalis (from Greek : μάθησις , mathesis "science or learning", and Latin : universalis "universal") is a hypothetical universal science modelled on mathematics envisaged by Descartes and Leibniz , among a number of other 16th- and 17th-century philosophers and mathematicians. For Leibniz, it would be supported by a calculus ratiocinator .

John Wallis invokes the name as title in his Opera Mathematica , a textbook on arithmetic , algebra , and Cartesian geometry .

History [ edit ] Frontispiece of Universae mathesis idea (1602) by Adriaan van Roomen Descartes' most explicit description of mathesis universalis occurs in Rule Four of the Rules for the Direction of the Mind , written before 1628.

[ 1 ] Leibniz attempted to work out the possible connections between mathematical logic , algebra , infinitesimal calculus , combinatorics , and universal characteristics in an incomplete treatise titled " Mathesis Universalis " in 1695.

Predicate logic could be seen as a modern system with some of these universal qualities, at least as far as mathematics and computer science are concerned. More generally, mathesis universalis , along with perhaps François Viète 's algebra , represents one of the earliest attempts to construct a formal system .

One of the perhaps most prominent critics of the idea of mathesis universalis was Ludwig Wittgenstein and his philosophy of mathematics .

[ 2 ] As Anthropologist Emily Martin notes: [ 3 ] Tackling mathematics, the realm of symbolic life perhaps most difficult to regard as contingent on social norms, Wittgenstein commented that people found the idea that numbers rested on conventional social understandings "unbearable".

René Descartes [ edit ] In Descartes' corpus the term mathesis universalis appears only in the Rules for the Direction of the Mind .

[ 1 ] In the discussion of Rule Four , Descartes' provides his clearest description of mathesis universalis : Rule Four We need a method if we are to investigate the truth of things.

[...] I began my investigation by inquiring what exactly is generally meant by the term 'mathematics' and why it is that, in addition to arithmetic and geometry, sciences such as astronomy, music, optics, mechanics, among others, are called branches of mathematics. [...] This made me realize that there must be a general science which explains all the points that can be raised concerning order and measure irrespective of the subject-matter, and that this science should be termed mathesis universalis — a venerable term with a well-established meaning — for it covers everything that entitles these other sciences to be called branches of mathematics. [...] — René Descartes , Rules for the Direction of the Mind ; translated by John Cottingham [ 4 ] Gottfried Leibniz [ edit ] In his account of mathesis universalis , Leibniz proposed a dual method of universal synthesis and analysis for the ascertaining truth , described in De Synthesi et Analysi universale seu Arte inveniendi et judicandi (1890).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Ars inveniendi [ edit ] Ars inveniendi ( Latin for "art of invention") is the constituent part of mathesis universalis corresponding to the method of synthesis.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Ars combinatoria [ edit ] Leibniz also identified synthesis with the ars combinatoria , viewing it in terms of the recombination of symbols or human thoughts.

[ 5 ] Ars judicandi [ edit ] Ars judicandi ( Latin for "art of judgement") is the constituent part of mathesis universalis corresponding to the method of analysis.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Characteristica universalis De Arte Combinatoria An Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language Lingua generalis References [ edit ] ^ a b Sasaki (2003) , p. 359.

^ Rhees (1970) .

^ Martin (2013) .

^ Descartes (1985) , pp. 19–20.

^ a b c d Sasaki (2003) .

^ a b Marciszewski (1984) .

Bibliography [ edit ] Foucault, Michel (2010).

The Order of Things: an archaeology of the human sciences . London: Routledge.

Marciszewski, Witold (1984). "The principle of comprehension as a present-day contribution to mathesis universalis".

Philosophia Naturalis (21): 525– 526.

Martin, Emily (2013). "The Potentiality of Ethnography and the Limits of Affect Theory".

Current Anthropology .

54 (S7): 156.

doi : 10.1086/670388 .

S2CID 143944116 .

Rhees, Rush (1970).

Discussions of Wittgenstein . New York: Schocken.

Sasaki, Chikara (2003). " 'Mathesis Universalis' in the Seventeenth Century".

Descartes's Mathematical Thought . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Vol. 237. pp.

359– 418.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-1225-5_10 .

ISBN 978-90-481-6487-5 .

Descartes, René (20 May 1985). "Rules for the Direction of the Mind".

The Philosophical Writings of Descartes . Translated by Cottingham, John . Cambridge University Press. pp.

7– 78.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511805042.004 .

External links [ edit ] Raul Corazzon's Ontology web page: Mathesis Universalis with a bibliography v t e Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliography Outline Mathematics and philosophy Alternating series test Best of all possible worlds Calculus controversy Calculus ratiocinator Characteristica universalis Compossibility Difference Dynamism Identity of indiscernibles Individuation Law of continuity Leibniz wheel Leibniz's gap Leibniz's notation Lingua generalis Mathesis universalis Pre-established harmony Plenitude Sufficient reason Salva veritate Theodicy Transcendental law of homogeneity Rationalism Universal science Vis viva Works De Arte Combinatoria (1666) Discourse on Metaphysics (1686) New Essays on Human Understanding (1704) Théodicée (1710) Monadology (1714) Leibniz–Clarke correspondence (1715–1716) Category v t e History of science Background Theories and sociology Historiography Pseudoscience History and philosophy of science By era Ancient world Classical Antiquity Medieval European Renaissance Scientific Revolution Age of Enlightenment Romanticism 19th century in science 20th century in science By culture African Argentine Brazilian Byzantine Chinese French Indian Japanese Korean Medieval Islamic Mexican Russian Spanish Natural sciences Astronomy Biology Chemistry Earth science Physics Mathematics Algebra Calculus Combinatorics Geometry Logic Probability Statistics Trigonometry Social sciences Anthropology Archaeology Economics Education History Political science Psychology Sociology Technology Agricultural science Computer science Materials science Engineering Medicine Human medicine Veterinary medicine Anatomy Neuroscience Neurology and neurosurgery Nutrition Pathology Pharmacy Timelines Portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathesis_universalis&oldid=1288784601 " Categories : Mathematical logic Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz René Descartes Philosophy of science Latin words and phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 19:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mathesis universalis 10 languages Add topic

