Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient Toggle Ancient subsection 1.1 Possible geoglyphs 2 Contemporary 3 Geoglyphs in the world 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Geoglyph 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Motif produced on the ground; observable only from a height For the racehorse, see Geoglyph (horse) .

Geoglyphs on deforested land in the Amazon rainforest A geoglyph is a large design or motif – generally longer than 4 metres (13 ft) – produced on the ground by durable elements of the landscape, such as stones, stone fragments, gravel, or earth.  A positive geoglyph is formed by the arrangement and alignment of materials on the ground in a manner akin to petroforms , while a negative geoglyph is formed by removing part of the natural ground surface to create differently coloured or textured ground in a manner akin to petroglyphs .

Geoglyphs are generally a type of land art , and sometimes rock art .  A hill figure is created on a slope, so that it can be seen from a distance.

Ancient [ edit ] The prehistoric English hill figure of the Uffington White Horse Arguably the most famous geoglyphs are the Nazca lines in Peru . The cultural significance of these geoglyphs for their creators remains unclear, despite many hypotheses.

[ 1 ] The Nazca Lines in Peru. This photograph shows a depiction of a hummingbird Since the 1970s, numerous geoglyphs have been discovered on deforested land in the Amazon rainforest , Brazil, leading to claims about Pre-Columbian civilizations.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Ondemar Dias is accredited with first discovering the geoglyphs in 1977 and Alceu Ranzi with furthering their discovery after flying over Acre .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Other areas with geoglyphs include Megaliths in the Urals , South Australia ( Marree Man , which is not ancient, but rather a modern work of art, with mysterious origins), Western Australia and parts of the Great Basin Desert in the southwestern United States.

Hill figures , turf mazes and the stone-lined labyrinths of Scandinavia , Iceland , Lappland and the former Soviet Union are types of geoglyphs.

The south of England has a number of equine and human figures cut into chalk hillsides. Examples include the Uffington White Horse , Cerne Abbas Giant , Westbury White Horse , and the Long Man of Wilmington .  Some are ancient, others from the last few centuries.

Possible geoglyphs [ edit ] The " Works of the Old Men " in Arabia , "stone-built structures that are far more numerous than (the) Nazca Lines, far more extensive in the area that they cover, and far older," [ 7 ] have been described as geoglyphs by Amelia Sparavigna, a physics professor at Politecnico di Torino in Italy.

[ 8 ] The use of this term to describe these features is probably inaccurate, as recent research has shown that most were not constructed primarily as art, but were rather built to serve a range of purposes including burial sites and funerary customs, aiding in the trapping of migratory animals, and as cleared areas for camps, houses and animal enclosures.

[ 9 ] Contemporary [ edit ] Bunjil geoglyph at the You Yangs , Lara, Australia , by Andrew Rogers. The creature has a wingspan of 100 metres and 1,500 tonnes of rock were used to construct it.

Not all geoglyphs are ancient. The Land Art movement created many new geoglyphs as well as other structures; perhaps the most famous example is Spiral Jetty by Robert Smithson . Many towns and cities in the Western United States use hillside letters (also known as "mountain monograms") on the hills above their locations. Contemporary Australian sculptor Andrew Rogers has created geoglyphs around the world called "The Rhythms of Life".

You Yangs Regional Park is the home of a geoglyph constructed by Rogers in recognition of the indigenous people of the area. It depicts Bunjil , a mythical creature in the culture of the local Wautharong Aboriginal people .

[ 10 ] Portrait of Genghis Khan painted onto cleared areas of Mt. Bogd Khan in Mongolia in 2006.

Geoglyphic texts and images are common in Central and Inner Asia but there has been little systematic study of their origins and spread.

More recent figures in the south of England created since the early 1800s have kept up the region's ancient tradition of chalk hillside figures. Examples of these are the Litlington White Horse , Devizes White Horse , Fovant Badges , Cherhill White Horse , and the Marlborough White Horse .

The Litlington White Horse in the village of Litlington , South East England In 2008–2009 Alfie Dennen created Britglyph , a locative art -focused geoglyph created by having participants across the United Kingdom leave rocks at highly specific locations and uploading media created at each location. When taken together and viewed on the main project website an image of a watch and chain inspired by John Harrison 's marine chronometer H5 was created.

[ 11 ] People have used the Strava mobile app and other GPS systems to create GPS drawings , virtual geoglyphs.

Geoglyphs in the world [ edit ] Country Geoglyph Israel Geoglyphs of Har Karkom [ 12 ] England Uffington White Horse Westbury White Horse Cerne Abbas Giant Long Man of Wilmington Pewsey White Horse Litlington White Horse United States Gila River Valley Great Serpent Mound Blythe Intaglios Peru Nazca Lines Paracas Candelabra Brazil Acre geoglyphs Chile Atacama Giant Bolivia Sajama Lines Australia Marree Man Readymix logo geoglyph Bunjil Geoglyph India Great Indian Desert Lines , (also known as the Boha geoglyphs ), Rajasthan North Macedonia Kanda Geoglyph Russia Russian geoglyph , in the Ural Mountains See also [ edit ] Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Intaglio (burial mound) Battalion Park Crop circle References [ edit ] ^ New Technologies for Archaeology: Multidisciplinary Investigations in Palpa and Nasca, Peru, Natural science in archaeology, page 50, Markus Reindel, Günther A. Wagner, Springer Verlag, 2009.

ISBN 978-3-540-87437-9 ^ Simon Romero (January 14, 2012).

"Once Hidden by Forest, Carvings in Land Attest to Amazon's Lost World" .

The New York Times .

^ Amazon Jungle geoglyphs in Portuguese ^ Martti Pärssinen, Denise Schaan and Alceu Ranzi (2009). "Pre-Columbian geometric earthworks in the upper Purús: a complex society in western Amazonia".

Antiquity .

83 (322): 1084– 1095.

doi : 10.1017/s0003598x00099373 .

S2CID 55741813 .

^ Junior, Gonçalo (October 2008).

"Amazonia lost and found" .

Pesquisa (Ed.220) . FAPESP. Archived from the original on 2014-08-12.

^ "Unnatural Histories – Amazon" . BBC Four.

^ Professor David Kennedy, quoted by Owen Jarus, LiveScience Contributor.

"Visible Only From Above, Mystifying 'Nazca Lines' Discovered in Mideast" [ dead link ] , NBC News (via LiveScience), 9/15/2011 ^ Amelia Sparavigna, quoted by Owen Jarus, LiveScience Contributor.

"Visible Only From Above, Mystifying 'Nazca Lines' Discovered in Mideast" [ dead link ] , NBC News (via LiveScience), 9/15/2011 ^ Kennedy, David (2011). "The "Works of the Old Men" in Arabia: remote sensing in interior Arabia".

Journal of Archaeological Science .

38 (12): 3185– 3203.

Bibcode : 2011JArSc..38.3185K .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2011.05.027 .

^ "Bunjil | Monument Australia" .

www.monumentaustralia.org.au . Retrieved 2025-02-26 .

^ Dennen, Alfie (2009-03-11).

"Britglyph" .

Moblog . Archived from the original on 2008-12-18 . Retrieved 2009-03-17 .

^ "The geoglyphs of Har Karkom (Negev, Israel): classification and interpretation" (PDF) . ccsp.it . Retrieved 30 July 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Tiffany May (19 Oct 2020).

"2,000-Year-Old Cat Etching Found at Nazca Lines Site in Peru" .

The New York Times .

Kennedy, David (2011). "The "Works of the Old Men" in Arabia: remote sensing in interior Arabia".

Journal of Archaeological Science .

38 (12): 3185– 3203.

Bibcode : 2011JArSc..38.3185K .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2011.05.027 .

External links [ edit ] Look up geoglyph in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Blythe Intaglios, A Photo Gallery v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing ( Paleolithic diet ) Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spear-thrower baton harpoon Schöningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Jōmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Prehistoric music Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Alligator drum Paleolithic flute Divje Babe flute Gudi Prehistoric religion Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Spiritual drug use Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism v t e Hill figures Humanoid Cerne Abbas Giant Long Man of Wilmington Firle Corn Atacama Giant Marree Man Horses Alton Barnes White Horse Broad Town White Horse Cherhill White Horse Devizes White Horse Folkestone White Horse Hackpen White Horse Kilburn White Horse Litlington White Horse Marlborough White Horse Osmington White Horse Pewsey White Horse Red Horse of Tysoe Uffington White Horse Westbury White Horse Other Battalion Park Bulford Kiwi Effigy Mounds National Monument Fovant Badges Lenham Cross Paracas Candelabra Shoreham Memorial Cross South San Francisco hillside sign Watlington White Mark Whiteleaf Cross Related art Geoglyph Rock art Land art White Horse Flag Hillside letters List The "A" The Big "C" Block U The "P" Platte Mound M Y Mountain Hill figures in Wiltshire Elvis Rock v t e Writing and writing material Enduring Plant-based Amate Trema micrantha Ficus aurea Bamboo and wooden slips Birch bark ( Betula ) Folding-book manuscript Streblus asper Broussonetia papyrifera Ola leaf ( Corypha umbraculifera ) Palm leaf ( Borassus ) Paper Papyrus ( Cyperus papyrus ) Other materials Animal skin Parchment Vellum Ink Metals Intaglio Stamping Oracle bone Photographic film Stone Geoglyph Petroglyph Tablets Clay tablet Slate Wax tablet Textile printing Silk text Impermanent Electronic paper Screen Skywriting Carrier objects Book Codex Notebook Electronic media Hu / Shaku (baton) Inscription Bas-relief Manuscript Palimpsest Microform Scroll Sign Related topics Writing systems History of writing List of writing systems Written language Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geoglyph&oldid=1300121627 " Categories : Geoglyphs Archaeological features Land art Methods in archaeology Prehistoric inscriptions Rock art Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 11:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geoglyph 42 languages Add topic

