Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Varsity teams Toggle Varsity teams subsection 1.1 Men's basketball 2 2016–17 Northeast-10 Conference champions Toggle 2016–17 Northeast-10 Conference champions subsection 2.1 Volleyball 2.2 Baseball 3 National championships Toggle National championships subsection 3.1 Team 4 Campus Recreation 5 Beckerman Recreation Center 6 Club sports 7 RECSports (Intramural Sports) 8 Fitness and wellness 9 Other programs 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents New Haven Chargers 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intercollegiate sports teams of the University of New Haven Athletic teams representing University of New Haven New Haven Chargers University University of New Haven Conference Northeast Conference NCAA Division I Athletic director Devin Crosby Location West Haven , Connecticut Varsity teams 20 Football stadium Ralph F. DellaCamera Stadium Basketball arena The Jeffrey P. Hazell Center Baseball stadium Frank Vieira Field Softball stadium UNH Softball Field Soccer stadium Kathy Zolad Stadium Lacrosse stadium Kathy Zolad Stadium Volleyball arena The Jeffery P. Hazel Center Mascot Charlie the Charger Nickname Chargers Colours Navy and Gold Website newhavenchargers .com Team NCAA championships 1 The New Haven Chargers are the athletic teams that represent the University of New Haven , located in West Haven, Connecticut , in NCAA Division I intercollegiate sports. The Chargers' 20 varsity athletics teams, eight men's and 12 women's, compete as members of the Northeast Conference , with the exception of women's rugby which competes under USA Rugby.

[ 1 ] New Haven was previously a member of the Northeast-10 Conference from 2008 until their reclassification from NCAA Division II to I on July 1, 2025.

[ 2 ] In 2016–17, the women's volleyball and baseball team won Northeast-10 Conference championships. Overall twelve of sixteen teams qualified for postseason play, while six teams (men's & women's cross country, volleyball, baseball, women's lacrosse and softball) advanced to the NCAA Championships. Six Chargers were named All-Americans following their respective seasons; Zach Voytek (football), Tyler Condit (football), Kendall Cietek (women's lacrosse), Nicole Belanger (women's lacrosse), Hannah Johnson (women's lacrosse) and Robert Petrillo (baseball). Off the fields, courts and tracks, the Chargers 300-plus student-athletes combined for a 3.01 grade point average in the Spring of 2017, the 18th straight season with a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher. Additionally, 343 Chargers received NE10 Commissioner's Honor Roll accolades, while 163 were named to the New Haven Dean's List.

[ 3 ] Varsity teams [ edit ] Men's basketball [ edit ] Men's basketball was the first intercollegiate athletic program at the University of New Haven . They began play in the 1960–61 season, under director of athletics and head basketball coach Don Ormrod.

Ted Hotaling has been the head men's basketball coach at the University of New Haven since 2010.

[ 4 ] Under his guidance, the team has made three NCAA II tournament appearances with an overall record of 155-128. Hotaling is the second winningest coach in University of New Haven men's basketball history.

In 2014–15, New Haven Charger, Eric Anderson became the first Northeast-10 player to be named Defensive Player of the Year for three seasons in a row with 13.1 rebounds per game and 9.85 defensive rebounds per game.

[ 5 ] He was also 8th in the nation in double doubles and 5th in total rebounds. Anderson went on to play professionally in Germany, Luxembourg, Japan, Argentina, Israel, and Portugal.

2016–17 Northeast-10 Conference champions [ edit ] Volleyball [ edit ] The Chargers secured their fifth NE10 Conference Championship with a four-set win over Adelphi on November 19. 2016. With the victory, New Haven secured its 31st berth in the NCAA Division II Championship tournament.

In the NE10 final, New Haven was led by NE10 Championship Most Outstanding Player who finished with a triple double, her third in as many games in the NE10 Championship. Overall, she finished with 10 kills, 20 assists and 15 digs in the title match. Joining her on the All-Tournament team was senior outside hitter Meghan Kennelly who finished the title match with a team-high 15 kills. Junior Caroline Martins and freshman Mallory Nowicki rounded out the leading hitters for New Haven, finishing with 14 and 11 kills, respectively.

[ 6 ] Baseball [ edit ] The New Haven baseball team swept a doubleheader from Franklin Pierce to secure its second Northeast-10 Conference Championship. Junior pitcher David Palmer was named the NE10 Championship Most Outstanding Player. In addition to Palmer, senior Nick Perelli and freshman Devon DiMascio were each named to the All-Championship Team. With the victories, New Haven earned its 29th berth to the NCAA Division II East Regional, hosted by Southern New Hampshire.

[ 7 ] National championships [ edit ] Team [ edit ] Association Division Sport Year Opponent/Runner-up Score NCAA (1) Division II (1) Women's Basketball (1) 1987 Cal Poly Pomona 77–75 Campus Recreation [ edit ] Campus Recreation at the University of New Haven offers various programs including; group exercise classes, personal training, massage therapy, intramural sports, club sports, hiking trips, CPR/AED/FA classes, special events, and a comprehensive student employment program.

[ 8 ] On campus, Campus Recreation is commonly referred to as ChargerREC.

Beckerman Recreation Center [ edit ] The home of most campus recreation programs is the Beckerman Recreation Center, named after David A. Beckerman, founder of Starter Clothing Line.

[ 9 ] The $15.5 million Beckerman Center at the University of New Haven is a comprehensive 56,500 square-foot Student Recreation Center consisting of: Two Multi-Purpose Group Fitness Studios Weight Room and Fitness Center (6,000 square-feet) Two Racquetball Courts Two Hardwood Activity Courts (with capabilities for basketball, volleyball & badminton) Multi-Activity Court (with capabilities for basketball, volleyball indoor soccer, floor/roller hockey and other various activities) Jogging Track (1/10 of a mile) NRgize Juice Bar Men's, Women's and Individual Use Locker Rooms Lounge Area Lobby Area Office Suite Club sports [ edit ] There are 11 recognized Club Sports at the University of New Haven. Club Sports are recreation or athletics student-led organizations who compete with other universities and colleges. Each club is a University of New Haven recognized student organization and member of a regional or national governing association. Participation and individual dues vary by club.

Ice Hockey (Men's) Lacrosse (Men's) Baseball Rugby (Women's and Men's) Ultimate Frisbee (CoRec) Field Hockey (CoRec) Tennis (CoRec) Soccer (Men's) Wrestling (CoRec) Volleyball (Women's and Men's) RECSports (Intramural Sports) [ edit ] RECSports is an extensive intramural sport program, which provides participants the opportunity to compete and socialize through organized sports leagues, one-day tournament, special events and online programs. Over 50 team and individual sport programs are offered throughout the academic year. Access to all RECSports programs is free and open to all University of New Haven students.

Fitness and wellness [ edit ] GroupX classes are drop-in fitness classes designed for participants of all levels. A diverse range of classes is highlighted by Spinning, Meditation, Yoga, Cardio/Strength, Core, Zumba, and High Intensity based formats. Over 25 classes are offered each week during the academic year. Access to all GroupX classes is free and open to all University of New Haven students.

Massage Therapy offers participants an opportunity for relaxation and stress relief. Massage therapists will work with participants to develop and individualized session focusing in their stress reduction needs.

Personal Training offers participants and opportunity for 1-on-1 or small group fitness training. Personal trainers will work with participants to develop an individualized program to meet their personal fitness goals.

Other programs [ edit ] TeamREC is an experiential based employment program, where student employees are challenged to manage the programs of ChargerREC and the operations of the Beckerman Recreation Center. ChargerREC is the largest employer on campus, employing over 100 students each year.

OutdoorREC are hiking trips which offer participants the opportunity to explore scenic trails throughout the state of Connecticut and surrounding area.

References [ edit ] ^ "New Haven Chargers" .

^ "Charging Ahead: University of New Haven accepts Northeast Conference membership invite" .

newhavenchargers.com . New Haven Chargers. May 6, 2025 . Retrieved May 6, 2025 .

^ "Story Archives" .

^ Cloutier, Bill (2010-04-01).

"Hotaling named men's basketball coach at New Haven" .

New Haven Register . Retrieved 2020-12-17 .

^ "Ted Hotaling - Men's Basketball Coach" .

University of New Haven Athletics . Retrieved 2020-12-17 .

^ "University of New Haven Athletics" .

^ "University of New Haven Athletics" .

^ "ChargerRec" .

^ "David A. Beckerman Recreation Center" .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of New Haven Located in : West Haven, Connecticut Athletics Teams Football Venues Ralph F. DellaCamera Stadium Founded : 1920 Students : 6,984 Endowment : US$130 million v t e Northeast Conference Full members Central Connecticut Blue Devils Chicago State Cougars Fairleigh Dickinson Knights Le Moyne College Dolphins LIU Sharks Mercyhurst Lakers New Haven Chargers Saint Francis Red Flash (leaving in 2026) Stonehill Skyhawks Wagner Seahawks Associate members Binghamton Bearcats 5 12 Cleveland State Vikings 7 Coppin State Eagles 1 Daemen Wildcats 13 Delaware State Hornets 1 6 8 9 Detroit Mercy Titans 7 D'Youville Saints 13 Maryland Eastern Shore Hawks 1 5 6 13 Norfolk State Spartans 1 Duquesne Dukes 2 4 Fairfield Stags 3 Howard Bison 5 6 8 9 10 11 Manhattan Jaspers 13 Merrimack Warriors 3 Monmouth Hawks 2 Niagara Purple Eagles 2 North Carolina Central Eagles 5 6 Rider Broncs 3 Robert Morris Colonials 4 7 Sacred Heart Pioneers 3 VMI Keydets 7 1 baseball 2 bowling 3 field hockey 4 football 5 men's golf 6 women's golf 7 men's lacrosse 8 women's lacrosse 9 men's soccer 10 women's soccer 11 men's / women's swimming 12 men's / women's tennis 13 men's volleyball v t e Northeast Conference baseball Teams Central Connecticut Blue Devils Coppin State Eagles Delaware State Hornets Fairleigh Dickinson Knights Le Moyne Dolphins LIU Sharks Maryland Eastern Shore Hawks Mercyhurst Lakers New Haven Chargers Norfolk State Spartans Stonehill Skyhawks Wagner Seahawks Championships & awards Conference tournament v t e Sports teams based in Connecticut Baseball EL Hartford Yard Goats FCBL New Britain Bees Norwich Sea Unicorns NECBL Bristol Blues Danbury Westerners Mystic Schooners Basketball WNBA Connecticut Sun Football WFA Connecticut Hawks Northern Connecticut Nightmare NEFL Connecticut Reapers Gaelic games USGAA: Northeast Division Hartford Ice hockey AHL Bridgeport Islanders Hartford Wolf Pack FPHL Danbury Hat Tricks NAHL Danbury Jr. Hat Tricks Soccer USLC Hartford Athletic MLSNP Connecticut United FC (2026) USL2 AC Connecticut NPSL Hartford City FC USASA Newtown Pride FC Roller derby WFTDA Connecticut Roller Derby Hartford Area Roller Derby MRDA Connecticut Death Quads Rugby union NERFU Fairfield Yankees RFC Hartford Wanderers RFC New Haven Old Black RFC New London County RFC Softball ASA Connecticut Brakettes College athletics NCAA Division I Bridgeport Purple Knights ( women's gymnastics ) Central Connecticut Blue Devils Fairfield Stags New Haven Chargers Post Eagles ( women's bowling and women's ice hockey ) Quinnipiac Bobcats Sacred Heart Pioneers Southern Connecticut Owls ( women's gymnastics ) UConn Huskies Yale Bulldogs NCAA Division II Bridgeport Purple Knights Post Eagles Southern Connecticut Owls NCAA Division III Albertus Magnus Falcons Coast Guard Bears Connecticut College Camels Eastern Connecticut Warriors Hartford Hawks Mitchell Mariners Saint Joseph Blue Jays Trinity Bantams Wesleyan Cardinals Western Connecticut Colonials NJCAA Division III Gateway Lions Lincoln Wildcats UConn-Avery Point Pointers v t e Sport teams based in the New York metropolitan area Australian rules football USAFL New York Magpies Baseball MLB New York Mets New York Yankees EL Somerset Patriots SAL Brooklyn Cyclones Hudson Valley Renegades ALPB Long Island Ducks Staten Island FerryHawks FL New Jersey Jackals New York Boulders Sussex County Miners Basketball NBA Brooklyn Nets New York Knicks WNBA New York Liberty G League Long Island Nets Westchester Knicks ABA Jersey Express Entertainment Teams Harlem Wizards Esports CDL New York Subliners OWL New York Excelsior Football NFL New York Giants New York Jets WFA New York Sharks Hockey NHL New Jersey Devils New York Islanders New York Rangers AHL Bridgeport Islanders PWHL New York Sirens FPHL Danbury Hat Tricks Rugby league USARL White Plains Wombats NARL New York R.L.F.C.

Rugby union MLR Rugby New York USAR New York Athletic Club RFC Old Blue Soccer MLS New York City FC New York Red Bulls NWSL Gotham FC USLS Brooklyn FC USLC Brooklyn FC USL1 New York Cosmos (2026) Westchester SC MLSNP New York City FC II New York Red Bulls II USL2 Cedar Stars Rush F.A. Euro Long Island Rough Riders Manhattan SC Westchester Flames NPSL FC Monmouth FC Motown New York Athletic Club S.C.

USLW Long Island Rough Riders Manhattan SC Westchester Flames Roller derby WFTDA Gotham Roller Derby Jersey Shore Roller Girls Long Island Roller Rebels Suburbia Roller Derby MRDA New York Shock Exchange Team tennis WTT New York Empire College athletics NCAA Division I Army Columbia Fairfield Fairleigh Dickinson Fordham Hofstra Iona LIU Manhattan NJIT Princeton Quinnipiac Rider Rutgers Sacred Heart St. John's Saint Peter's Seton Hall Stony Brook Wagner Yale NCAA Division II Adelphi Bridgeport East Stroudsburg New Haven ( Division I in July 2025 ) NYIT Southern Connecticut NCAA Division III Merchant Marine NYU TCNJ Ultimate UFA New York Empire Gaelic games New York GAA : Gaelic football Hurling Main article: Sports in the New York metropolitan area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Haven_Chargers&oldid=1300519895 " Category : New Haven Chargers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New Haven Chargers 1 language Add topic

