Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography and hydrography 2 Ecology 3 History and political significance 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Maine 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°N 68°W ﻿ / ﻿ 43°N 68°W ﻿ / 43; -68 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large gulf of the Atlantic Ocean on the east coast of North America Gulf of Maine French : Golfe du Maine Gulf of Maine Gulf of Maine Major features of the Gulf of Maine Location Northeast coast of the United States and southeast coast of Canada Coordinates 43°N 68°W ﻿ / ﻿ 43°N 68°W ﻿ / 43; -68 Type Gulf Part of North Atlantic Ocean River sources Saint John River , Penobscot River Catchment area 69,000 square miles (180,000 km 2 ) Basin countries Canada and the United States Surface area 36,000 square miles (93,000 km 2 ) Islands Mount Desert Island , Fox Islands ( North Haven and Vinalhaven ), Isle au Haut , Grand Manan Settlements Boston , Portsmouth , Portland , Saint John The Gulf of Maine is a large gulf of the Atlantic Ocean on the east coast of North America . It is bounded by Cape Cod at the eastern tip of Massachusetts in the southwest and by Cape Sable Island at the southern tip of Nova Scotia in the northeast. The gulf includes the entire coastlines of the U.S. states of New Hampshire and Maine , as well as Massachusetts north of Cape Cod, and the southern and western coastlines of the Canadian provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia , respectively.

[ 1 ] The gulf was named for the adjoining English colonial Province of Maine , which was in turn likely named by early explorers after the province of Maine in France .

[ 2 ] Massachusetts Bay , Penobscot Bay , Passamaquoddy Bay , and the Bay of Fundy are all arms of the Gulf of Maine.

Geography and hydrography [ edit ] The Gulf of Maine is a roughly rectangular depression with a surface area of around 36,000 square miles (93,000 km 2 ), enclosed to the west and north by the North American mainland and communicating with the Atlantic Ocean to the southeast. The region's glaciation by the Laurentide Ice Sheet stripped sedimentary soil away from the coastline, [ 3 ] leaving a shore that is predominantly rocky and scenic, lacking the sandy beaches found to the south along the Eastern Seaboard . The only significant coastal developments are located in the Boston , Portsmouth , Portland and Saint John metropolitan areas.

The underwater features of the seabed sculpted during the lower sea levels of the ice ages make the gulf a semi-enclosed sea bounded to the south and east by underwater banks .

Georges Bank in particular, on its southern end, shelters the gulf from the Gulf Stream . Gulf of Maine waters are more strongly influenced by the Labrador Current , making the gulf waters significantly colder and more nutrient-rich than those found to the south. Undersea valleys in the central basin can reach depths of 1,500 feet (500 m), while undersea mountains rise up 800 feet (240 m) from the sea floor, almost reaching the surface in some locations, or even exceeding it, creating islands.

There are three major basins contained within the Gulf of Maine: Wilkinson Basin to the west, Jordan Basin in the northeast, and Georges Basin in the south, which are isolated from each other beneath the 650-foot (200 m) isobath . Georges Basin, just north of Georges Bank, is the deepest of the three at just over 1,200 feet (370 m) and generates a pocket at the end of the Northeast Channel, a deep fissure between Georges Bank and Browns Bank, the southwestern edge of the Scotian Shelf . The Northeast Channel is the major channel between the Gulf and the rest of the Northwest Atlantic. A secondary, shallower connection to the rest of the Atlantic is the Great South Channel, located between Georges Bank and the Nantucket Shoals.

A number of states and provinces along the North American coast drain into the Gulf of Maine. Much of that region is depicted here.

The watershed of the gulf encompasses an area of 69,000 square miles (180,000 km 2 ), including all of Maine, 70% of New Hampshire, 56% of New Brunswick, 41% of Massachusetts, and 36% of Nova Scotia. The watershed also includes a small southern portion of the Canadian province of Quebec , which is less than 1% of the province's area. Significant rivers that drain into the Gulf include, from east to west, the Annapolis , Shubenacadie , Salmon , Petitcodiac , Saint John , Magaguadavic , St. Croix , Penobscot , Kennebec , Saco , Piscataqua , Merrimack and Charles rivers; the Saint John and Penobscot have the greatest discharge.

Ecology [ edit ] The cold waters, extreme tidal mixing, and diverse bottom of the gulf make it one of the most productive marine environments in the North Atlantic, and it furnishes habitat for more than 3,000 marine species and birds, [ 4 ] including most notably large marine species such as haddock , pinnipeds , [ 5 ] the Acadian redfish ( Sebastes fasciatus ), the Atlantic herring ( Clupea harengus ), and the American lobster ( Homarus americanus ), which grows to famously large sizes in the gulf. The biodiversity and productivity of the area are supported by kelp forest habitats that are found along the coastal zones of the gulf.

In the Gulf of Maine, different kelp macroalgae species are found at various depths.

[ 6 ] At depths less than 5 meters, Alaria esculenta is most abundant, while the Saccharina species such as S. latissima and S. digita are the species primarily seen at depths of 5–15 meters.

[ 6 ] In the deeper waters, Agarum clathratum are more abundant in the rocky subtidal zone.

[ 6 ] S. latissima , one of the most abundant of the Saccharina species in the Gulf of Maine The waters of the Gulf of Maine system, particularly at the boundary with the Bay of Fundy , are also home to the summering grounds for many different bird and whale species, most notably the highly endangered North Atlantic right whale .

[ 7 ] The gulf was home to the sea mink until its extinction in the late 1800s.

Water temperatures in the Gulf of Maine are rapidly rising due to human-induced climate change . Both the Labrador Current and Gulf Stream are warming, and the Gulf Stream is spreading out and delivering more water to the Gulf of Maine.

[ 8 ] As a result, it has become too warm for cod as well as kelp forests. Studies found that some areas, such as Ammen Rock Site 1, witnessed a 36.2% decrease in kelp between 1987 and 2015, while nearby shallow coastal kelp populations have been declining since the 1970s.

[ 6 ] Alongside this decline, the kelp beds have been replaced by invasive turf, defined as macroalgae that provide little three-dimensional structure but form on the bottom layers as filaments, branches, or plumes.

[ 9 ] In southwestern areas, turf is now covering 50–60% of the ocean floor.

[ 10 ] This, along with past overfishing, has helped push stocks towards collapse and hampered its recovery despite deep reductions in the number of fish caught, according to a study conducted by the Gulf of Maine Research Institute . Traditional calculations "consistently over-estimated the abundance of cod." [ citation needed ] From 2004, temperatures rose by more than 0.4 °F (0.22 °C) per year, culminating in an ocean heat wave in the northwest Atlantic in 2012–13.

[ 11 ] Starting in the early 1990's, to prevent further degradation of the ecosystem, a number of closed areas have been created in which certain activities are banned for some or all parts of the year.

[ 12 ] History and political significance [ edit ] Hampton Beach, New Hampshire , in mid-September 2004 The gulf's relative proximity to Europe compared to other locations on the opposite side of the Atlantic made it an early destination for European colonization.

French settlers founded a settlement on St. Croix Island in 1604.

English settlers founded the Popham Colony on an island in the Kennebec River in 1607, the same year as the Jamestown settlement, followed by the Plymouth Colony on the shores of Massachusetts Bay in 1620. The cod fisheries that flourished in this ecosystem were able to support the Industrial Revolution occurring in Europe as well as playing a role during the 17th through early 19th century’s trade routes between Africa, the Caribbean, North America and Europe.

[ 13 ] In the 1960s and 1970s, there was a dispute between Canada and the United States over fishing and other resource rights in the Gulf of Maine, specifically in the Georges Bank region. This dispute was taken to the International Court of Justice , which delineated a maritime boundary through the gulf in 1984. The two nations continue to disagree on the sovereignty of Machias Seal Island and the waters surrounding it in the northeastern part of the gulf. In recognition of the gulf's importance to marine habitat, both nations currently maintain complementary embargoes against offshore oil and gas exploration activities on Georges Bank in the southern part of the gulf.

As of the past twenty years, however, traditional maritime fisheries focused on large fish species such as cod experienced a stock depletion that hurt commercial fishing. In response, harvesting of lobsters and other invertebrates rose. These changes can largely be attributed to anthropogenic factors. There has also been a rise in marine aquaculture in the area, following global trends. Such aquaculture species include Atlantic salmon, oysters, clams, mussels, and more.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Maine portal Massachusetts portal Nova Scotia portal Geography portal British colonization of the Americas French colonization of the Americas Gulf of Maine Research Institute Maritime Peninsula References [ edit ] ^ "About the Gulf of Maine" . Gulf of Maine Association . Retrieved October 15, 2021 .

^ "Journal of the Senate" (PDF) . State of Maine, HP1629, item 1, 123rd Maine State Legislature. March 6, 2002 . Retrieved September 20, 2007 .

WHEREAS, the State of Maine is named after the Province of Maine in France...

^ Manahan, Abigail.

"A Geologic History of the Gulf of Maine" .

Gulf of Maine Area Census of Marine Life . Archived from the original on November 25, 2017 . Retrieved November 23, 2017 .

^ "About the Gulf of Maine | Gulf of Maine Association" . Retrieved 2022-04-05 .

^ A. Bogomolni; G. Early; K. Matassa; O. Nichols; L. Sette (June 1, 2010).

Gulf of Maine Seals - populations, problems and priorities (PDF) .

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . p. 81.

doi : 10.1575/1912/3701 .

OCLC 672010623 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 30, 2021.

^ a b c d Witman, Jon D.; Lamb, Robert W. (2018-01-03).

"Persistent differences between coastal and offshore kelp forest communities in a warming Gulf of Maine" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (1): e0189388.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1389388W .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0189388 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 5751975 .

PMID 29298307 .

^ "The Gulf of Maine is Warming, and Its Whales Are Disappearing" .

NPR.org .

^ Ocean warming is 'off the charts' this summer. But not in the Gulf of Maine. Why?

^ Filbee-Dexter, Karen; Wernberg, Thomas (2018-02-01).

"Rise of Turfs: A New Battlefront for Globally Declining Kelp Forests" .

BioScience .

68 (2): 64– 76.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix147 .

hdl : 11250/2618071 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

^ O'Brien, Brandon S.; Mello, Kristen; Litterer, Amber; Dijkstra, Jennifer A. (2018-09-01).

"Seaweed structure shapes trophic interactions: A case study using a mid-trophic level fish species" .

Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology .

506 : 1– 8.

doi : 10.1016/j.jembe.2018.05.003 .

ISSN 0022-0981 .

S2CID 51963821 .

^ "Water Too Warm for Cod in U.S. Gulf of Maine, Stock Near Collapse" .

NBC News . 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 3 November 2015 .

^ "Northeast Multispecies Closed Area Regulations: Gulf of Maine | NOAA Fisheries" .

^ "About the Gulf of Maine | Gulf of Maine Association" . Retrieved 2022-04-05 .

^ "About the Gulf of Maine | Gulf of Maine Association" . Retrieved 2022-04-05 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Gulf of Maine at Wikimedia Commons Gulf of Maine Research Institute Gulf of Maine Council on the Marine Environment v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e Gulf of Maine estuaries Maine Bays Blue Hill Bay Casco Bay Chandler Bay Dennys Bay Englishman Bay Frenchman Bay Harrington Bay Machias Bay Maquoit Bay Merrymeeting Bay Muscongus Bay Narraguagus Bay Passamaquoddy Bay Penobscot Bay Pleasant Bay Saco Bay Wohoa Bay River mouths Batson River Benjamin River Cape Neddick River Damariscotta River Johns River Jordan River Josias River Kennebunk River Little River (Boothbay) Little River (Drakes Island) Little River (Georgetown) Little River (Goosefare Bay) Little River (York) Morse River Mousam River Ogunquit River Pemaquid River Piscataqua River Sheepscot River Sprague River Webhannet River York River Massachusetts Bays Cape Cod Bay Massachusetts Bay River mouths Annisquam River Eagle Hill River Egypt River Ipswich River Jericho Creek Merrimack River Roger Island River Rowley River Skug River New Brunswick Bays Bay of Fundy Chignecto Bay Cumberland Basin Passamaquoddy Bay Shepody Bay River mouths Big Salmon River Quiddy River Saint John River New Hampshire River mouths Blackwater River Hampton River Piscataqua River Nova Scotia Bays Bay of Fundy Annapolis Basin Cobequid Bay Cumberland Basin Minas Basin St. Marys Bay River mouths Tusket River Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Maine&oldid=1299855938 " Categories : Disputed waters Bodies of water of Maine Bodies of water of Massachusetts Bodies of water of New Brunswick Bodies of water of New Hampshire Bodies of water of Nova Scotia Canada–United States border Gulfs of Canada Gulfs of the United States Gulfs of the Atlantic Ocean Seas of Canada Seas of North America Seas of the United States Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without alt bathymetry All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 20:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Maine 42 languages Add topic

