Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Old Testament 2 New Testament Toggle New Testament subsection 2.1 1 John 5:7 2.2 Jesus in the New Testament 2.2.1 Jesus in later Christian theology 2.3 Holy Spirit in the New Testament 2.3.1 Holy Spirit in later Christian theology 3 Early Christianity Toggle Early Christianity subsection 3.1 Before the Council of Nicaea 3.2 First Council of Nicaea (325) 3.3 First Council of Constantinople (381) 3.4 Middle Ages 4 Theology Toggle Theology subsection 4.1 Baptismal formula 4.2 Economic and immanent Trinity 4.3 Love 4.4 One God in three persons 4.5 Perichoresis 4.6 Relationship between the persons 4.7 Nontrinitarianism 4.8 Judaism 5 Architecture 6 Artistic depictions 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Footnotes 8.2 Citations 8.3 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Trinity 113 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Аԥсшәа العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian doctrine that God exists in three persons Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Holy Trinity (disambiguation) and Trinity (disambiguation) .

A compact diagram of the Trinity, known as the " Shield of the Trinity ", consisting of God the Father , God the Son (Jesus), and God the Holy Spirit (the Shield is generally not intended to be a schematic diagram of the structure of God, but it presents a series of statements about the relationship between the persons of the Trinity) Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e The Trinity ( Latin : Trinitas , lit.

'triad', from trinus 'threefold') [ 1 ] is a Christian doctrine concerning the nature of God , which defines one God existing in three, coeternal , consubstantial divine persons : [ 2 ] [ 3 ] God the Father , God the Son ( Jesus Christ ) and God the Holy Spirit , three distinct persons ( hypostases ) sharing one essence/substance/nature ( homoousion ).

[ 4 ] As the Fourth Lateran Council declared, it is the Father who begets , the Son who is begotten , and the Holy Spirit who proceeds.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In this context, one essence/nature defines what God is, while the three persons define who God is.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] This expresses at once their distinction and their indissoluble unity. Thus, the entire process of creation and grace is viewed as a single shared action of the three divine persons, in which each person manifests the attributes unique to them in the Trinity, thereby proving that everything comes "from the Father", "through the Son", and "in the Holy Spirit".

[ 10 ] This doctrine is called Trinitarianism, and its adherents are called Trinitarians , while its opponents are called antitrinitarians or nontrinitarians and are considered non-Christian by many mainline groups.

[ which?

] Nontrinitarian positions include Unitarianism , binitarianism and modalism . The theological study of the Trinity is called "triadology" or "Trinitarian theology".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] While the developed doctrine of the Trinity is not explicit in the books that constitute the New Testament , it is implicit in John , [ 13 ] and the New Testament possesses a triadic understanding of God [ 14 ] and contains a number of Trinitarian formulas .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The doctrine of the Trinity was first formulated among the early Christians (mid-2nd century and later) and fathers of the Church as they attempted to understand the relationship between Jesus and God in their scriptural documents and prior traditions.

[ 17 ] Old Testament [ edit ] The Old Testament has been interpreted as referring to the Trinity in many places. For example, in the Genesis creation narrative , the first-person plural pronouns in Genesis 1:26–27 and Genesis 3:22 have been used to argue for a Trinitarian understanding of God: Then God said, 'Let us make man in our image, after our likeness [...]' — Genesis 1:26 Then the LORD God said, 'Behold, the man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil [...]' — Genesis 3:22 A traditional Christian interpretation of these pronouns is that they refer to a plurality of persons within the Godhead . Biblical commentator Victor P. Hamilton outlines several interpretations, including the most widely held among Biblical scholars, which is that the pronouns do not refer to other persons within the Godhead but to the 'heavenly court' of Isaiah 6 . Theologians Meredith Kline [ 18 ] and Gerhard von Rad argue for this view; as von Rad says, 'The extraordinary plural ("Let us") is to prevent one from referring God's image too directly to God the Lord. God includes himself among the heavenly beings of his court and thereby conceals himself in this majority.' [ 19 ] Hamilton notes that this interpretation assumes that Genesis 1 is at variance with Isaiah 40:13–14, Who has measured the Spirit of the Lord, or what man shows him his counsel? Whom did he consult, and who made him understand? Who taught him the path of justice, and taught him knowledge, and showed him the way of understanding?

That is, if the plural pronouns of Genesis 1 teach that God consults and creates with a 'heavenly court', then it contradicts the statement in Isaiah that God seeks the counsel of nobody. According to Hamilton, the best interpretation 'approaches the Trinitarian understanding but employs less direct terminology'.

[ 20 ] : 133 Following D. J. A. Clines , he states that the plural reveals a 'duality within the Godhead' that recalls the 'Spirit of God' mentioned in verse 2, And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters.

Hamilton also says that it is unreasonable to assume that the author of Genesis was too theologically primitive to deal with such a concept as 'plurality within unity'; [ 20 ] : 134 Hamilton thus argues for a framework of progressive revelation , in which the doctrine of the Trinity is revealed at first obscurely then plainly in the New Testament.

Another of these places is Isaiah 9, where, if interpreted to be about the Messiah, the Messiah is called "Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace". Some Christians see this verse as meaning the Messiah will represent the Trinity on earth. This is because Counselor is a title for the Holy Spirit (John 14:26), the Trinity is God, Father is a title for God the Father, and Prince of Peace is a title for Jesus. This verse is also used to support the Deity of Christ .

[ 21 ] The Deity of Christ can also be inferred from certain passages in the Book of Daniel : [ 22 ] I saw in the night visions, and behold, with the clouds of heaven there came one like a son of man, and he came to the Ancient of Days and was presented before him. And to him was given dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom one that shall not be destroyed.

— Daniel 7:13–14 This is because both the Ancient of Days (God the Father) and the Son of Man (God the Son, Matt 16:13) have an everlasting dominion, which is ascribed to God in Psalm 145:13.

[ 23 ] People also see the Trinity when the Old Testament refers to God's word (Psalm 33:6), His Spirit (Isaiah 61:1), and Wisdom (Proverbs 9:1), as well as narratives such as the appearance of the three men to Abraham .

[ 24 ] However, it is generally agreed among Trinitarian Christian scholars that it would go beyond the intention and spirit of the Old Testament to correlate these notions directly with later Trinitarian doctrine.

[ 25 ] Some Church Fathers believed that a knowledge of the mystery was granted to the prophets and saints of the Old Testament and that they identified the divine messenger of Genesis 16:7, Genesis 21:17, Genesis 31:11, Exodus 3:2, and Wisdom of the sapiential books with the Son, and "the spirit of the Lord" with the Holy Spirit.

[ 25 ] Other Church Fathers, such as Gregory Nazianzen , argued in his Orations that the revelation was gradual, claiming that the Father was proclaimed in the Old Testament openly, but the Son only obscurely, because "it was not safe, when the Godhead of the Father was not yet acknowledged, plainly to proclaim the Son".

[ 26 ] Genesis 18–19 has been interpreted by Christians as a Trinitarian text. The narrative has the Lord appearing to Abraham, who was visited by three men.

[ 27 ] In Genesis 19, "the two angels" visited Lot at Sodom.

[ 28 ] The interplay between Abraham on the one hand and the Lord/three men/the two angels on the other was an intriguing text for those who believed in a single God in three persons.

Justin Martyr and John Calvin similarly interpreted it as such that Abraham was visited by God, who was accompanied by two angels.

[ 29 ] Justin supposed that the God who visited Abraham was distinguishable from the God who remains in the heavens but was nevertheless identified as the (monotheistic) God. Justin interpreted the God who visited Abraham as Jesus, the second person of the Trinity.

[ 30 ] The Trinity by Russian icon painter Andrei Rublev , early 15th century.

Augustine, in contrast, held that the three visitors to Abraham were the three persons of the Trinity.

[ 29 ] He saw no indication that the visitors were unequal, as would be the case in Justin's reading. Then, in Genesis 19, two of the visitors were addressed by Lot in the singular: "Lot said to them, 'Not so, my lord ' " (Gen. 19:18).

[ 29 ] Augustine saw that Lot could address them as one because they had a single substance despite the plurality of persons.

[ a ] Christians interpret the theophanies , or appearances of the Angel of the Lord , as revelations of a person distinct from God, who is nonetheless called God. This interpretation is found in Christianity as early as Justin Martyr and Melito of Sardis and reflects ideas that were already present in Philo .

[ 31 ] The Old Testament theophanies were thus seen as Christophanies , each a "preincarnate appearance of the Messiah".

[ 32 ] New Testament [ edit ] According to Januariy and Fee , while the developed doctrine of the Trinity is not explicit in the books that constitute the New Testament , the New Testament contains several Trinitarian formulas , including Matthew 28:19, 2 Corinthians 13:14, Ephesians 4:4–6, 1 Peter 1:2, and Revelation 1:4–6.

[ 15 ] [ 33 ] James Barker argues that important aspects of Trinitarianism are present in the New Testament, with an economic Trinity being present in the Gospel of John .

[ 34 ] Reflection by early Christians on passages such as the Great Commission : "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" and Paul the Apostle 's blessing: "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all", lead to attempts to articulate the relationship between the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

[ 35 ] Eventually, the diverse references to God, Jesus, and the Spirit found in the New Testament were brought together to form the concept of the Trinity—one Godhead subsisting in three persons and one substance . The concept of the Trinity was used to oppose alternative views of how the three are related and to defend the church against charges of worshiping two or three gods.

[ 36 ] 1 John 5:7 [ edit ] Modern Biblical scholarship largely agrees that 1 John 5:7, which was seen in Latin and Greek texts after the 4th century and found in later translations such as the King James Translation due to its inclusion in the Textus Receptus , cannot be found in the oldest Greek and Latin texts. Verse 7 is known as the Johannine Comma , which most scholars agree to be a later addition by a later copyist or what is termed a textual gloss [ 37 ] and not part of the original text. This verse reads: Because there are three in Heaven that testify—the Father, the Word and the Holy Spirit—and these three are one.

— 1 John 5:7 This verse is absent from the Ethiopic, Aramaic, Syriac, early Slavic, early Armenian, Georgian, and Arabic translations of the Greek New Testament. It is primarily found in Latin manuscripts, although a minority of Greek, late Slavonic, and late Armenian manuscripts contain it.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Perhaps the earliest mention of the Johannine Comma comes from the writings of Cyprian of Carthage (210 - 258ad), although this may have been an allegorical interpretation of the undisputed part of the verse. Nevertheless, the comma was often used in many later Latin-speaking authors such as Priscillian (4th century), Contra Varimadum (5th century), Donation of Constantine (8th), Peter Lombard (12th century), Bernard of Clairvaux (12th century), Thomas Aquinas (13th century) and William of Ockham (14th century), alongside having found its way into the earliest printed editions of the New Testament such as the Complutensian Polyglot and the Textus Receptus in the 16th century, causing the comma to become a part of most Reformation-era vernacular translations.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Jesus in the New Testament [ edit ] God in the person of the Son confronts Adam and Eve , by Master Bertram (d. c. 1415) In the Pauline epistles , the public, collective devotional patterns towards Jesus in the early Christian community are reflective of Paul's perspective on the divine status of Jesus in what scholars have termed a "binitarian" pattern or shape of devotional practice (worship) in the New Testament, in which "God" and Jesus are thematized and invoked.

[ 44 ] Jesus receives prayer (1 Corinthians 1:2; 2 Corinthians 12:8–9), the presence of Jesus is confessionally invoked by believers (1 Corinthians 16:22; Romans 10:9–13; Philippians 2:10–11), people are baptized in Jesus' name (1 Corinthians 6:11; Romans 6:3), Jesus is the reference in Christian fellowship for a religious ritual meal (the Lord's Supper ; 1 Corinthians 11:17–34).

[ 45 ] Jesus is described as "existing in the very form of God" (Philippians 2:6), and having the "fullness of the Deity [living] in bodily form" (Colossians 2:9). Jesus is also in some verses directly called God (Romans 9:5, [ 46 ] Titus 2:13, 2 Peter 1:1).

The Gospels depict Jesus as human through most of their narrative, but "[o]ne eventually discovers that he is a divine being manifest in flesh, and the point of the texts is in part to make his higher nature known in a kind of intellectual epiphany".

[ 47 ] In the Gospels Jesus is described as forgiving sins, leading some theologians to believe Jesus is portrayed as God.

[ 48 ] This is because Jesus forgives sins on behalf of others; people normally only forgive transgressions against themselves. The teachers of the law next to Jesus recognized this and said: Why does this man speak like that? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?

— Mark 2:7 Jesus also receives προσκύνησις ( proskynesis ) in the aftermath of the resurrection, a Greek term that either expresses the contemporary social gesture of bowing to a superior, either on one's knees or in full prostration (in Matthew 18:26 a slave performs προσκύνησις to his master so that he would not be sold after being unable to pay his debts). The term can also refer to the religious act of devotion towards a deity. While Jesus receives προσκύνησις a number of times in the synoptic Gospels , only a few can be said to refer to divine worship.

[ 49 ] This includes Matthew 28:16–20, an account of the resurrected Jesus receiving worship from his disciples after proclaiming his authority over the cosmos and his ever-continuing presence with the disciples (forming an inclusion with the beginning of the Gospel, where Jesus is given the name Emmanuel, "God with us", a name that alludes to the God of Israel's ongoing presence with his followers throughout the Old Testament (Genesis 28:15; Deuteronomy 20:1).

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Whereas some have argued that Matthew 28:19 was an interpolation on account of its absence from the first few centuries of early Christian quotations, scholars largely accept the passage as authentic due to its supporting manuscript evidence and that it does appear to be either quoted in the Didache (7:1–3) [ 52 ] or at least reflected in the Didache as part of a common tradition from which both Matthew and the Didache emerged.

[ 53 ] Jesus receiving divine worship in the post-resurrection accounts is further mirrored in Luke 24:52.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 54 ] In Acts, it is common for individual Christians to "call" upon the name of Jesus (9:14, 21; 22:16), an idea precedented in the Old Testament descriptions of calling on the name of YHWH as a form of prayer. The story of Stephen depicts Stephen invoking and crying out to Jesus in the final moments of his life to receive his spirit (7:59–60). Acts further describes a common ritual practice of inducting new members into the early Jesus sect by baptizing them in Jesus' name (2:38; 8:16; 10:48; 19:5).

[ 56 ] According to Dale Allison , Acts depicts the appearances of Jesus to Paul as a divine theophany , styled on and identified with the God responsible for the theophany of Ezekiel in the Old Testament.

[ 57 ] The Gospel of John has been seen as especially aimed at emphasizing Jesus' divinity, presenting Jesus as the Logos , pre-existent and divine, from its first words: " In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God " (John 1:1).

[ 58 ] The Gospel of John ends with Thomas's declaration that he believed Jesus was God, "My Lord and my God!" (John 20:28).

[ 36 ] Modern scholars agree that John 1:1 and John 20:28 identify Jesus with God.

[ 59 ] However, in a 1973 Journal of Biblical Literature article, Philip B. Harner, Professor Emeritus of Religion at Heidelberg College , claimed that the traditional translation of John 1:1c ("and the Word was God") is incorrect. He endorses the New English Bible translation of John 1:1c, "and what God was, the Word was".

[ 60 ] However, other scholars have criticized Harner's claim.

[ 61 ] In the same article, Harner also noted that, "Perhaps the clause could be translated, 'the Word had the same nature as God'. This would be one way of representing John's thought, which is, as I understand it, that [the] logos , no less than [the] theos , had the nature of theos ", which in his case means the Word is as fully God as the person called "God".

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] John also portrays Jesus as the agent of creation of the universe.

[ 64 ] Jesus in later Christian theology [ edit ] Some have suggested that John presents a hierarchy [ 65 ] [ 66 ] when he quotes Jesus as saying, "The Father is greater than I", a statement which was appealed to by nontrinitarian groups such as Arianism .

[ 67 ] However, influential theologians such as Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas argued this statement was to be understood as Jesus speaking about his human nature.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Holy Spirit in the New Testament [ edit ] Prior Israelite theology held that the Spirit is merely the divine presence of God himself, [ 70 ] whereas orthodox Christian theology holds that the Holy Spirit is a distinct person of God the Father himself. This development begins early in the New Testament, as the Spirit of God receives much more emphasis and description comparably than it had in earlier Jewish writing. Whereas there are 75 references to the Spirit within the Old Testament and 35 identified in the non-biblical Dead Sea Scrolls , the New Testament, despite its significantly shorter length, mentions the Spirit 275 times. In addition to its larger emphasis and importance placed on the Spirit in the New Testament, the Spirit is also described in much more personalized and individualized terms than earlier.

[ 71 ] Larry Hurtado writes: Moreover, the New Testament references often portray actions that seem to give the Spirit an intensely personal quality, probably more so than in Old Testament or ancient Jewish texts. So, for example, the Spirit "drove" Jesus into the wilderness (Mk 1:12; compare "led" in Mt. 4:1/Lk 4:1), and Paul refers to the Spirit interceding for believers (Romans 8:26–27) and witnessing to believers about their filial status with God (Romans 8:14–16). To cite other examples of this, in Acts the Spirit alerts Peter to the arrival of visitors from Cornelius (10:19), directs the church in Antioch to send forth Barnabas and Saul (13:2–4), guides the Jerusalem council to a decision about Gentile converts (15:28), at one point forbids Paul to missionize in Asia (16:6), and at another point warns Paul (via prophetic oracles) of trouble ahead in Jerusalem (21:11).

[ 71 ] The Holy Spirit is described as God in the book of the Acts of the Apostles : But Peter said, "Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back for yourself part of the proceeds of the land? 4 While it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal? Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to man but to God". Acts 5:3–4 In the New Testament, the Spirit is not portrayed as the recipient of cultic devotion, which, instead, is typically offered to God the Father and to the risen/glorified Jesus. Although what became mainstream Christianity subsequently affirmed the propriety of including the Spirit as the recipient of worship as reflected in the developed form of the Nicene Creed , perhaps the closest to this in the New Testament is in Matthew 28:19 and 2 Corinthians 13:14, which describe the Spirit as the subject of religious ritual.

[ 72 ] Holy Spirit in later Christian theology [ edit ] As the Arian controversy was dissipating, the debate moved from the deity of Jesus Christ to the equality of the Holy Spirit with the Father and Son. On one hand, the Pneumatomachi sect declared that the Holy Spirit was an inferior person to the Father and Son. On the other hand, the Cappadocian Fathers argued that the Holy Spirit was equal to the Father and Son in nature or substance.

[ 73 ] Although the main text used in defense of the deity of the Holy Spirit was Matthew 28:19, the Cappadocian Fathers argued from other verses such as: "By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of his mouth all their host" (Psalm 33:6). According to their understanding, because "breath" and "spirit" in Hebrew are both רוּחַ ( ruach ), Psalm 33:6 is revealing the roles of the Son and Holy Spirit as co-creators. And since, according to them, because only the holy God can create holy beings such as the angels, the Son and Holy Spirit must be God.

[ 74 ] Yet another argument from the Cappadocian Fathers to prove that the Holy Spirit is of the same nature as the Father and Son comes from "For who knows a person's thoughts except the spirit of that person, which is in him? So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God" (1 Corinthians 2:11). They reasoned that this passage proves that the Holy Spirit has the same relationship to God as the spirit within us has to us.

[ 74 ] The Cappadocian Fathers also quoted, "Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you?" (1 Corinthians 3:16) and reasoned that it would be blasphemous for an inferior being to take up residence in a temple of God, thus proving that the Holy Spirit is equal with the Father and the Son.

[ 75 ] They also combined "the servant does not know what his master is doing" (John 15:15) with 1 Corinthians 2:11 in an attempt to show that the Holy Spirit is not the slave of God and therefore, his equal.

[ 76 ] The Pneumatomachi contradicted the Cappadocian Fathers by quoting, "Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation?" (Hebrews 1:14) in effect arguing that the Holy Spirit is no different from other created angelic spirits.

[ 77 ] The Church Fathers disagreed, saying that the Holy Spirit is greater than the angels since the Holy Spirit is the one who grants the foreknowledge for prophecy (1 Corinthians 12:8–10) so that the angels could announce events to come.

[ 74 ] Early Christianity [ edit ] Further information: Trinitarianism in the Church Fathers Before the Council of Nicaea [ edit ] Detail of the earliest known artwork of the Trinity, the Dogmatic or Trinity Sarcophagus , c.

350 ( Vatican Museums ).  Three similar figures, representing the Trinity, are involved in the creation of Eve , whose much smaller figure is cut off at lower right; to her right, Adam lies on the ground.

[ 78 ] The developed doctrine of the Trinity is not explicit in the books that constitute the New Testament , though it is implicit in John, [ 79 ] and it was first formulated as early Christians attempted to understand the relationship between Jesus and God in their scriptural documents and prior traditions.

[ 17 ] According to Margaret Baker, Trinitarian theology has roots in pre-Christian Palestinian beliefs about angels.

[ 80 ] An early reference to the three "persons" of later Trinitarian doctrines appears towards the end of the first century, where Clement of Rome rhetorically asks in his epistle as to why corruption exists among some in the Christian community; "Do we not have one God, and one Christ, and one gracious Spirit that has been poured out upon us, and one calling in Christ?" (1 Clement 46:6).

[ 81 ] A similar example is found in the first-century Didache , which directs Christians to "baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit".

[ 82 ] Ignatius of Antioch similarly refers to all three persons around AD 110, exhorting obedience to "Christ, and to the Father, and to the Spirit".

[ 83 ] The pseudonymous Ascension of Isaiah , written sometime between the end of the first century and the beginning of the third century, possesses a "proto-Trinitarian" view, such as in its narrative of how the inhabitants of the sixth heaven sing praises to "the primal Father and his Beloved Christ, and the Holy Spirit".

[ 84 ] Justin Martyr (AD 100 – c. 165) also writes, "in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit".

[ 85 ] Justin Martyr is the first to use much of the terminology that would later become widespread in codified Trinitarian theology. For example, he describes that the Son and Father are the same "being" ( ousia ) and yet are also distinct faces ( prosopa ), anticipating the three persons ( hypostases ) that come with Tertullian and later authors. Justin describes how Jesus, the Son, is distinguishable from the Father but also derives from the Father, using the analogy of a fire (representing the Son) that is lit from its source, a torch (representing the Father).

[ 86 ] At another point, Justin Martyr wrote that "we worship him [Jesus Christ] with reason, since we have learned that he is the Son of the living God himself, and believe him to be in second place and the prophetic Spirit in the third" (1 Apology 13, cf. ch. 60).
About the Christian Baptism , he wrote that "in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, they then receive the washing with water", highlighting the liturgical use of a Trinitarian formula.

[ 87 ] Justin Martyr produced a rudimentary version of the Trinitarian doctrine.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Some authors state that Justin's texts were Binitarian, and the same applies to the texts of Tertullian and Eusebius of Caesarea .

[ 90 ] The Adoration of the Trinity by Albrecht Dürer (1511)  From top to bottom: Holy Spirit (dove), God the Father and Christ on the cross The first of the early Church Fathers to be recorded using the word "Trinity" was Theophilus of Antioch , writing in the late 2nd century. He defines the Trinity as God, his Word ( Logos ), and his Wisdom ( Sophia ) [ 91 ] in the context of a discussion of the first three days of creation, following the early Christian practice of identifying the Holy Spirit as the Wisdom of God.

[ 92 ] The first defense of the doctrine of the Trinity was by Tertullian , who was born around AD 150–160, explicitly "defined" the Trinity as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and defended his theology against Praxeas , [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] although he noted that the majority of the believers in his day found issue with his doctrine.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Tertullian confession, although it implies a Trinity, is binitarian in structure.

[ 90 ] The "Heavenly Trinity" joined to the " Earthly Trinity " through the Incarnation of the Son – The Heavenly and Earthly Trinities by Murillo (c. 1677) St. Justin and Clement of Alexandria referenced all three persons of the Trinity in their doxologies and St. Basil likewise, in the evening lighting of lamps.

[ 98 ] Origen of Alexandria (AD 185 – c. 253) has often been interpreted as Subordinationist —believing in shared divinity of the three persons but not in co-equality. However, some modern researchers have argued that Origen might have actually been anti-Subordinationist and that his own Trinitarian theology inspired the Trinitarian theology of the later Cappadocian Fathers .

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] The concept of the Trinity can be seen as developing significantly during the first four centuries by the Church Fathers in reaction to theological interpretations known as Adoptionism , Sabellianism , and Arianism . In 269, the Synods of Antioch condemned Paul of Samosata for his Adoptionist theology and also condemned the term homoousios ( ὁμοούσιος , "of the same being") in the modalist sense in which he used it.

[ 101 ] First Council of Nicaea (325) [ edit ] Main article: First Council of Nicaea The Glory of Saint Nicholas , by António Manuel da Fonseca ; Nicholas of Myra , a participant in the First Council of Nicaea, achieves the beatific vision in the shape of the Holy Trinity.

In the fourth century, Arianism , as traditionally understood, [ b ] taught that the Father existed prior to the Son, who was not, by nature, God but rather a changeable creature who was granted the dignity of becoming "Son of God".

[ 102 ] In 325, the First Council of Nicaea adopted the Nicene Creed which described Christ as "God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father", and the "Holy Ghost" as the one by which " was incarnate ... of the Virgin Mary ".

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] ("the Word was made flesh and dwelled among us"). About the Father and the Son, the creed used the term homoousios (of one substance) to define the relationship between the Father and the Son. After more than fifty years of debate, homoousios was recognized as the hallmark of orthodoxy and was further developed into the formula of "three persons, one being".

The Confession of the First Council of Nicaea, the Nicene Creed, said little about the Holy Spirit.

[ 105 ] At the First Council of Nicea (325) all attention was focused on the relationship between the Father and the Son, without making any similar statement about the Holy Spirit. In the words of the creed: We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father [the only-begotten; that is, of the essence of the Father, God of God,] Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father; ... And [we believe] in the Holy Ghost.

The Nicene Creed of 325 is also considered binitarian (although it passingly mentions the Holy Spirit).

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] First Council of Constantinople (381) [ edit ] Main article: First Council of Constantinople Later, at the First Council of Constantinople (381), the Nicene Creed would be expanded, known as Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, by saying that the Holy Spirit is worshiped and glorified together with the Father and the Son ( συμπροσκυνούμενον καὶ συνδοξαζόμενον ), suggesting that he was also consubstantial with them: We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all worlds (æons), Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father; ... And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father, who with the Father and the Son together is worshiped and glorified, who spake by the prophets ...

[ 108 ] The doctrine of the divinity and personality of the Holy Spirit was developed by Athanasius in the last decades of his life.

[ 109 ] He defended and refined the Nicene formula.

[ 105 ] By the end of the 4th century, under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea , Gregory of Nyssa , and Gregory of Nazianzus (the Cappadocian Fathers ), the doctrine had reached substantially its current form.

[ 105 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, and Basil the Great account for the Trinity saw that the distinctions between the three divine persons were solely in their inner divine relations. There are not three gods; God is one divine Being in three persons.

[ 110 ] Where the Cappadocian Fathers used social analogies to describe the triune nature of God, Augustine of Hippo used psychological analogy. He believed that if man is created in the image of God, he is created in the image of the Trinity. Augustine's analogy for the Trinity is the memory, intelligence, and will in the mind of a man. In short, Christians do not have to think of three persons when they think of God; they may think of one person.

[ 110 ] In the late 6th century, some Latin-speaking churches added the words "and from the Son" ( Filioque ) to the description of the procession of the Holy Spirit, words that were not included in the text by either the Council of Nicaea or that of Constantinople.

[ 111 ] This was incorporated into the liturgical practice of Rome in 1014.

[ 112 ] Filioque eventually became one of the main causes for the East–West Schism in 1054 and the failures of the repeated union attempts.

[ 113 ] Gregory of Nazianzus would say of the Trinity, "No sooner do I conceive of the One than I am illumined by the splendour of the Three; no sooner do I distinguish Three than I am carried back into the One. When I think of any of the Three, I think of Him as the Whole, and my eyes are filled, and the greater part of what I am thinking escapes me. I cannot grasp the greatness of that One so as to attribute a greater greatness to the rest. When I contemplate the Three together, I see but one torch, and cannot divide or measure out the undivided light." [ 114 ] Theology [ edit ] "Trinitarian" and "Trinitarianism" redirect here. For other uses, see Trinitarian (disambiguation) .

Baptismal formula [ edit ] Main article: Trinitarian formula The Baptism of Christ , by Piero della Francesca , 15th century Baptism is generally conferred with the Trinitarian formula , "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit".

[ 115 ] Trinitarians identify this name with the Christian faith into which baptism is an initiation, as seen, for example, in the statement of Basil the Great (330–379): "We are bound to be baptized in the terms we have received, and to profess faith in the terms in which we have been baptized." The First Council of Constantinople (381) also says, "This is the Faith of our baptism that teaches us to believe in the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. According to this Faith there is one Godhead, Power, and Being of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit." [ 116 ] This may be taken to indicate that baptism was associated with this formula from the earliest decades of the Church's existence. Other Trinitarian formulas found in the New Testament include 2 Corinthians 13:14, 1 Corinthians 12:4–6, Ephesians 4:4–6, 1 Peter 1:2, and Revelation 1:4–5.

[ 15 ] [ 33 ] Oneness Pentecostals demur from the Trinitarian view of baptism and emphasize baptism "in the name of Jesus Christ" only, what they hold to be the original apostolic formula.

[ 117 ] For this reason, they often focus on the baptisms in Acts. Those who place great emphasis on the baptisms in Acts often likewise question the authenticity of Matthew 28:19 in its present form.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Most scholars of New Testament textual criticism accept the authenticity of the passage since there are no variant manuscripts regarding the formula, [ 52 ] and the extant form of the passage is attested in the Didache [ 120 ] and other patristic works of the 1st and 2nd centuries: Ignatius , [ 121 ] Tertullian , [ 122 ] Hippolytus , [ 123 ] Cyprian , [ 124 ] and Gregory Thaumaturgus .

[ 125 ] Commenting on Matthew 28:19, Gerhard Kittel states: This threefold relation [of Father, Son and Spirit] soon found fixed expression in the triadic formulae in 2 Corinthians 13:14 [ 126 ] and in 1 Corinthians 12:4–6.

[ 127 ] The form is first found in the baptismal formula in Matthew 28:19 Did., 7. 1 and 3. ... [I]t is self-evident that Father, Son and Spirit are here linked in an indissoluble threefold relationship.

[ 128 ] Economic and immanent Trinity [ edit ] The term "immanent Trinity" focuses on who God is; the term "economic Trinity" focuses on what God does. According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church : The Fathers of the Church distinguish between theology ( theologia ) and economy ( oikonomia ). "Theology" refers to the mystery of God's inmost life within the Blessed Trinity and "economy" to all the works by which God reveals himself and communicates his life. Through the oikonomia the theologia is revealed to us; but conversely, the theologia illuminates the whole oikonomia . God's works reveal who he is in himself; the mystery of his inmost being enlightens our understanding of all his works. So it is, analogously, among human persons. A person discloses himself in his actions, and the better we know a person, the better we understand his actions.

[ 129 ] The whole divine economy is the common work of the three divine persons. For as the Trinity has only one and the same natures so too does it have only one and the same operation: "The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are not three principles of creation but one principle." However, each divine person performs the common work according to his unique personal property. Thus the Church confesses, following the New Testament, "one God and Father from whom all things are, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom all things are, and one Holy Spirit in whom all things are". It is above all the divine missions of the Son's Incarnation and the gift of the Holy Spirit that show forth the properties of the divine persons.

[ 130 ] The ancient Nicene theologians argued that everything the Trinity does is done by Father, Son, and Spirit working in unity with one will. The three persons of the Trinity always work inseparably, for their work is always the work of the one God. The Son's will cannot be different from the Father's because it is the Father's. They have but one will as they have but one being. Otherwise, they would not be one God. On this point St. Basil said: When then He says, "I have not spoken of myself", and again, "As the Father said unto me, so I speak", and "The word which ye hear is not mine, but [the Father's] which sent me", and in another place, "As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do", it is not because He lacks deliberate purpose or power of initiation, nor yet because He has to wait for the preconcerted key-note, that he employs language of this kind. His object is to make it plain that His own will is connected in indissoluble union with the Father. Do not then let us understand by what is called a "commandment" a peremptory mandate delivered by organs of speech, and giving orders to the Son, as to a subordinate, concerning what He ought to do. Let us rather, in a sense befitting the Godhead, perceive a transmission of will, like the reflexion of an object in a mirror, passing without note of time from Father to Son.

[ 131 ] According to Thomas Aquinas the Son prayed to the Father, became a minor to the angels, became incarnate, obeyed the Father as to his human nature; as to his divine nature the Son remained God: "Thus, then, the fact that the Father glorifies, raises up, and exalts the Son does not show that the Son is less than the Father, except in His human nature. For, in the divine nature by which He is equal to the Father, the power of the Father and the Son is the same and their operation is the same." [ 69 ] Aquinas stated that the mystery of the Son cannot be explicitly believed to be true without faith in the Trinity ( ST IIa IIae, 2.7 resp. and 8 resp.).

[ 132 ] A Greek fresco of Athanasius of Alexandria, the chief architect of the Nicene Creed, formulated at Nicaea Athanasius of Alexandria explained that the Son is eternally one in being with the Father, temporally and voluntarily subordinate in his incarnate ministry.

[ 133 ] Such human traits, he argued, were not to be read back into the eternal Trinity. Likewise, the Cappadocian Fathers also insisted there was no economic inequality present within the Trinity. As Basil wrote: "We perceive the operation of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to be one and the same, in no respect showing differences or variation; from this identity of operation we necessarily infer the unity of nature." [ 134 ] The traditional theory of "appropriation" consists in attributing certain names, qualities, or operations to one of the Persons of the Trinity, not, however, to the exclusion of the others, but in preference to the others. This theory was established by the Latin Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries, especially by Hilary of Poitiers , Augustine , and Leo the Great . In the Middle Ages, the theory was systematically taught by the Schoolmen such as Bonaventure .

[ 135 ] Love [ edit ] Augustine "coupled the doctrine of the Trinity with anthropology . Proceeding from the idea that humans are created by God according to the divine image, he attempted to explain the mystery of the Trinity by uncovering traces of the Trinity in the human personality".

[ 136 ] The first key of his exegesis is an interpersonal analogy of mutual love. In De trinitate (399–419) he wrote: We are now eager to see whether that most excellent love is proper to the Holy Spirit, and if it is not so, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Trinity itself is love, since we cannot contradict the most certain faith and the most weighty authority of Scripture which says: "God is love".

[ c ] [ 137 ] One must, therefore, ask if love itself is triune. Augustine found that it is, and consists of "three: the lover, the beloved, and the love".

[ d ] [ 138 ] Reaffirming the theopaschite formula unus de trinitate passus est carne (meaning "One of the Trinity suffered in the flesh"), [ 139 ] Thomas Aquinas wrote that Jesus suffered and died as to his human nature, as to his divine nature he could not suffer or die. "But the commandment to suffer clearly pertains to the Son only in His human nature. ... And the way in which Christ was raised up is like the way He suffered and died, that is, in the flesh. For it says in 1 Peter (4:1): 'Christ having suffered in the flesh' ... then, the fact that the Father glorifies, raises up, and exalts the Son does not show that the Son is less than the Father, except in His human nature. For, in the divine nature by which He is equal to the Father." [ 140 ] In the 1900s the recovery of a substantially different formula of theopaschism took place: at least unus de Trinitate passus est (meaning "not only in the flesh").

[ 141 ] More specifically, World War II had an impact not only on the theodicy of Judaism with the Holocaust theology , but also on that of Christianity with a profound rethinking of its dogmatic theology . Deeply affected by the atomic bomb event , [ 142 ] as early as 1946 the Lutheran theologian Kazoh Kitamori published Theology of the Pain of God , [ 143 ] a theology of the Cross pushed up to the immanent Trinity. This concept was later taken by both Reformed and Catholic theology : in 1971 by Jürgen Moltmann 's The Crucified God ; in the 1972 "Preface to the Second Edition" of his 1969 German book Theologie der drei Tage (English translation: The Mystery of Easter ) by Hans Urs von Balthasar , who took a cue from Revelation 13:8 ( Vulgate : agni qui occisus est ab origine mundi , NIV : "the Lamb who was slain from the creation of the world") to explore the "God is love" idea as an " eternal super-kenosis ".

[ 144 ] In the words of von Balthasar: "At this point, where the subject undergoing the 'hour' is the Son speaking with the Father, the controversial 'Theopaschist formula' has its proper place: 'One of the Trinity has suffered.' The formula can already be found in Gregory Nazianzen : 'We needed a ... crucified God'." [ 145 ] But if theopaschism indicates only a Christological kenosis (or kenotic Christology), instead von Balthasar supports a Trinitarian kenosis: [ 146 ] "The persons of the Trinity constitute themselves as who they are through the very act of pouring themselves out for each other".

[ 147 ] This allows to clearly distinguish his idea from Subordinationism .

Furthermore, following the concepts developed by Scholasticism , the underlying question is whether the three Persons of the Trinity can experience self-love ( amor sui ), as well as whether for them, with the conciliar dogmatic formulation in terms that today we would call ontotheological , it is possible for aseity ( causa sui ) to be valid. If the Father is not the Son or the Spirit since the generator/begetter is not the generated/begotten nor the generation/generative process and vice versa, and since the lover is neither the beloved nor the love dynamic between them and vice versa. As a response, Christianity has provided an oblative , sacrificial, martyrizing, crucifying, and precisely kenotic concept of divine ontology.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] One God in three persons [ edit ] In Trinitarian doctrine, God exists as three persons but is one being, having a single divine nature .

[ 150 ] The members of the Trinity are co-equal and co-eternal, one in essence, nature, power, action, and will. As stated in the Athanasian Creed , the Father is uncreated, the Son is uncreated, and the Holy Spirit is uncreated, and all three are eternal without beginning.

[ 151 ] "The Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit" are not names for different parts of God, but one name for God [ 152 ] because three persons exist in God as one entity.

[ 153 ] They cannot be separate from one another. Each person is understood as having the identical essence or nature, not merely similar natures.

[ 154 ] According to the Eleventh Council of Toledo (675) "For, when we say: He who is the Father is not the Son, we refer to the distinction of persons; but when we say: the Father is that which the Son is, the Son that which the Father is, and the Holy Spirit that which the Father is and the Son is, this clearly refers to the nature or substance".

[ 155 ] The Fourth Lateran Council (1215) adds: "Therefore in God there is only a Trinity, not a quaternity, since each of the three persons is that reality—that is to say substance, essence or divine nature-which alone is the principle of all things, besides which no other principle can be found. This reality neither begets nor is begotten nor proceeds; the Father begets, the Son is begotten and the holy Spirit proceeds. Thus there is a distinction of persons but a unity of nature. Although therefore the Father is one person, the Son another person and the holy Spirit another person, they are not different realities, but rather that which is the Father is the Son and the holy Spirit, altogether the same; thus according to the orthodox and catholic faith they are believed to be consubstantial. " [ 156 ] [ 157 ] Clarification of the relationships among the three Trinitarian Persons (divine persons, different from the sense of a "human self") advanced in the Magisterial statement promulgated by the Council of Florence (1431–1449), though its formulation precedes the council: "These three persons are one God and not three gods, for the three are one substance, one essence, one nature, one Godhead, one infinity, one eternity, and everything (in them) is one
where there is no opposition of relationship [ relationis oppositio ]".

[ 158 ] Perichoresis [ edit ] Main article: Perichoresis A depiction of the Council of Nicaea in AD 325, at which the Deity of Christ was declared orthodox and Arianism condemned Perichoresis (from Greek , 'going around', 'envelopment') is a term used by some scholars to describe the relationship among the members of the Trinity. The Latin equivalent for this term is circumincessio . This concept refers for its basis to John 10:38,14:11,14:20, [ 159 ] where Jesus is instructing the disciples concerning the meaning of his departure. His going to the Father, he says, is for their sake; so that he might come to them when the "other comforter" is given to them. Then, he says, his disciples will dwell in him, as he dwells in the Father, and the Father dwells in him, and the Father will dwell in them. This is so, according to the theory of perichoresis , because the persons of the Trinity "reciprocally contain one another, so that one permanently envelopes and is permanently enveloped by, the other whom he yet envelopes" ( Hilary of Poitiers , Concerning the Trinity 3:1).

[ 160 ] The most prominent exponent of perichoresis was John of Damascus (d. 749) who employed the concept as a technical term to describe both the interpenetration of the divine and human natures of Christ and the relationship between the hypostases of the Trinity.

[ 161 ] Perichoresis effectively excludes the idea that God has parts, but rather is a simple being . It also harmonizes well with the doctrine that the Christian's union with the Son in his humanity brings him into union with one who contains in himself, in Paul's words, "all the fullness of deity" and not a part.

[ e ] Perichoresis provides an intuitive figure of what this might mean. The Son, the eternal Word, is from all eternity the dwelling place of God; he is the "Father's house", just as the Son dwells in the Father and the Spirit; so that, when the Spirit is "given", then it happens as Jesus said, "I will not leave you as orphans; for I will come to you." [ 162 ] Relationship between the persons [ edit ] Although all Trinitarians agree that there exists one God in three persons, Trinitarian theologians have differed on how to explain the relationships of the persons of the Trinity, among them are the eternal generation of the Son , [ 163 ] the functional subordination of the Son , [ 164 ] the eternal procession of the Spirit , [ 165 ] [ 166 ] the Filioque [ 167 ] and the subordinationism .

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] The Holy Trinity on the stained glass windows of the Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in Brockdish The doctrine of eternal generation is defined as a necessary and eternal act of God the Father , in which he generates (or begets) God the Son by communicating the whole divine essence to the Son. Generation is not defined as an act of the will, but is by necessity of nature.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] This doctrine has been affirmed by the Athanasian creed , [ 172 ] the Nicene creed [ 173 ] and by church fathers such as Athanasius of Alexandria , Augustine , and Basil of Caesarea [ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] being mentioned explicitly first by Origen of Alexandria.

[ 178 ] Those who teach the traditional doctrine of eternal generation have often used biblical texts such as Proverbs 8:23, [ 179 ] Psalm 2:7, Micah 5:2, John 5:26, John 1:18, 3:16, Colossians 1:15, 2 Corinthians 4:4 and Hebrews 1:3 to establish their understanding of eternal generation.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] However, some modern theologians reject the doctrines of eternal generation and procession, disputing the idea that these texts teach the doctrine of eternal generation. To reject eternal generation, William Lane Craig has argued, is to introduce subordinationism into the Trinity.

[ 182 ] [ 163 ] Among modern Trinitarian debates, the issue of social Trinitarianism is often discussed.

[ 183 ] Although it is a diverse theological movement, many of its advocates argue that each person of the Trinity has their own center of consciousness and own will united in a loving relationship.

[ 184 ] Critics argue it risks veering into tritheism (belief in three gods) by overemphasizing the distinctness of the persons, while proponents say it better reflects the biblical portrayal of the Trinity as relational and active in history. Social Trinitarianism is in contrast to what is often called " classical Trinitarianism " due to its association with many classical theologians such as Augustine, which instead distinguishes the persons by their eternal relations of begetting and procession.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] Nontrinitarianism [ edit ] Main article: Nontrinitarianism Nontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to Christian belief systems that reject the doctrine of the Trinity as found in the Nicene Creed as not having a scriptural origin. Nontrinitarian views differ widely on the nature of God, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit.

Various nontrinitarian views, such as Adoptionism and Arianism , existed prior to the formal definition of the Trinity doctrine in AD 325, 360, and 431 at the Councils of Nicaea , Constantinople , and Ephesus , respectively.

[ 187 ] Adoptionists believed that Jesus became divine only at his baptism, resurrection, or ascension.

[ 188 ] Adherents of Arianism postulated that only God has independent existence. Since the Son is dependent, he should, therefore, be called a creature.

[ 189 ] Arianism was condemned as heretical by the First Council of Nicaea and, lastly, with Sabellianism by the Second Ecumenical Council .

[ 190 ] Adoptionism was declared as heretical by the Ecumenical Council of Frankfurt, convened by the Emperor Charlemagne in 794 for the Latin West Church.

[ 191 ] Following the adoption of trinitarianism at Constantinople in 381 , Arianism was driven from the Empire, retaining a foothold amongst the Germanic tribes. When the Franks converted to Catholicism in 496, however, it gradually faded out.

[ 102 ] Nontrinitarianism was later renewed in the Gnosticism of the Cathars in the 11th through 13th centuries, in the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century, and in some groups arising during the Second Great Awakening of the 19th century.

[ f ] Judaism [ edit ] While Judaism traditionally rejects the doctrine of the Trinity, some Jewish mystical texts have expressed ideas that bear a resemblance to trinitarian concepts. For example, the Zohar (AD 1286), a foundational work of Jewish mysticism , states that "God is they, and they are it." [ 192 ] This passage has been interpreted by some as referencing a kind of "kabbalistic trinity," describing "three hidden lights" within "the root of all roots"—a unified essence and origin. The parallels between these mystical notions and Christian trinitarianism were striking enough that some medieval Jewish thinkers suggested the Christian Trinity may have arisen from a misinterpretation of Kabbalistic teachings. However, some recent Jewish scholars instead view the Zohar as being influenced by Christian trinitarianism. Nevertheless, some later Jewish Aristotelians borrowed from the trinitarian analogies of Augustine of Hippo , making the claim that God is a thinker, thinking, and thought itself.

[ 192 ] According to Philo (20 BC – c. AD 50), the Logos —or divine reason—was the instrument through which God created the world. For Philo, the ultimate Being possesses two primary attributes: goodness and authority. The Logos represents the union of these two powers. As pure being, this ultimate source is called the Father; in relation to goodness, he is called God; and in his rule over creation, he is called Lord. The Logos is sometimes portrayed not only as the combination of goodness and authority within the Father but also as existing above and between them, thereby being identified with the Supreme Being itself. In this way, Philo presents a kind of trinitarian view of the divine, though it differs from the Christian concept of the Trinity. Scholars continue to debate whether Philo viewed the Logos as a distinct person or as an impersonal force.

[ 193 ] Architecture [ edit ] Three doors representing the trinity at a cathedral in Cleveland, Ohio [ 194 ] Almost every detail of Gothic cathedrals —the cruciform plan, the use of light, the statuary, the representation of the Trinity in trefoils and of the four evangelists in quatrefoils , and so on—reveals design decisions that are explicitly theological. However elaborate or simple the architecture, whether purpose-built for Christian use or not, the spaces used for Christian worship speak of theological meanings and values.

[ 195 ] Many Christian churches have three doors symbolizing the Trinity. Other architectural features, such as windows or steps, are also grouped into three for this reason.

[ 196 ] This practice originated in spolia churches that were built from, and on top of, the remains of ancient pre-Christian holy structures.

[ 197 ] Examples are the three royal doors inside Eastern churches and the trio of doors in the façade of many cathedrals . A triangular floor plan can also symbolize the Trinity, as in Heiligen-Geist-Kapelle in Austria.

[ 198 ] Artistic depictions [ edit ] Main article: The Trinity in art The Trinity is most commonly seen in Christian art with the Spirit represented by a dove, as specified in the gospel accounts of the baptism of Christ ; he is nearly always shown with wings outspread. However, depictions using three human figures appear occasionally in most periods of art.

[ 199 ] The Father and the Son are usually differentiated by age and later by dress, but this too is not always the case. The usual depiction of the Father as an older man with a white beard may derive from the biblical Ancient of Days , which is often cited in defense of this sometimes controversial representation. However, in Eastern Orthodoxy , the Ancient of Days is usually understood to be God the Son, not God the Father (see below)—early Byzantine images show Christ as the Ancient of Days, [ 200 ] but this iconography became rare. When the Father is depicted in art, he is sometimes shown with a halo shaped like an equilateral triangle instead of a circle. The Son is often shown at the Father's right hand (Acts 7:56). He may be represented by a symbol—typically the Lamb ( agnus dei ) or a cross—or on a crucifix , so that the Father is the only human figure shown at full size. In early medieval art, the Father may be represented by a hand appearing from a cloud in a blessing gesture, for example, in scenes of the Baptism of Christ . Later, in the West, the Throne of Mercy (or "Throne of Grace") became a common depiction. In this style, the Father (sometimes seated on a throne ) is shown supporting either a crucifix [ 201 ] or, later, a slumped crucified Son, similar to the Pietà (this type is distinguished in German as the Not Gottes ) [ 202 ] in his outstretched arms, while the Dove hovers above or in between them. This subject continued to be popular until at least the 18th century.

By the end of the 15th century, larger representations, other than the Throne of Mercy, became effectively standardized, showing an older figure in plain robes for the Father, Christ with his torso partly bare to display the wounds of his Passion , and the dove above or around them. In earlier representations, both Father, especially, and Son often wear elaborate robes and crowns. Sometimes the Father alone wears a crown or even a papal tiara .

In the later part of the Christian Era , in Renaissance European iconography, the Eye of Providence began to be used as an explicit image of the Christian Trinity and associated with the concept of Divine Providence . Seventeenth-century depictions of the Eye of Providence sometimes show it surrounded by clouds or sunbursts .

[ 203 ] Depiction of Trinity from Saint Denis Basilica in Paris (12th century) The Father, The Holy Spirit, and Christ crucified, depicted in a Welsh manuscript c.

1390–1400 The Holy Trinity in an angelic glory over a landscape, by Lucas Cranach the Elder (d. 1553) God the Father (top), and the Holy Spirit (represented by a dove) depicted above Jesus Painting by Francesco Albani (d. 1660) God the Father (top), the Holy Spirit (a dove), and the child Jesus, painting by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo (d. 1682) Pope Clement I prays to the Trinity, in a typical post-Renaissance depiction by Gianbattista Tiepolo (d. 1770).

Atypical depiction of the Trinity where the Son is identified by a lamb, the Father an Eye of Providence , and the Spirit a dove 13th-century depiction of the Trinity from a Roman de la Rose manuscript Representation of the Trinity in the form of the mercy seat (epitaph from 1549) The Trinity by Russian icon painter Andrei Rublev , early 15th century: this portrayal of the three angels who visited Abraham at the Oak of Mamre (Genesis 18:1-8) Renaissance painting by Jerónimo Cosida depicting Jesus as a triple deity Inner text: The Father is God; the Son is God; the Holy Spirit is God An anonymous 18th century Catholic painting from the Peruvian Cuzco School . This work depicts the Holy Triune God; one in essence, with three persons.

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Ahuric triad Ayyavazhi Trinity Formal distinction Hypostasis (philosophy and religion) Islamic view of the Trinity Saint Patrick Social trinitarianism Three Pure Ones Trikaya , the three Buddha bodies Trimurti , Hinduism Tridevi , Hinduism Trinitarian Order Trinitarian universalism Trinity Sunday , a day to celebrate the doctrine Triple deity , an associated term in comparative religion Triquetra , a symbol sometimes used to represent the Trinity Tritheism References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Augustine had poor knowledge of the Greek language, and no knowledge of Hebrew. So he trusted the Septuagint, which differentiates between κύριοι ('lords', vocative plural) and κύριε ('lord', vocative singular), even if the Hebrew verbal form, נא-אדני ( na-adoni ), is exactly the same in both cases.

^ Very little of Arius ' own writings have survived. We depend largely on quotations made by opponents which reflect what they thought he was saying. Furthermore, there was no single Arian party or agenda but rather various critics of the Nicene formula working from distinct perspectives.( Williams 2001 ) ^ (in Latin) Veluti nunc cupimus videre utrum illa excellentissima caritas proprie Spiritus Sanctus sit. Quod si non est, aut Pater est caritas, aut Filius, aut ipsa Trinitas, quoniam resistere non possumus certissimae fidei, et validissimae auctoritati Scripturae dicentis: 'Deus caritas est'.

^ (in Latin) Tria ergo sunt: amans, et quod amatur, et amor .

^ See also Divinization (Christian) ^ See also binitarianism Citations [ edit ] ^ "Trinity".

Definition of trinity - deity, theology and numbered group (British & World English) .

Oxford Dictionaries . Archived from the original on 26 December 2012.

^ Daley 2009 , pp. 323–350.

^ Ramelli 2012 .

^ Definition of the Fourth Lateran Council quoted in Catechism of the Catholic Church § 253 Archived 3 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

Latin : substantia, essentia seu natura divina ( DS 804 Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Fourth Lateran Council (1215) List of Constitutions: 2. On the error of abbot Joachim . Archived from the original on 7 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 July 2019 .

^ "Greek and Latin Traditions Regarding the Procession of the Holy Spirit | EWTN" .

EWTN Global Catholic Television Network .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2004 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ Fathers, Council (11 November 1215).

Fourth Lateran Council: 1215 Council Fathers .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ "Frank Sheed, Theology and Sanity " . Ignatiusinsight.com. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 November 2013 .

^ Sheed, Frank J.

(11 January 1978).

Theology & Sanity . Bloomsbury Publishing (published 1978).

ISBN 978-0-8264-3882-9 . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

Nature answers the question what we are; person answers the question who we are. [...] Nature is the source of our operations, person does them.

^ Blanch, Jorge (24 November 2024).

"The Trinity: Historical Development and Debates" .

The Mythic Cross .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2024 .

^ Januariy, Archimandrite (2003), Stewart, Melville Y. (ed.), "The Elements of Triadology in the New Testament" , The Trinity: East/West Dialogue , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

99– 106, doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-0393-2_10 (inactive 1 July 2025), ISBN 978-94-017-0393-2 , retrieved 7 March 2025 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Westhuizen, Henco van der (15 December 2022).

Reader in Trinitarian Theology . UJ Press.

ISBN 978-1-77641-949-4 .

^ Attridge, Harold (2018).

The Bible and Early Trinitarian Theology . The Catholic University of America Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0813229959 .

^ Hurtado 2010 , pp. 99–110.

^ a b c Januariy 2013 , p. 99.

^ Archimandrite Janurariy (Ivliev) (9 March 2013) [2003]. "The Elements of Triadology in the New Testament". In Stewart, Melville Y.

(ed.).

The Trinity: East/West Dialogue . Volume 24 of Studies in Philosophy and Religion. Dordrecht: Springer Science & Business Media (published 2013). p. 100.

ISBN 9789401703932 . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

Trinitarian formulas are found in New Testament books such as 1 Peter 1:2; and 2 Cor 13:13. But the formula used by John the mystery-seer is unique. Perhaps it shows John's original adaptation of Paul's dual formula.

^ a b Hurtado 2005 , pp. 644–648.

^ Kline, Meredith G. (2016).

Genesis: A New Commentary . Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers Marketing. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1-61970-852-5 .

^ von Rad, Gerhard (1961).

Genesis . Translated by Marks, John H. Chatham, Kent: W. L. Jenkins. p. 57.

^ a b Hamilton, Victor P. (1990).

The Book of Genesis: chapters 1–17 . Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2521-6 .

^ "For to Us a Child Is Born: The Meaning of Isaiah 9:6" .

Zondervan Academic .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2022 .

^ "Doctrine of the Last Things (Part 1): The Second Coming of Christ" .

Reasonable Faith .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2022 . Retrieved 15 July 2022 .

^ "Bible Gateway passage: Psalm 145:13 – New International Version" .

Bible Gateway .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 31 July 2022 .

^ Cross & Livingstone 2005 , p. 1652.

^ a b Joyce 1912 .

^ Gregory Nazianzen, Orations , 31.26 ^ Genesis 18:1–2 ^ Genesis 19 ^ a b c Watson, Francis.

Abraham's Visitors: Prolegomena to a Christian Theological Exegesis of Genesis 18–19 Archived 2 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Church Fathers: Dialogue with Trypho, Chapters 55-68 (Justin Martyr)" .

New Advent . Retrieved 7 March 2025 .

^ Hurtado 2005 , pp. 573–578.

^ "Baker's Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology: Angel of the Lord " . Studylight.org.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2014 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ a b Fee 2002 , p. 52.

^ Barker, James (2025).

Writing and Rewriting the Gospels . Eerdmans. p. 289.

ISBN 978-0802874528 .

^ Margerie, Bertrand de (1982).

The Christian Trinity in History . St. Bede's Publications.

ISBN 978-0-932506-14-6 .

^ a b Metzger & Coogan 1993 , pp. 782–783.

^ Metzger & Ehrman 1968 , p. 101.

^ McDonald, G. R. (2011).

Raising the ghost of Arius: Erasmus, the Johannine comma and religious difference in early modern Europe (Doctoral dissertation). Leiden University.

hdl : 1887/16486 .

^ Scrivener, Frederick H. (12 November 1997).

A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament, 2 Volumes . Wipf and Stock.

ISBN 978-1-57910-071-1 .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2024 . Retrieved 27 August 2024 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Epistles of Saint John" .

New Advent .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

The Armenian manuscripts, which favour the reading of the Vulgate, are admitted to represent a Latin influence which dates from the twelfth century ^ Scrivener, Frederick Henry Ambrose (1894).

A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament for the Use of Biblical Students . G. Bell.

^ McDonald, G. R (2011).

Raising the ghost of Arius : Erasmus, the Johannine comma and religious difference in early modern Europe (Doctoral dissertation). Leiden University.

hdl : 1887/16486 .

^ Introduction to the New Testament , p. 372, Vol. 3, 1909.

^ Hurtado 2010 , pp.

[1] .

^ Hurtado 2005 , pp. 134–152.

^ "Is Jesus God? (Romans 9:5)" .

billmounce.com .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2022 .

^ Litwa 2019 , p. 53.

^ Lewis, C. S. (2001).

Mere Christianity . HarperCollins. pp.

51– 52.

^ Kupp 1996 , p. 226.

^ Hays 2014 , pp. 44–45.

^ Hurtado 2005 , pp. 337–338.

^ a b Ferguson 2009 , pp. 134–135.

^ Sim & Repschinski 2008 , pp. 124–125.

^ a b Hurtado 2005 , p. 345.

^ Bauckham 2017 , pp. 516–519.

^ Hurtado 2005 , pp. 194–206.

^ Allison 2016 , pp. 807–826.

^ "The Presentation of Jesus in John's Gospel" .

h2g2 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: Earth Edition . 10 January 2008 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ Brown 1970 , pp. 1026, 1032.

^ Harner, Philip B., "Qualitative Anarthrous Predicate Nouns: Mark 15:39 and John 1:1", Journal of Biblical Literature 92, 1 (March 1973), ^ Hartley, Donald (7 July 2004).

"Revisiting the Colwell Construction in Light of Mass/Count Nouns" .

bible.org .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2022 .

^ Harner, Philip B. (March 1973). "Qualitative Anarthrous Predicate Nouns: Mark 15:39 and John 1:1".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

92 (1). The Society of Biblical Literature: 75– 87.

doi : 10.2307/3262756 .

ISSN 0021-9231 .

JSTOR 3262756 .

^ Rhodes, Ron. "Reasoning from the Scriptures with the Jehovah's Witnesses" Harvest House Publishers, 2009, p. 104-105.

^ Hoskyns 1967 , p. 142.

^ Clarke 1900 , pp. 161ff..

^ Polkinghorne 2008 , pp. 395–396.

^ Simonetti & Oden 2002 .

^ St. Augustine of Hippo, De Trinitate , Book I, Chapter 3.

^ a b Aquinas, Thomas.

Summa Contra Gentiles Book Four Chapter 8 . Archived from the original on 28 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ Goodman & Blumberg 2002 , p. 36.

^ a b Hurtado 2018 , p. 62.

^ Hurtado 2018 , p. 64.

^ Buck, George (1 January 1960).

"A Study of the Trinity in the Cappadocian Fathers" .

Graduate Thesis Collection .

^ a b c Basil of Caesarea 1980 , Ch. 16.

^ Basil of Caesarea 1980 , Ch. 19.

^ Basil of Caesarea 1980 , Ch. 21.

^ Arendzen 1911 .

^ Milburn 1991 , p. 68.

^ Attridge, Harold (2018).

The Bible and Early Trinitarian Theology . The Catholic University of America Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0813229959 .

^ Baker, Margaret (1992).

The Great Angel: A Study of Israel's Second God . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-664-25395-0 .

^ Ehrman, Bart D.

The Apostolic Fathers . Vol. 1. Loeb Classical Library, 2003, 119. Ehrman further notes (fn. 97) Clement is alluding to Ephesians 4:4–6. Also see 1 Clement 58:2.

^ Ehrman, Bart.

The Apostolic Fathers , Vol. 1. Harvard University Press, 2003, pp. 411, 429.

^ "Ignatius's Letter to the Magnesians, Ch. XIII" .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2008 . Retrieved 21 September 2012 .

^ Hurtado 2005 , pp. 595–599.

^ "First Apology, LXI" . Ccel.org. 13 July 2005.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 3 November 2013 .

^ Hurtado 2005 , pp. 646.

^ "Church Fathers: The First Apology (St. Justin Martyr)" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ Lohse, Bernhard (1966).

A Short History of Christian Doctrine . Fortress Press. pp.

43– 44.

ISBN 978-1-4514-0423-4 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ Bucur, Bogdan Gabriel (2009).

Angelomorphic Pneumatology: Clement of Alexandria and Other Early Christian Witnesses . BRILL. p. 139.

ISBN 978-90-04-17414-6 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ a b Kim, Young Richard (7 January 2021).

The Cambridge Companion to the Council of Nicaea . Cambridge University Press. pp. 137, 139, 206 fn. 13.

ISBN 978-1-108-61746-8 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ Theophilus, Apologia ad Autolycum, Book II, Chapter 15 ^ Theophilus, To Autolycus , 1.7 Cf. Irenaeus, Against Heresies , 4.20.1, pg. 3 Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching , pg. 5 ^ Tertullian Against Praxeas ^ Osborn, Eric (4 December 2003).

Tertullian, First Theologian of the West . Cambridge University Press. pp.

121– 122.

ISBN 978-0-521-52495-7 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ McGowan, Andrew Brian; Daley, Brian Edward; Gaden, Timothy J. (2009).

God in Early Christian Thought: Essays in Memory of Lloyd G. Patterson . BRILL. p. 61.

ISBN 978-90-04-17412-2 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ "Against Praxeas, chapter 2" . Ccel.org. 1 June 2005.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .

^ Still, Todd D.; Wilhite, David E. (20 December 2012).

Tertullian and Paul . A&C Black. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-567-55411-6 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ Mulhern 1967 , p. 205.

^ Ramelli 2011a .

^ Barnard 1970 , pp. 172–188.

^ Chapman 1913 .

^ a b Cross & Livingstone 2005 , p. 100.

^ "Creeds of Christendom, with a History and Critical notes" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2003 . Retrieved 2 June 2014 .

^ Anderson, Michael.

"The Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed" .

creeds.net .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2006 . Retrieved 2 June 2014 .

^ a b c "Trinity". Britannica Encyclopaedia of World Religions. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006.

^ Steenberg, M. C. (1 January 2009).

Of God and Man: Theology as Anthropology from Irenaeus to Athanasius . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-567-60047-9 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

Thomas Smail's comments on attention to the Spirit in the Constantinopolitan revision of Nicaea seem even more pertinent as to the Nicene original: Attention is so concentrated on the binitarian question of the right relationship of the Father to the Son that the properly trinitarian question that deals with the relating of the Spirit to both the Father and the Son is dealt with in a way that lacks focus and specifi city and that, on any reckoning, is quite inadequate to the rich biblical and especially New Testament material that deals with the pre- and post-Pentecostal activity of the Spirit among God's people.

^ Ngong, David Tonghou (2010).

The Holy Spirit and Salvation in African Christian Theology: Imagining a More Hopeful Future for Africa . Peter Lang. pp. 131, 153 fn. 35.

ISBN 978-1-4331-0941-6 . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

That is why the creed drawn at Nicaea in 325 was fundamentally a binitarian creed as it dwelled on the Father and the Son, mentioning the Spirit only in passing.

35 35 See, R. P. C. Hanson, The Search for the Christian Doctrine of God (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1988), 163-72; John Behr, Formation of Christian Theology: The Way to Nicaea , Vol. 1 (Crestwood, New York: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2001); Oberdorfer, "The Holy Spirit," 29.

^ See Creeds of Christendom Archived 6 December 2003 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Hornblower, Spawforth & Eidinow 2012 , p. 193.

^ a b Shelley, Bruce L. (2013).

Church History in Plain Language . p. 113.

^ For a different view, see e.g.

Excursus on the Words πίστιν ἑτέραν Archived 21 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Greek and Latin Traditions on Holy Spirit .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2004 . Retrieved 18 January 2019 .

^ Heath, R. G. (1972). "The Western Schism of the Franks and the 'Filioque' ".

The Journal of Ecclesiastical History .

23 (2): 97– 113.

doi : 10.1017/S0022046900055779 .

ISSN 0022-0469 .

S2CID 163123385 .

^ Gregory of Nazianzus, Orations 40.41 ^ Mt 28:19 ^ Matthew 28:19 ^ Vondey 2012 , p. 78.

^ Wilson, Jake. (2021). The Supersessionist Forgery of Matthew 28:19.

^ Finnegan, Sean (1 January 2018).

"Is Matthew 28:19 Authentic or a Forgery?" .

Restitutio .

^ 7:1, 3 online Archived 17 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Epistle to the Philippians , 2:13 online Archived 1 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ On Baptism 8:6 online , Against Praxeas , 26:2 online Archived 9 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Against Noetus , 1:14 online Archived 29 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ Seventh Council of Carthage "online" .

^ A Sectional Confession of Faith , 13:2 online ^ 2 Cor. 13:14 ^ 1Cor 12:4–6 ^ Kittel, G., Friedrich, G., & Bromiley, G. W. (Eds.). (1985).

Theological Dictionary of the New Testament: abridged in one volume (Vol. 1). Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.

^ CCC § 236 Archived 3 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

^ CCC § 258 Archived 3 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Basil the Great, De Spiritu Sancto, NPNF, Vol 8" . Ccel.org. 13 July 2005.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ Took, John (15 May 2016).

Conversations with Kenelm: Essays on the Theology of the Commedia .

Ubiquity Press . p. 66.

ISBN 978-1-909188-08-2 .

OCLC 1054304886 .

Quote (in Latin ): "mysterium Christi explicite credi non potest sine fide Trinitatis..." ^ Athanasius, 3.29 (p. 409) ^ Basil "Letters", NPNF, Vol 8, 189.7 (p. 32) ^ Sauvage 1907 .

^ Stefon, Matt (10 December 2015).

"Christianity – The Holy Trinity" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Attempts to define the Trinity.

^ Augustine of Hippo 2002 , p. 25.

^ Augustine of Hippo 2002 , p. 26.

^ Pool 2011 , p. 398.

^ Aquinas 1975 , p. 91.

^ (in Latin) DS 401 Archived 20 January 2025 at the Wayback Machine ( Pope John II , letter Olim quidem addressed to the senators of Constantinople, March 534).

^ Yewangoe 1987 , p. 273.

^ Kitamori 2005 , p. v.

^ von Balthasar 2000 , p. vii.

^ von Balthasar 1992 , p. 55.

^ Mobley 2021 , p. 202.

^ Dimech 2019 , p. 103.

^ Carson 2000 , chpt. 9.

^ Also published in "On Distorting the Love of God" (PDF) .

Bibliotheca Sacra .

156 (January–March 1999): 3– 12.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2024 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

^ Grudem 1994 , p. 226.

^ "Athanasian Creed" . Ccel.org.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ Barth 1975 , pp. 348–349.

^ Pegis 1997 , pp. 307–309.

^ De Smet 2010 .

^ The Eleventh Council of Toledo (675) .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2019 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ Fourth Lateran Council (1215) List of Constitutions: 2. On the error of abbot Joachim . Archived from the original on 7 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 July 2019 .

^ Fathers, Council (11 November 1215).

Fourth Lateran Council: 1215 Council Fathers .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ Denzinger, Heinrich (1911).

Enchiridion symbolorum definitionum et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum (in Latin). PIMS – University of Toronto. Friburg: Herder.

^ John 10:38,14:11,14:20 ^ "NPNF2-09. Hilary of Poitiers, John of Damascus | Christian Classics Ethereal Library" . Ccel.org. 13 July 2005.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ Cross, F. L., ed. (1974). "Cicumincession".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

^ John 14:18 ^ a b Giles, Kevin (7 May 2012).

The Eternal Generation of the Son: Maintaining Orthodoxy in Trinitarian Theology . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-3965-0 .

^ Erickson, Millard J. (2009).

Who's Tampering with the Trinity?: An Assessment of the Subordination Debate . Kregel Academic.

ISBN 978-0-8254-9918-0 .

^ Ryrie, Charles C. (11 January 1999).

Basic Theology: A Popular Systematic Guide to Understanding Biblical Truth . Moody Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-57567-498-8 .

^ Waldron, Sam (7 December 2011).

"Who's Tampering with the Trinity? (Part 17) The Eternal Procession of the Holy Spirit Proved" .

Covenant Baptist Theological Seminary .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 16 October 2024 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Filioque" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 .

^ Beisner, E. Calvin (10 February 2004).

God in Three Persons . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59244-545-5 .

^ Ramelli, Ilaria L. E.; McGuckin, J. A.; Ashwin-Siejkowski, Piotr (16 December 2021).

T&T Clark Handbook of the Early Church . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-567-68039-6 .

^ "God the Son" .

Tabletalk . 1 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Hodge, Charles.

Outlines of Theology .

The eternal generation of the Son is commonly defined to be an eternal personal act of the Father, wherein by necessity of nature, not by choice of will, he generates the person (not the essence) of the Son, by communicating to him the whole indivisible substance of the Godhead, without division, alienation, or change, so that the Son is the express image of His Father's person, and eternally continues, not from the Father, but in the Father, and the Father in the Son ^ "The Blessed Trinity" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2019 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 – via New Advent.

^ Parkison, Samuel.

"The Only Begotten God" .

Credo .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2023 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Johnson, Keith E.

"Trinitarian Agency and the Eternal Subordination of the Son: An Augustinian Perspective" .

The Gospel Coalition .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Wedgeworth, Steven (15 April 2020).

"Athanasius on the Simple God And Eternal Generation" .

The Gospel Coalition .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Graham, Wyatt (13 February 2022).

"Impassibility Makes Sense of Our Faith in the Father and Son" .

The Gospel Coalition | Canada .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Giles, Kevin (7 May 2012).

The Eternal Generation of the Son: Maintaining Orthodoxy in Trinitarian Theology . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-3965-0 .

^ "Bavinck On Eternal Generation" .

The Heidelblog . 28 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ "Proverbs 8:23, the Eternal Generation of the Son and the History of Reformed Exegesis" .

reformation21.org .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ "What is the Doctrine of Eternal Generation?" .

Phoenix Seminary . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Sanders, Fred; Swain, Scott R. (21 November 2017).

Retrieving Eternal Generation . Zondervan Academic.

ISBN 978-0-310-53788-5 .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2025 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 .

^ "Is God the Son Begotten in His Divine Nature? | Reasonable Faith" .

reasonablefaith.org .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Holmes, Stephen R.; Molnar, Paul D.; McCall, Thomas H.; Fiddes, Paul (2 September 2014).

Two Views on the Doctrine of the Trinity . Zondervan Academic.

ISBN 978-0-310-49813-1 .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2025 . Retrieved 1 January 2025 .

^ "Monothelitism and the Trinity | Reasonable Faith" .

www.reasonablefaith.org .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 .

^ Barrett, Matthew (2021).

Simply Trinity: The Unmanipulated Father, Son, and Spirit . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Books.

ISBN 978-1-5409-0007-4 .

^ Barrett, Matthew (1 October 2024).

On Classical Trinitarianism: Retrieving the Nicene Doctrine of the Triune God . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-1-5140-0035-9 .

^ von Harnack, Adolf (1 March 1894).

"History of Dogma" .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2007 .

[In the 2nd century,] Jesus was either regarded as the man whom God hath chosen, in whom the Deity or the Spirit of God dwelt, and who, after being tested, was adopted by God and invested with dominion, (Adoptionist Christology); or Jesus was regarded as a heavenly spiritual being (the highest after God) who took flesh, and again returned to heaven after the completion of his work on earth (pneumatic Christology) ^ Coonrad, Sharon Watters (1999).

Adoptionism: The History of a Doctrine . University of Iowa.

^ Gregg, Robert C. (19 October 2006).

Arianism: Historical and Theological Reassessments: Papers from The Ninth International Conference on Patristic Studies . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59752-961-7 .

^ Olson 1999 , p. 173.

^ Meens 2016 , p. 64.

^ a b "Trinity > Judaic and Islamic Objections (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ The Jewish Quarterly Review . Macmillan. 1895.

^ "The Front Entrance" .

The Cathedral of Saint John the Evangelist . Cleveland, Ohio.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2023 . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

A central doctrine of the Catholic Faith is symbolized in the three arches of the entrance the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity. The center door symbolizes the Father, the north door the Son, and the south door the Holy Spirit.

^ Rae, M. A. (2023). Architecture and Christian Theology. St Andrews.

^ Kennedy, Katherine (1919).

Christian Symbols: Some Notes on Their Origin and Meaning . A. R. Mowbray. p. 12.

^ Hansen, Maria Fabricius (2015).

The Spolia Churches of Rome: Recycling Antiquity in the Middle Ages . p. 59.

^ "Sanierung Heiligen-Geist-Kapelle, Bruck an der Mur" (in German). Bruck an der Mur.

Archived from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ Schiller 1971 , figs 1; 5–16.

^ Cartlidge & Elliott 2001 , p. 240.

^ Schiller 1971 , pp. 122–124 and figs 409–414.

^ Schiller 1971 , pp. 219–224 and figs 768–804.

^ Potts 1982 , pp. 68–78.

Sources [ edit ] Allison, Dale C. Jr (2016). "Acts 9: 1–9, 22: 6–11, 26: 12–18: Paul and Ezekiel".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

135 (4): 807– 826.

doi : 10.15699/jbl.1354.2016.3138 .

Aquinas, Thomas (1975).

Summa Contra Gentiles: Book 4: Salvation Chapter 4 . University of Notre Dame Press.

ISBN 978-0-268-07482-1 .

Arendzen, John Peter (1911).

"Pneumatomachi" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Augustine of Hippo (2002).

Augustine: On the Trinity Books 8–15 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-79665-1 .

Barnard, L. W. (1970). "The Antecedents of Arius".

Vigiliae Christianae .

24 (3): 172– 188.

doi : 10.2307/1583070 .

ISSN 0042-6032 .

JSTOR 1583070 .

Barth, Karl (1975).

The Doctrine of the Word of God: (prolegomena to Church Dogmatics, Being Volume I, 1) . T. & T. Clark.

ISBN 978-0-567-09013-3 .

Basil of Caesarea (1980).

On the Holy Spirit . St Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0-913836-74-3 .

Bauckham, Richard (2017).

"Is "High Human Christology" Sufficient? A Critical Response to J. R. Daniel Kirk's A Man Attested by God" .

Bulletin for Biblical Research .

27 (4). Penn State University Press: 503– 525.

doi : 10.5325/bullbiblrese.27.4.0503 .

JSTOR 10.5325/bullbiblrese.27.4.0503 .

S2CID 246577988 .

Brown, Raymond Edward (1970).

The Gospel According to John . Vol. 2: XIII to XXI. Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-03761-7 .

Carson, Donald Arthur (2000).

The Difficult Doctrine of the Love of God . Inter-Varsity.

ISBN 978-0-85111-975-5 .

Cartlidge, David R.; Elliott, James Keith (2001).

Art and the Christian Apocrypha . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-23392-7 .

Chadwick, Henry (1993).

The Penguin History of the Church: The Early Church . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-023199-1 .

Chapman, Henry Palmer (1913).

"Paul of Samosata" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Clarke, William Newton (1900).

An Outline of Christian Theology (8th ed.). New York: Scribner.

Cross, Frank Leslie; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"Trinity, doctrine of the" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford: University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

Daley, Brian E.

(2009).

"The Persons in God and the Person of Christ in Patristic Theology: An Argument for Parallel Development" .

God in Early Christian Thought . Leiden & Boston: Brill. pp.

323– 350.

ISBN 978-9004174122 .

De Smet, Richard (2010). Ivo Coelho (ed.).

Brahman and Person: Essays . Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-8120834590 .

Dimech, Pauline (2019). "9. Von Balthasars Theoaesthetics Applied to Religious Education". In Michael T. Buchanan; Adrian-Mario Gellel (eds.).

Global Perspectives on Catholic Religious Education in Schools. Volume II: Learning and Leading in a Pluralist World .

Springer . p.

103 .

doi : 10.1007/978-981-13-6127-2 .

ISBN 978-9811361272 .

Fee, Gordon (2002).

"Paul and the Trinity: The experience of Christ and the Spirit for Paul's Understanding of God" . In Davis, Stephen (ed.).

The Trinity: An Interdisciplinary Symposium on the Trinity . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-924612-0 .

Ferguson, Everett (2009).

Baptism in the Early Church: History, Theology, and Liturgy in the First Five Centuries . Eerdmans.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2748-7 .

Glassé, Cyril; Smith, Huston (2003).

The New Encyclopedia of Islam . Rowman Altamira.

ISBN 978-0-7591-0190-6 .

Goodman, Roberta Louis; Blumberg, Sherry H. (2002).

Teaching about God and Spirituality: A Resource for Jewish Settings . Behrman House.

ISBN 978-0-86705-053-0 .

Griffith, Sidney H. (2012).

The Church in the Shadow of the Mosque: Christians and Muslims in the World of Islam . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-3402-0 .

Grudem, Wayne (1994).

Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine . Leicester: Inter-Varsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-310-28670-7 .

Harvey, Susan Ashbrook; Hunter, David G. (2008).

The Oxford Handbook of Early Christian Studies . Oxford: University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927156-6 .

Hays, Richard B. (2014).

Reading Backwards: Figural Christology and the Fourfold Gospel Witness . Baylor University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4813-0232-6 .

Hoskyns, Sir Edwyn Clement (1967). F. N. Davey (ed.).

The Fourth Gospel (2nd ed.). London: Faber & Faber.

Hornblower, Simon; Spawforth, Antony; Eidinow, Esther (2012). "On Athanasius".

The Oxford Classical Dictionary . Oxford: University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-954556-8 .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2021 .

Hurtado, Larry (2005).

Lord Jesus Christ: Devotion to Jesus in Earliest Christianity . Eerdmans.

ISBN 978-0-8028-3167-5 .

Hurtado, Larry (2010).

God in New Testament Theology . Abingdon Press.

ISBN 978-1-4267-1954-7 .

Hurtado, Larry (2018).

"Observations on the "Monotheism" Affirmed in the New Testament" . In Beeley, Christopher; Weedman, Mark (eds.).

The Bible and Early Trinitarian Theology . Catholic University of America Press.

ISBN 978-0-8132-2995-9 .

Januariy, Archimandrite (2013).

"The Elements of Triadology in the New Testament" . In Stewart, M. (ed.).

The Trinity: East/West Dialogue . Springer.

ISBN 978-9401703932 .

Joyce, George Hayward (1912).

"Blessed Trinity" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 15. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Kitamori, Kazoh (2005).

Theology of the Pain of God . Translated by Graham Harrison from the Japanese Kami no itami no shingaku , revised edition 1958, first edition 1946.

Eugene, Oregon : Wipf and Stock .

ISBN 978-1-59752-256-4 .

Kupp, David D. (1996).

Matthew's Emmanuel: Divine Presence and God's People in the First Gospel . Cambridge: University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-57007-7 .

Litwa, M. David (2019).

How the Gospels Became History: Jesus and Mediterranean Myths . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-24948-4 .

Magliola, Robert (2001).

"Two Models of Trinity: French Post-structuralist versus the Historical-critical argued in the Form of a Dialogue" . In Oliva Blanchette; Tomonobu Imamichi; George F. McLean (eds.).

Philosophical Challenges and Opportunities of Globalization . Vol. 2. Washington, DC: CRVP: Catholic U. of America.

ISBN 978-1-56518-129-8 .

Magliola, Robert (2014).

Facing Up to Real Doctrinal Difference: How Some Thought-Motifs from Derrida Can Nourish The Catholic-Buddhist Encounter . Angelico Press.

ISBN 978-1-62138-079-5 .

Meens, Rob (2016).

Religious Franks: Religion and Power in the Frankish Kingdoms: Studies in Honour of Mayke de Jong . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7190-9763-8 .

Metzger, B. M.; Ehrman, B. D. (1968).

The Text of New Testament (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-5885009010 .

Metzger, Bruce M.; Coogan, Michael David (1993).

The Oxford Companion to the Bible . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-974391-9 .

Milburn, Robert (1991).

Early Christian Art and Architecture .

University of California Press .

ISBN 0-520-07412-2 .

Mobley, Joshua (2021).

A Brief Systematic Theology of the Symbol .

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-567-70252-4 .

Mulhern, Philip (1967). "Trinity, Holy, Devotion To". In Bernard L. Marthaler (ed.).

New Catholic Encyclopedia . McGraw Hill.

OCLC 588876554 .

Neuwirth, Angelika; Sells, Michael A. (2016).

Qur'ānic Studies Today . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-29566-2 .

Olson, Roger (1999).

The Story of Christian Theology: Twenty Centuries of Tradition & Reform . InterVarsity Press. p.

173 .

ISBN 978-0-8308-1505-0 .

sabellian heresy council constantinople.

Pegis, Anton (1997).

Basic writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas . Hackett Pub.

ISBN 978-0-87220-380-8 .

Polkinghorne, John (September 2008). "Book Review: The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence for Belief".

Theology .

111 (863): 395– 396.

doi : 10.1177/0040571x0811100523 .

ISSN 0040-571X .

S2CID 170563171 .

Pool, Jeff B. (2011) [2009].

God's Wounds. Evil and Divine Suffering . Vol. 2.

Havertown , Philadelphia : Casemate Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-227-17360-2 .

Potts, Albert M. (1982).

The World's Eye .

University Press of Kentucky . pp.

68– 78.

ISBN 978-0-8131-3130-6 .

Ramelli, Ilaria (2011a). "Origen's anti-subordinationism and its heritage in the Nicene and Cappadocian line".

Vigiliae Christianae .

65 (1): 21– 49.

doi : 10.1163/157007210X508103 .

Ramelli, Ilaria (2012). "Origen, Greek Philosophy, and the Birth of the Trinitarian Meaning of Hypostasis".

The Harvard Theological Review .

105 (3): 302– 350.

doi : 10.1017/S0017816012000120 .

JSTOR 23327679 .

S2CID 170203381 .

Sauvage, George (1907).

"Appropriation" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Schiller, Gertrud (1971).

Iconography of Christian Art . Vol. 1: Christ's Incarnation. Childhood. Baptism. Temptation. Transfiguration. Works and miracles. Lund Humphries.

ISBN 978-0-85331-270-3 .

Sim, David C.; Repschinski, Boris (2008).

Matthew and his Christian Contemporaries . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-0-567-46231-2 .

Simonetti, Manlio; Oden, Thomas C. (2002).

Matthew 14–28 . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-1469-5 .

Sirry, Mun'im (2014).

Scriptural Polemics: The Qur'an and Other Religions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-935937-0 .

Thomas, David (2006). "Trinity".

Encyclopedia of the Qur'an . Vol. V.

von Balthasar, Hans (1992).

Theo-drama: Theological Dramatic Theory . Vol. 3: Dramatis Personae: Persons in Christ. Ignatius Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-2281-0 .

von Balthasar, Hans Urs (2000) [1990].

"Preface to the Second Edition" .

Mysterium Paschale. The Mystery of Easter . Translated with an Introduction by Aidan Nichols , O.P.

(2nd ed.). San Francisco: Ignatius Press .

ISBN 978-1-68149-348-0 .

Vondey, Wolfgang (2012).

Pentecostalism: A Guide for the Perplexed . T&T Clark.

ISBN 978-0-567-62731-5 .

Warfield, Benjamin B.

(1915).

"§ 20 Trinity: The Question of Subordination" . In James Orr (ed.).

The International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia . Vol. 5. Howard-Severance Company.

Williams, Rowan (2001).

Arius: Heresy and Tradition (2nd ed.).

SPCK .

ISBN 978-0-334-02850-5 .

Yewangoe, Andreas (1987).

Theologia Crucis in Asia: Asian Christian Views on Suffering in the Face of Overwhelming Poverty and Multifaceted Religiosity in Asia . Rodopi.

ISBN 978-9062036103 .

Zebiri, Kate (2006). "Argumentation". In Rippin, Andrew (ed.).

The Blackwell Companion to the Qur'an . Wiley Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4051-7844-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alfeyev, Hilarion (2013).

"The Trinitarian Teaching of Saint Gregory Nazianzen" . In Stewart, M. (ed.).

The Trinity: East/West Dialogue . Springer.

ISBN 978-9401703932 .

Bates, Matthew W. (2015).

The Birth of the Trinity . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-104587-5 .

Bellarmine, Robert (1902).

"Trinity Sunday: The Holy Trinity." .

Sermons from the Latins . Benziger Brothers.

Beeley, Christopher; Weedman, Mark, eds. (2018).

The Bible and Early Trinitarian Theology . Catholic University of America Press.

ISBN 978-0-8132-2996-6 .

Dupuis, Jacques; Neuner, Josef (2001).

The Christian Faith in the Doctrinal Documents of the Catholic Church (7th ed.). Alba House.

ISBN 978-0-8189-0893-4 .

Emery, Gilles; Levering, Matthew, eds. (2012).

The Oxford Handbook of the Trinity . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-955781-3 .

Grillmeier, Aloys (1975) [1965].

Christ in Christian Tradition: From the Apostolic Age to Chalcedon (451) . Vol. 1 (2nd revised ed.). Atlanta: John Knox Press.

ISBN 978-0-664-22301-4 .

Fiddes, Paul , Participating in God: a pastoral doctrine of the Trinity (London: Darton, Longman, & Todd, 2000).

Johnson, Thomas K., "What Difference Does the Trinity Make?" (Bonn: Culture and Science Publ., 2009).

Hillar, Marian, From Logos to Trinity. The Evolution of Religious Beliefs from Pythagoras to Tertullian.

(Cambridge University Press, 2012).

Holmes, Stephen R. (2012).

The Quest for the Trinity: The Doctrine of God in Scripture, History and Modernity . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-3986-5 .

La Due, William J., The Trinity guide to the Trinity (Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003, ISBN 978-1563383953 ).

Morrison, M. (2013).

Trinitarian Conversations: Interviews With Ten Theologians . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

Letham, Robert (2004).

The Holy Trinity: In Scripture, History, Theology, and Worship . P & R.

ISBN 978-0-87552-000-1 .

O'Collins, Gerald (1999).

The Tripersonal God: Understanding and Interpreting the Trinity . Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-3887-6 .

Olson, Roger E.

; Hall, Christopher A.

(2002).

The Trinity . Wm. B. Eerdmans.

ISBN 978-0-8028-4827-7 .

Phan, Peter C.

, ed. (2011).

The Cambridge Companion to the Trinity . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-87739-8 .

Ramelli, Ilaria (2011).

"Gregory of Nyssa's Trinitarian Theology in Illud: Tunc et ipse filius. His Polemic against Arian Subordinationism and the ἀποκατάστασις" .

Gregory of Nyssa: The Minor Treatises on Trinitarian Theology and Apollinarism . Leiden-Boston: Brill. pp.

445– 478.

ISBN 978-9004194144 .

Reynolds, Gabriel Said (2014). "On the Presentation of Christianity in the Qurʾān and the Many Aspects of Qur'anic Rhetoric".

Al-Bayān – Journal of Qurʾān and Ḥadīth Studies .

12 (1): 42– 54.

doi : 10.1163/22321969-12340003 .

ISSN 2232-1950 .

So, Damon W. K., Jesus' Revelation of His Father: A Narrative-Conceptual Study of the Trinity with Special Reference to Karl Barth .

Archived 14 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine (Milton Keynes: Paternoster, 2006).

ISBN 184227323X .

Spirago, Francis (1904).

"Lesson 3: On the Unity and Trinity of God" .

Anecdotes and Examples Illustrating The Catholic Catechism . Translated by James Baxter. Benzinger Brothers.

Reeves, Michael (2022), Delighting in the Trinity: An Introduction to the Christian Faith , InterVarsity Press, ISBN 978-0-8308-4707-5 Tuggy, Dale (Summer 2014), "Trinity (History of Trinitarian Doctrines)" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Weedman, Mark (2007).

The Trinitarian Theology of Hilary of Poitiers . Leiden-Boston: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004162242 .

Webb, Eugene , In Search of The Triune God: The Christian Paths of East and West (Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press , 2014) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Holy Trinity .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Trinity .

A Formulation and Defense of the Doctrine of the Trinity – A brief historical survey of patristic Trinitarian thought.

Doctrine of the Trinity Reading Room : Extensive collection of online sources on the Trinity.

"Trinity" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Trinity" .

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Trinity" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Trinity" .

Theopedia .

v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Lutheranism Luther's Small Catechism The Ten Commandments Apostle's Creed Lord's Prayer Sacrament of Holy Baptism Confession Sacrament of the Eucharist Chief articles of faith in the Augsburg Confession I.

God II.

Original Sin III. The Son of God IV.

Justification By Faith V. The Office of Preaching VI. Of The New Obedience VII. Of The Church VIII. What the Church Is IX. Of Baptism X. Of the Lord's Supper XI. Of Confession XII. Of Repentance XIII. Of the Use of the Sacraments XIV.

XV.

Ecclesiastical Usages XVI. Of Civil Affairs XVII. Of Christ's Return to Judgment XVIII. Of Free Will XIX. Of the Cause of Sin XX. Of Good Works XXI. Of the Worship of the Saints Practices Divine Service Confirmation Common table prayer Sign of The Cross Matins Vespers Easter Vigil Liturgical Calendar Wreath of Christ Movements Gnesio-Lutherans Crypto-Calvinism Philippists Sacramentarians Ubiquitarians Lutheran orthodoxy Pietism Laestadianism Old Lutherans Neo-Lutheranism High Church Lutheranism Evangelical Catholicism Confessional Lutherans Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trinity&oldid=1306072370 " Categories : Trinitarianism Ancient Christian controversies Attributes of God in Christian theology Christian terminology Triple gods God Hidden categories: Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2025 Articles containing German-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trinity 113 languages Add topic

