Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Medieval philosophy 1.2 Modern philosophy 1.3 Contemporary philosophy 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Conceptualism 31 languages العربية Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metaphysical theory For the postmodern art movement, see Conceptual art .

Peter Abelard , a French philosopher, theologian and preeminent logician, put forward the theory of conceptualism.

[ 1 ] In metaphysics , conceptualism is a theory that explains universality of particulars as conceptualized frameworks situated within the thinking mind.

[ 2 ] Intermediate between nominalism and realism , the conceptualist view approaches the metaphysical concept of universals from a perspective that denies their presence in particulars outside the mind's perception of them.

[ 3 ] Conceptualism is anti-realist about abstract objects , just like immanent realism is (their difference being that immanent realism accepts there are mind-independent facts about whether universals are instantiated).

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Medieval philosophy [ edit ] The evolution of late scholastic terminology has led to the emergence of conceptualism, which stemmed from doctrines that were previously considered to be nominalistic. The terminological distinction was made in order to stress the difference between the claim that universal mental acts correspond with universal intentional objects and the perspective that dismissed the existence of universals outside the mind. The former perspective of rejection of objective universality was distinctly defined as conceptualism.

Peter Abélard was a medieval thinker whose work is currently classified as having the most potential in representing the roots of conceptualism. Abélard’s view denied the existence of determinate universals within things.

[ 5 ] William of Ockham was another famous late medieval thinker who had a strictly conceptualist solution to the metaphysical problem of universals. He argued that abstract concepts have no fundamentum outside the mind.

[ 6 ] In the 17th century conceptualism gained favour for some decades especially among the Jesuits : Pedro Hurtado de Mendoza , Rodrigo de Arriaga and Francisco Oviedo are the main figures.

[ 7 ] Although the order soon returned to the more realist philosophy of Francisco Suárez , the ideas of these Jesuits had a great impact on the early modern philosophy .

Modern philosophy [ edit ] Conceptualism was either explicitly or implicitly embraced by most of the early modern thinkers, including René Descartes , John Locke , Baruch Spinoza , Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , George Berkeley , and David Hume – often in a quite simplified form if compared with the elaborate scholastic theories.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Sometimes the term is applied even to the radically different philosophy of Immanuel Kant , who holds that universals have no connection with things as they are in themselves because they (universals) are exclusively produced by our a priori mental structures and functions, even though the categories have an objective validity for objects of experience (that is, phenomena).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In late modern philosophy , conceptualist views were held by G. W. F. Hegel .

[ 12 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] In contemporary times , Edmund Husserl 's philosophy of mathematics has been construed as a form of conceptualism.

[ 13 ] Conceptualist realism (a view put forward by David Wiggins in 1980) states that our conceptual framework maps reality.

[ 14 ] Though separate from the historical debate regarding the status of universals, there has been significant debate regarding the conceptual character of experience since the release of Mind and World by John McDowell in 1994.

[ 15 ] McDowell's touchstone is the famous refutation that Wilfrid Sellars provided for what he called the " Myth of the Given "—the notion that all empirical knowledge is based on certain assumed or 'given' items, such as sense data.

[ 16 ] Thus, in rejecting the Myth of the Given, McDowell argues for perceptual conceptualism , according to which perceptual content is conceptual "from the ground up", that is, all perceptual experience is a form of conceptual experience. McDowell's philosophy of justification is considered a form of foundationalism : it is a form of foundationalism because it allows that certain judgements are warranted by experience and it is a coherent form of this view because it maintains that experience can warrant certain judgements because experience is irreducibly conceptual.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] A clear motivation of contemporary conceptualism is that the kind of perception that rational creatures like humans enjoy is unique in the fact that it has conceptual character. McDowell explains his position: I have urged that our perceptual relation to the world is conceptual all the way out to the world’s impacts on our receptive capacities. The idea of the conceptual that I mean to be invoking is to be understood in close connection with the idea of rationality, in the sense that is in play in the traditional separation of mature human beings, as rational animals, from the rest of the animal kingdom. Conceptual capacities are capacities that belong to their subject’s rationality. So another way of putting my claim is to say that our perceptual experience is permeated with rationality. I have also suggested, in passing, that something parallel should be said about our agency.

[ 19 ] McDowell's conceptualism, though rather distinct (philosophically and historically) from conceptualism's genesis, shares the view that universals are not "given" in perception from outside the sphere of reason. Particular objects are perceived, as it were, already infused with conceptuality stemming from the spontaneity of the rational subject herself.

The retroactive application of the term "perceptual conceptualism" to Kant's philosophy of perception is debatable.

[ 20 ] Robert Hanna has argued for a rival interpretation of Kant's work termed perceptual non-conceptualism .

[ 21 ] How Conceptualism Provides Answers The view of conceptualism approaches philosophical questions by looking at the role of mental constructs and how they shape our understanding of the world. For example, in the debate over the existence of universals, conceptualism proposes that ideas (or concepts) like "justice" or "beauty" do not exist independently but rather are mental categories that have been developed through experiences and reasoning.

[ 22 ] This approach allows for a more flexible understanding of philosophical ideas and also accommodates variations in individuals' thoughts. By focusing on the role of mental constructs, the view of conceptualism allows for a procedure that analyzes and interprets different philosophical problems.

Universals The view of conceptualism assumes that universals, such as "justice" or "beauty,” are mental constructs of the human mind. They do not exist in the external world.

[ 23 ] Even though individual objects share common features, the universals that are assigned to them are mental abstractions that allow the categorization and understanding of these similarities between them. For example, the concept of a tree appears from an individual's mental grouping of various trees based on experienced and perceived similarities. There is no external universal for a tree in this view.

Conceptualism and Personal Identity: The Ship of Theseus The Ship of Theseus paradox asks questions about identity over a period of time. It asks the question, if all parts of an object are replaced, does the object remain the same? The way conceptualism approaches this situation is by claiming that the identity is not an innate property, but rather a conceptual structure that is applied.

[ 24 ] Therefore, the conclusion of whether the ship remains the same depends on the conceptual criteria that are used to define identity. This idea also extends to personal identity—it suggests that our sense of self is a construct based on the continuity of our experiences and memory, rather than a fixed nature.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Conceptual architecture Conceptual art Intuitionism Lyco art (lyrical conceptualism), term coined by artist Paul Hartal Notes [ edit ] ^ Laos, Nicolas (2015).

The Metaphysics of World Order: A Synthesis of Philosophy, Theology, and Politics . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 37.

ISBN 9781498201025 .

^ See articles in Strawson, P. F. and Arindam Chakrabarti (eds.), Universals, concepts and qualities: new essays on the meaning of predicates . Ashgate Publishing, 2006.

^ "Conceptualism." The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy . Simon Blackburn. Oxford University Press, 1996. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. 8 April 2008.

^ Neil A. Manson, Robert W. Barnard (eds.), The Bloomsbury Companion to Metaphysics , Bloomsbury, 2014, p. 95.

^ "Aune, Bruce. "Conceptualism." Metaphysics: the elements. U of Minnesota Press, 1985. 54.

^ "Turner, W. " William of Ockham.

" The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 15. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 27 Oct. 2011 ^ Daniel Heider, Universals in Second Scholasticism , John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2014, p. 18.

^ David Bostock , Philosophy of Mathematics: An Introduction , Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, p. 43: "All of Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume supposed that mathematics is a theory of our ideas , but none of them offered any argument for this conceptualist claim, and apparently took it to be uncontroversial." ^ Stefano Di Bella, Tad M. Schmaltz (eds.), The Problem of Universals in Early Modern Philosophy , Oxford University Press, 2017, p. 64 "there is a strong case to be made that Spinoza was a conceptualist about universals" and p. 207 n. 25: "Leibniz's conceptualism [is related to] the Ockhamist tradition..." ^ "De Wulf, Maurice. " Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism.

" The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 27 Oct. 2011 ^ Oberst, Michael. 2015. "Kant on Universals." History of Philosophy Quarterly 32 (4):335–352.

^ A. Sarlemijn, Hegel's Dialectic , Springer, 1975, p. 21.

^ Zahar, Elie (2001).

Poincaré's Philosophy: From Conventionalism to Phenomenology . Chicago: Open Court Pub Co. p. 211.

ISBN 0-8126-9435-X .

^ A. M. Ferner, Organisms and Personal Identity: Individuation and the Work of David Wiggins , Routledge, 2016, p. 28.

^ McDowell, John (1994).

Mind and World . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-57610-0 .

^ "Wilfrid Sellars" . Retrieved 2013-05-24 .

^ John McDowell, Mind and World . Harvard University Press, 1994, p. 29.

^ Roger F. Gibson, "McDowell's Direct Realism and Platonic Naturalism", Philosophical Issues Vol. 7, Perception (1996), pp. 275–281.

^ McDowell, J. (2007). "What Myth?".

Inquiry .

50 (4): 338– 351.

doi : 10.1080/00201740701489211 .

S2CID 214653941 .

^ "The Togetherness Principle, Kant's Conceptualism, and Kant's Non-Conceptualism" – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Robert Hanna, "Kantian non-conceptualism", Philosophical Studies 137 (1):41–64 (2008).

^ Gabriel, Gottfried (2000-02-28), "Logik und Metaphysik in Freges Philosophie der Mathematik" , Gottlob Frege - Werk und Wirkung , Brill | mentis, pp.

25– 37, ISBN 978-3-89785-085-9 , retrieved 2025-04-30 ^ Armstrong, D. M. (2018-05-04).

"Universals" .

doi : 10.4324/9780429492617 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Hawley, Katherine (2004-09-30).

How Things Persist . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927543-4 .

^ Parfit, Derek (2017-12-21).

"Subjectivist Reasons" .

Oxford Scholarship Online .

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780198778608.003.0014 .

References [ edit ] "Conceptualism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911.

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conceptualism&oldid=1296888332 " Categories : Conceptualism Theories of deduction Abstract object theory Metaphysical theories Occamism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 23:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conceptualism 31 languages Add topic

