Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Identity and misnomers 2 Contributions to alchemy Toggle Contributions to alchemy subsection 2.1 Chrysopoeia of Cleopatra 3 Citations 4 References Toggle the table of contents Cleopatra the Alchemist 23 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Norsk bokmål Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Egyptian alchemist and writer Cleopatra the alchemist Imaginative depiction of Cleopatra the Alchemist from Mylius' 1618 Basilica philosophica "Seals of the Philosophers" Born c.

3rd century Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Western philosophy Main interests Alchemy Notable ideas Alembic Cleopatra the Alchemist ( Greek : Κλεοπάτρα; fl.

c.

3rd century AD ) was a Greek alchemist , writer, and philosopher . She experimented with practical alchemy but is also credited as one of the four female alchemists who could produce the philosopher's stone . Some writers consider her to be the inventor of the alembic , a distillation apparatus.

[ 1 ] Cleopatra the Alchemist appears to have been active in Alexandria in the 3rd century or 4th century A.D. She is associated with the school of alchemy typified by Mary the Jewess and Comarius . These alchemists used complex apparatus for distillation and sublimation.

[ 2 ] Identity and misnomers [ edit ] Cleopatra is a pseudonym for an unknown author or group of authors. She is not the same person as Cleopatra VII . Nonetheless, she is referred to as Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, in some later works.

[ 3 ] One example of this can be found in Basilica Philosophica by Johann Daniel Mylius (1618), where her seal is pictured alongside the motto: "The divine is hidden from the people according to the wisdom of the Lord".

[ 4 ] She is also conflated with Cleopatra the Physician . The two supposedly lived during the same time and are said to have similar styles in their writing, both having grand imagery.

[ 5 ] Cleopatra is used as a character within the dialogue of the alchemical texts themselves.

Contributions to alchemy [ edit ] Cleopatra was a foundational figure in alchemy, contemporary with or even pre-dating Zosimos of Panopolis .

Michael Maier , author of Atalanta Fugiens (1618), names her as one of the four women who knew how to make the philosopher's stone, along with Maria the Jewess , Medera , and Paphnutia .

[ 6 ] Cleopatra was mentioned with great respect in the Arabic encyclopedia Kitab al-Fihrist from 988. She is sometimes credited with the invention of the alembic .

[ 7 ] Also trying to quantify alchemy and its experiments, Cleopatra worked with weights and measures.

[ 8 ] Three alchemical texts related to Cleopatra survive. The text titled A Dialogue of Cleopatra and the Philosophers exists, but cannot be attributed to her.

[ 2 ] Jack Lindsay calls this discourse "the most imaginative and deeply felt document left by the alchemist".

[ 3 ] Ἐκ τῶν Κλεοπάτρας περὶ μέτρων καὶ σταθμῶν. ("On Weights and Measures") Χρυσοποιία Κλεοπάτρας  ("Gold Making of Cleopatra") Διάλογος φιλοσόφων καὶ Κλεοπάτρας ("A Dialogue of the Philosophers and Cleopatra") Cleopatra's use of imagery reflects conception and birth, the renewal and transformation of life. The philosopher alchemist who contemplates their work is compared to a loving mother who thinks about her child and feeds it.

[ 5 ] Chrysopoeia of Cleopatra [ edit ] Cleopatra is most noted for the Chrysopoeia of Cleopatra ( Greek : Χρυσοποιία Κλεοπάτρας ), a single sheet document which contains only symbols, drawings and captions (all of which are pictured below). It is first found on a single leaf in a tenth-to-eleventh century manuscript in the Biblioteca Marciana , Venice , MS Marciana gr. Z. 299.

[ 9 ] A later copy can be found at Leiden University , located in the Netherlands.

[ 5 ] Chrysopoeia translated is "gold-making".

[ 5 ] An example of the imagery is the serpent eating its own tail as a symbol of the eternal return , called the Ouroboros : “a snake curving around with its tail in its mouth (eating itself) is an obvious emblem of unity of the cosmos, of eternity, where the beginning is the end and the end is the beginning".

[ 3 ] Also on the Chrysopeoia is an inscription in a double ring this describing the Ouroboros : One is the Serpent which has its poison according to two compositions, and One is All and through it is All, and by it is All, and if you have not All, All is Nothing.

Within the inscription ring is also symbols for gold, silver, and mercury. Along with those are drawings of a "dibikos" ( Greek : διβικός )  and an instrument similar to a kerotakis ( Greek : κηροτακίς or κυροτακίς), both alchemical apparatuses. Another of her symbols is the eight-banded star. It is believed that the drawing of these star symbols and the crescent shapes above them are a pictorial depiction of turning lead into silver.

[ 5 ] Images from Chrysopoeia of Cleopatra Citations [ edit ] ^ El Daly, Okasha (January 2013).

Egyptology: The Missing Millennium, Ancient Egypt in Medieval Arabic Writings . London: University College London Press.

^ a b Taylor, F. Sherwood. “A Survey of Greek Alchemy”.

The Journal of Hellenic Studies 50 (1930): 109–139.

^ a b c Lindsay, Jack (1970).

The Origins of Alchemy in Graeco-Roman Egypt . New York: Barnes and Noble.

^ Stanislas Klossowski de Rola.

The Golden Game: Alchemical Engravings of the Seventeenth Century.

1988. p. 150.

^ a b c d e Marianne Offereins; Renate Strohmeier (7 March 2011). Apotheker, Jan; Sarkadi, Livia Simon (eds.).

European Women in Chemistry . Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co. KGaA. pp. 5, 6.

ISBN 978-3-527-32956-4 .

^ Raphael Patai .

The Jewish Alchemists: A History and Source Book.

p.78 ^ Stanton J. Linden.

The alchemy reader: from Hermes Trismegistus to Isaac Newton Cambridge University Press. 2003. p.44 ^ Rowbotham, Sheila (Sep 2, 2003).

Mitter, Swasti ; Rowbotham, Sheila (eds.).

Women Encounter Technology: Changing Patterns of Employment in the Third World . Routledge. p. 56.

ISBN 9781134799510 .

^ Berthelot, Marcillien (1887).

Collection des ancien alchimistes grec. Tome 1 . Paris: Steinheil. p. 128.

References [ edit ] Apotheker, Jan & Sarkadi, Livia Simon.

European Women in Chemistry Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co. KGaA (2011) Klossowski de la Rola, Stanislas.

The Golden Game: Alchemical Engravings of the Seventeenth Century Thames & Hudson. (1997) Lindsay. Jack.

The Origins of Alchemy in Graeco-Roman Egypt Barnes and Noble NY. (1970) Mitter, Swasti & Rowbotham, Sheila.

Women Encounter Technology: Changing Patterns of Employment in the Third World.

Routledge (2003) Patai, Raphael.

The Jewish Alchemists: A History and Source Book Princeton University Press. (1995) Stanton J. Linden.

The alchemy reader: from Hermes Trismegistus to Isaac Newton Cambridge University Press. (2003) Uglow, Jennifer S.

The Macmillan dictionary of women's biography Macmillan. (1982) v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cleopatra_the_Alchemist&oldid=1252870690 " Categories : Women chemists Egyptian alchemists Ancient alchemists Ancient Greek women writers Ancient Greek women philosophers Greek alchemists 3rd-century Egyptian people 4th-century Egyptian people 4th-century Egyptian women Ancient women scientists 3rd-century Egyptian women Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 08:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cleopatra the Alchemist 23 languages Add topic

