Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and education 2 Career 3 Works and writings 4 Family 5 References Toggle the table of contents Richard Woodward (bishop) 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English Protestant cleric Bishop Woodward by Thomas Gainsborough .

Richard Woodward (1726 – 12 May 1794) was an English Protestant cleric, active in Ireland during the 18th century. Educated at the University of Oxford , he moved to Ireland and would become the author of a vigorous defence of the Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland . Woodward was made an Anglican Bishop of Cloyne in the Church of Ireland .

Origins and education [ edit ] Richard Woodward was the son of Francis Woodward, of Grimsbury, near Bristol .

[ 1 ] He was educated by Josiah Tucker , the Dean of Gloucester , before attending Wadham College, Oxford , where he took the degree of Bachelor of Civil Law in 1749 and Doctor of Civil Law in 1759.

Career [ edit ] Between 1764 and 1781 Woodward was Dean of Clogher and between 1772 and 1778 he was Chancellor of St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin . In May 1778 he exchanged the latter position for the rectory of Louth . In 1781 he was raised to the episcopy as Bishop of Cloyne , being consecrated on 4 February 1781 at Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin , by the Archbishop of Dublin and the Bishops of Ossory and Clonfert . He continued to serve as Bishop of Cloyne until his death on 12 May 1794.

Works and writings [ edit ] Richard Woodward’s best known work was The Present State of the Church of Ireland, Containing a Description of it’s [sic] Precarious Situation; and the Consequent Danger to the Public, Recommended to the Serious consideration of the Friends of the Protestant Interest, to which are Subjoined, Some Reflections on the Impracticability of a Proper Commutation of Tithes; and a General Account of the Origin and Progress of the Insurrection in Munster (Dublin: W. Sleater 1787), the subject matter of which is sufficiently delineated in its title. It proved a controversial and successful tract, running rapidly through seven editions and “evinced the force of the author’s arguments, by the violent enmity which it excited against him in all the enemies of the Church”.

[ 2 ] Both the controversy and the success may be explained in part by such sentences as: “I need not tell the Protestant proprietor of land, that the security of his title depends very much (if not entirely) on the Protestant ascendancy; or that the preservation of that ascendancy depends entirely on an indissoluble connection between the Sister Kingdoms.” Richard Woodward could not, however, be easily dismissed as a bigot. As his memorial in his cathedral church records, “He was an eloquent and distinguished Advocate in the House of Peers for the Repeal of the Roman Catholic Penal Statutes in 1782”.

Woodward also took a keen interest in the plight of the Irish poor and, while Dean of Clogher, wrote both An Argument in support of the Right of the Poor in Ireland to a national Provision (Dublin, 1772) and An Address to the Public on the Expediency of a regular Plan for the Maintenance and Government of the Poor (Dublin, 1775). His memorial records that he planned and was in 1773 the principal Institutor of the House of Industry in Dublin.

He also published a Charge delivered to the Clergy at the Visitation in July, 1793 (Cork, 1793).

According to John Wesley , who attended a service in the church at Clogher in 1771, where “the congregation was not only large, but remarkably well-behaved”, Woodward was one of the best readers he had heard and “one of the most easy, natural preachers”.

[ 3 ] Family [ edit ] Memorial plaque in the north transept of Cloyne Cathedral dedicated to Woodwards children Francis Blake (died 1784, aged 18), John (died 1785, aged 11), and Thomas (died 1812, aged 40).

On 3 October 1763, Woodward married Susanna (d. 11 May 1795), the daughter of Richard Blake, of Bristol. Among their children, Richard (d. 1828) also entered the Church, becoming prebendary of Inniscarra in 1798, and Mary (1767–1799) married the Hon.

Charles Brodrick , Archbishop of Cashel .

References [ edit ] ^ "Clogher clergy and parishes : being an account of the clergy of the Church of Ireland in the Diocese of Clogher, from the earliest period, with historical notices of the several parishes, churches, etc" Leslie, J.B pp35/6: Fermanagh, R.H. Ritchie 1929 ^ Henry Cotton , Fasti Ecclesiae Hibernicae (Hodges & Smith, London and Oxford, 1851) ^ Richard Mant , History of the Church of Ireland (John W. Parker, London, 1840) v t e Bishops of Cloyne George Synge Patrick Sheridan Edward Jones William Palliser Tobias Pullen St George Ashe John Pooley Charles Crow Henry Maule Edward Synge George Berkeley James Stopford Robert Johnson Frederick Hervey Charles Agar George Chinnery Richard Woodward William Bennet Charles Warburton John Brinkley v t e Deans of Clogher Peter O'Heoghain Donal O'Heoghain Philip O'Mulloyre John McKathmoyll Charles Maguire Eugene McCaghwell William McCaghwell Odo O'Luchairen Robert Openshawe Robert Berkeley John Hodson John Roan Richard Tennison Joseph Wilkins William Gore Jonathan Smedley Pascal Ducasse Edward Cresset John Copping William Langton Edward Young Richard Woodward Cadogan Keatinge Lord John Beresford Richard Bagwell Robert Maude Ogle Moore Le Ban Kennedy George Tottenham Charles Ovenden Arthur Haire-Forster Hugh MacManaway Robert McTighe William Morris Robert Mollan Thomas Clements John McNutt Brian Hannon Nevil O'Neill John McCarthy Thomas Moore Raymond Thompson Kenny Hall Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Belgium People Ireland Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Woodward_(bishop)&oldid=1156956662 " Categories : 1726 births 1794 deaths English emigrants to Ireland Alumni of Wadham College, Oxford Deans of Clogher Anglican bishops of Cloyne Anglican writers Anti-Catholicism in Ireland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 Use Hiberno-English from June 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English This page was last edited on 25 May 2023, at 12:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard Woodward (bishop) 1 language Add topic

