Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common external tariffs 2 Union and common transit 3 Modernised Customs Code 4 Union Customs Code 5 Non-EU participants 6 EU territories with opt-outs Toggle EU territories with opt-outs subsection 6.1 Historical opt outs 7 Bilateral customs unions 8 Special arrangements concerning territories of the United Kingdom Toggle Special arrangements concerning territories of the United Kingdom subsection 8.1 Northern Ireland 8.2 Gibraltar 8.3 Akrotiri and Dhekelia 9 See also 10 Explanatory footnotes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents European Union Customs Union 31 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia European Union common customs area See also: European Union free trade agreements European Union Customs Union EU member states Non-EU states which participate in the customs union, or are in bilateral customs unions with the EU Type Customs union Membership 27 EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden 5 states/territories with bilateral agreements Andorra Monaco San Marino Turkey Akrotiri and Dhekelia ( United Kingdom ) Establishment 1968 [ 1 ] Area • Total 4,950,000 km 2 (1,910,000 sq mi) Population • 2021 estimate 518,000,000 GDP ( PPP ) 2021 estimate • Total $16.1 trillion GDP (nominal) 2021 estimate • Total $16.6 trillion This article is part of a series on Politics of the European Union Member states (27) Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Candidate countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Georgia Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Serbia Ukraine Countries with suspended accession negotiations Turkey Applicant countries Kosovo States not on the agenda Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Iceland Kazakhstan Norway Russia Switzerland United Kingdom Microstates and the European Union Andorra Liechtenstein Monaco San Marino Vatican City Special territories EU 3 (EU founding states) Enlargement of the European Union Withdrawal from the European Union Treaties and Declarations Schuman Declaration (1950) Treaty of Paris (1951) Europe Declaration (1951) Spaak Report (1956) Treaty of Rome (1957) Euratom Treaty (1957) Merger Treaty (1965) Solemn Declaration (1983) Single European Act (1986) Maastricht Treaty (1992) Treaty of Amsterdam (1997) Treaty of Nice (2001) Berlin Declaration (2007) Treaty of Lisbon (2007) Article 7 Article 50 Opt-outs Treaties of accession 1972 , 1979 , 1985 , 1994 , 2003 , 2005 , 2011 Treaties of withdrawal 1984 , 2020 Other treaties Schengen Agreement (1985) European Economic Area Agreement (1992) Abandoned treaties and agreements European Constitution (2004) UK membership renegotiation (2015–2016) Executive institutions European Council President : Costa (PES) Parties List of meetings European Commission Von der Leyen Commission President : Von der Leyen (EPP) Vice Presidents College of Commissioners Civil Service Secretary-General : Juhansone Legislative institutions Legislative procedure Council of the EU Presidency Denmark ( July–December 2025 ) Configurations GAC FAC ECOFIN Eurogroup AGRIFISH EPSCO COMPET TTE ENVI JHA EYC Voting Secretariat Secretary-General : Thérèse Blanchet Directorates-general Council preparatory bodies COREPER Council Working Parties European Parliament ( Members ) President : Metsola Largest groups EPP ( Manfred Weber ) S&D ( Iratxe García ) Member of the European Parliament 10th session (2024–2029) Bureau Vice Presidents Quaestor Conference National parliaments Judicial institutions Court of Justice of the EU European Court of Justice Members Advocates General Rulings General Court Auditory institutions European Court of Auditors European Court of Auditors Other auditory bodies Internal Audit Service of the Commission Committee on Budgetary Control of the Parliament Economic and Financial Affairs configuration of the Council Anti-Fraud Office Public Prosecutor's Office European Central Bank President Lagarde ESCB EMU Euro banknotes Euro coins Other bodies European Investment Bank Group Investment Bank Investment Fund EIB Institute European Stability Mechanism European Stability Mechanism European University Institute European University Institute Unified Patent Court Unified Patent Court Agencies, decentralised independent bodies and joint undertakings Decentralised agencies of the EU Single market agencies CFSP agencies AFSC agencies ESFS European Supervisory Authorities SRM bodies Executive agencies of the EU Euratom agencies Decentralised independent bodies of the EU European Institute of Innovation and Technology European Public Prosecutor's Office Corporate bodies of the EU European Data Protection Board Authority for European Political Parties and European Political Foundations Joint undertakings of the EU of the Euratom Other independent bodies European Data Protection Supervisor European Ombudsman Advisory bodies European Committee of the Regions European Economic and Social Committee Political and Security Committee European Union Military Committee EU/ESA Space Council Inter-institutional bodies Publications Office of the European Union European External Action Service European Personnel Selection Office Anti-Fraud Office European Administrative School Euratom Euratom members Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Associated states Switzerland United Kingdom Nuclear power in the European Union Euratom since 1 January 2021 Economic and Monetary Union Eurozone members Austria Belgium Croatia Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Eurogroup President Paschal Donohoe Other currencies in use Bulgarian lev Czech koruna Danish krone Hungarian forint Polish złoty Romanian leu Swedish krona ERM II Enlargement of the eurozone Non Euro countries relationship to Euro Bulgaria Czechia Denmark Hungary Poland Sweden Romania Eurozone since 2015 Schengen Area Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Iceland Liechtenstein Norway Switzerland Non-Schengen area EU member states Cyprus Ireland (Opt-out) ETIAS Prüm Convention Schengen Information System Visa Information System Visa policy of the Schengen Area Schengen Area from January 2023 European Economic Area EEA members Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Iceland Liechtenstein Norway Topics EEA Joint Committee EEA National Identity cards Microstates and the European Union European Economic Area Elections Elections to the European Parliament European parties European foundations Political groups of the European Parliament Spitzenkandidat Constituencies Apportionment Referendums related to the EU European elections 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014 2019 2024 (latest election) Elections in EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Law Acquis Conferral Primacy ( ECJ Case 6/64 ) Subsidiarity Regulation Democratic legitimacy Directive Decision Recommendation Fundamental Rights Policies and issues Budget Customs Union Free Trade Agreements European Single Market Area of FS&J Policies Agricultural Energy Fisheries Regional Citizenship Passports of the European Union Identity Pro-Europeanism Euroscepticism European banking union European Banking Supervision Single Resolution Mechanism Capital Markets Union European System of Financial Supervision Institutional seats of the European Union Integration Supranationalism European Federation Multi-speed Europe Enhanced cooperation Foreign relations High Representative Kaja Kallas Ext. Action Service Foreign Policy Defence Policy Foreign relations of EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Argentina–European Union relations Armenia–European Union relations Australia–European Union relations Brazil–European Union relations Canada–European Union relations China–European Union relations European Union–NATO relations Georgia–European Union relations Iceland–European Union relations Iran–European Union relations Israel–European Union relations Japan–European Union relations Kazakhstan–European Union relations Mexico–European Union relations Moldova–European Union relations Norway–European Union relations Russia–European Union relations Switzerland–European Union relations Turkey–European Union relations Ukraine–European Union relations United Kingdom–European Union relations ( History ) Post-Brexit United Kingdom relations with the European Union Brexit United States–European Union relations Common Travel Area ( Ireland ) Microstates and the European Union European Union and the United Nations European Union Association Agreement European Neighbourhood Policy Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly G7 G20 Defunct bodies European Communities (1958–1993) European Coal and Steel Community European Economic Community European Community Western European Union Convention on the Future of Europe European Union portal Other countries v t e The European Union Customs Union ( EUCU ), formally known as the Community Customs Union , is a customs union which consists of all the member states of the European Union (EU), Monaco , and the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia . Some detached territories of EU states do not participate in the customs union, usually as a result of their geographic separation.

[ a ] In addition to the EUCU, the EU is in customs unions with Andorra , San Marino and Turkey (with the exceptions of certain goods), [ b ] through separate bilateral agreements.

[ 2 ] There are no tariffs or non-tariff barriers to trade between the members of the customs union and—unlike a free trade area —members of the customs union impose a common external tariff on all goods entering the union.

[ 3 ] The European Commission negotiates for and on behalf of the Union as a whole in international trade deals , rather than each member state negotiating individually. It also represents the Union in the World Trade Organization and any trade disputes mediated through it.

Common external tariffs [ edit ] The EU Customs Union sets the tariff rates for imports to the EU from other countries. These rates are detailed and depend on the specific type of product imported, and can also vary by the time of year.

[ 4 ] The full WTO Most Favoured Nation tariff rates apply only to those countries that do not have a Free Trade Agreement with the EU , or are not on a WTO recognised exemption scheme such as Everything but Arms (an EU support arrangement for Least Developed Countries ).

Union and common transit [ edit ] Union transit, formerly called "Community transit", is a system generally applicable to the movement of non-Union goods for which customs duties and other charges due on import have not been paid, and of Union goods, which, between their point of departure and point of destination in the EU, have to pass through the territory of a third country.

[ 5 ] The 'common' transit procedure is used for the movement of goods between the EU Member States, the EFTA countries (Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and Switzerland), Turkey (since 1 December 2012), North Macedonia (since 1 July 2015) and Serbia (since 1 February 2016). The operation of the common transit procedure with the UK is ensured as the UK has deposited its instrument of accession on 30 January 2019 with the Secretariat of the Council of the EU.

[ 5 ] The procedure is based on the Convention of 20 May 1987 on a common transit procedure. The rules are effectively identical to those of the Union transit.

[ 5 ] Edward Kellett-Bowman MEP , as rapporteur for a European Parliament Committee of Inquiry, presented a report to the Parliament in February 1997 [ 6 ] which identified the removal of border controls and a lack of co-operation by member states as being responsible for a rise in organised crime and smuggling .

[ 7 ] Kellett-Bowman's report led to the European Union setting up a customs investigation body and computerising transit-monitoring systems.

[ 8 ] Modernised Customs Code [ edit ] The Modernised Customs Code (MCC) was adopted under Regulation (EC) No 450/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2008 laying down the Community Customs Code (Modernised Customs Code).

[ 9 ] The MCC was primarily adopted to enable IT customs and trade solutions to be adopted.

[ 10 ] Union Customs Code [ edit ] The Union Customs Code (UCC), intended to further modernise customs procedures, entered into force on 1 May 2016. This superseded the MCC.

[ 10 ] The European Commission has stated that the aims of the UCC are simplicity, service and speed.

[ 11 ] Implementation took place over a period of time and most aspects of implementation were complete by 31 December 2020, although some formalities managed by electronic systems may not be fully implemented until 2025.

[ 12 ] One major goal of the UCC is to progress towards the complete use of electronic systems for interactions between businesses and customs authorities, and between customs authorities, bringing all paper-based customs processes to an end.

[ 13 ] Non-EU participants [ edit ] Monaco and the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia are integral parts of the EU's customs territory.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] State / territory Agreement Entry into force Monaco Franco-Monegasque Customs Convention [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] 1968 Akrotiri and Dhekelia ( United Kingdom ) Treaty of Accession 2003 [ 18 ] Brexit withdrawal agreement [ 14 ] 1 May 2004 EU territories with opt-outs [ edit ] An Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements v t e While all EU member states are part of the customs union, not all of their respective territories participate. Territories of member states which have remained outside of the EU ( overseas territories of the European Union ) generally do not participate in the customs union.

[ 19 ] However, some territories within the EU do not participate in the customs union for tax and/or geographical reasons: Büsingen am Hochrhein (German exclave within Switzerland, part of the Swiss Customs Area ) [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Heligoland (small German archipelago in the North Sea with VAT free status) [ 20 ] [ 19 ] Livigno (remote Alpine town in Italy with VAT free status) [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Ceuta and Melilla (Spanish territories in Africa with VAT free status).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Historical opt outs [ edit ] The following territories were excluded until the end of 2019: Campione d'Italia (an exclave of Italy surrounded by Swiss territory) the Italian waters of Lake Lugano Bilateral customs unions [ edit ] Andorra, San Marino and Turkey are each in a customs union with the EU.

[ 2 ] State Agreement Entry into force Notes Andorra Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Economic Community and the Principality of Andorra – Joint Declarations [ 22 ] 1 January 1991 Excludes agricultural produce San Marino Agreement on Cooperation and Customs Union between the European Economic Community and the Republic of San Marino [ 23 ] 1 April 2002 Turkey Decision No 1/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 1995 on implementing the final phase of the Customs Union [ 24 ] 31 December 1995 Excludes agricultural produce Special arrangements concerning territories of the United Kingdom [ edit ] The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland left the European Union on 31 January 2020 and transition arrangements ended on 31 December 2020. Special arrangements have been made for those parts of the United Kingdom and its territories that share a land border with an EU member state.

Northern Ireland [ edit ] Further information: Brexit and the Irish border The UK (including Northern Ireland) is no longer a member of the European Union Customs Union. However, there are special arrangements in place for Northern Ireland: its trade with Great Britain and its trade with the European Union are each now regulated by the Brexit withdrawal agreement (specifically the Northern Ireland Protocol and the Windsor Framework ), the EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement , the European Union (Future Relationship) Act 2020 , the United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020 . These include special provisions for trade in goods between Northern Ireland and the EU which for many purposes are similar to those that apply within the Customs Union, although Northern Ireland remains part of United Kingdom Customs territory.

Gibraltar [ edit ] Main article: Effect of Brexit on Gibraltar Gibraltar left the EU concurrently with the United Kingdom. When part of the EU, it was one of the EU territories with opt-outs and had not been part of the Customs Union. An agreement in principle has been reached between the EU, the United Kingdom, and Gibraltar to negotiate a treaty which would include provisions for trade on goods between the EU and Gibraltar.

[ 25 ] These would be "substantially similar" to those within the Customs Union. As of April 2024 [update] , the agreement has not yet been concluded.

Akrotiri and Dhekelia [ edit ] As already noted above , the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia on the island of Cyprus are integral parts of the EU's customs territory (and remained so after Brexit ).

See also [ edit ] Community preference – Former principle of EU governance European Union value added tax – EU-wide goods and services tax policy EU VAT area European Customs Information Portal – EU Import/Export information service European Economic Area (EU and EFTA except Switzerland) European Free Trade Association (EFTA) European integration – Process of political, economic, social, and cultural integration of states in and around Europe European Single Market – Single market of the European Union and participating non-EU countries Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets European Union–Turkey Customs Union – Customs union between Turkey and European Union Free trade areas in Europe – EU, EFTA, CEFTA, CISFTA, GUAM, BAFTA Free-trade area – Regional trade agreement Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Market access – Ability to sell goods and services across borders Non-tariff barriers to trade – Other types of trade barriers Rules of origin – Rules to attribute a country of origin to a product Tariff – Goods import or export tax Explanatory footnotes [ edit ] ^ For example, Büsingen am Hochrhein , an exclave of Germany within Switzerland.

^ See European Union–Turkey Customs Union .

References [ edit ] ^ Dinan, Desmond (2014).

Europe Recast: A History of European Union (2nd ed.). Basingstoke, New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 88.

ISBN 978-0-333-69352-0 .

^ a b c Customs unions, Taxation and Customs Union Archived 17 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine , European Commission. Retrieved 20 August 2016.

^ Erskine, Daniel H (2006). "The United States-EC Dispute Over Customs Matters: Trade Facilitation, Customs Unions, and the Meaning of WTO Obligations".

Florida Journal of International Law .

18 : 432– 485.

SSRN 987367 .

^ Taric and Quota Data & Information Archived 24 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine – European Commission Communication and Information Resource Centre for Administrations, Businesses and Citizens.

^ a b c European Union, Union and Common Transit Archived 9 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 24 December 2020 Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License Archived 16 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

^ European Parliament, Report on the Community Transit System Archived 19 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine , 20 February 1997, accessed 31 January 2017 ^ Neil Buckley, "Cross-border crime loses EU billions: Inquiry blames Brussels and customs for failing to clamp down on smuggling", Financial Times , 21 February 1997, p. 2.

^ Neil Buckley, "EU plans single body against smuggling", Financial Times , 13 March 1997, p. 2.

^ OJ L 145, published 4 June 2008 ^ a b Deloitte Netherlands , " In 2016 the European Union will have a new Customs Code. But what’s new?

", published 17 December 2014, accessed 11 December 2023.

^ "Union Customs Code" .

Taxation and customs union – European Commission .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 .

^ European Commission, " The Union Customs Code (UCC) – Introduction ".

Archived 31 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 29 March 2023.

^ European Commission, " Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 to prolong the transitional use of means other than the electronic data-processing techniques provided for in the Union Customs Code ", COM(2018) 85 final, published 2 March 2018, accessed 29 March 2023.

Archived 5 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b Protocol relating to the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus Archived 11 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, EUR-Lex, 12 November 2019.

^ "Taxation and Customs – FAQ" .

European Commission . Archived from the original on 8 June 2012 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 of 12 October 1992 establishing the Community Customs Code" .

Official Journal of the European Union . 19 October 1992.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Monaco and the European Union" . Gouvernement Princier.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2021 .

^ Protocol No. 3 on the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus Archived 13 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded, EUR-Lex, 23 September 2003.

^ a b Territorial status of EU countries and certain territories Archived 3 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine – European Commission , retrieved 18 December 2018 ^ a b c d Article 6 of Council Directive 2006/112/EC Archived 29 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine , 28 November 2006 ^ a b c "REGULATION (EU) No 952/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code, Article 4" (PDF) . EURLEX. October 2013. p. 11.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 December 2018 .

^ "Andorra: Customs Unions and preferential arrangements" .

European Commission . Archived from the original on 26 October 2012 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Agreement on Cooperation and Customs Union between the European Economic Community and the Republic of San Marino" .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2013 . Retrieved 15 July 2015 .

^ "Decision No 1/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 1995 on implementing the final phase of the Customs Union" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2013.

^ Martin, Maria; González, Miguel (11 January 2021).

"Deal between Spain and UK plans to eliminate Gibraltar border checkpoint" .

El País . Madrid.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

External links [ edit ] TARIC database enquiry system , gives current tariff rates applicable by exporting country and season – European Commission : Communication and Information Resource Centre for Administrations, Businesses and Citizens.

TARIC and Quota Data & Information : user guides for the TARIC database above – European Commission: Communication and Information Resource Centre for Administrations, Businesses and Citizens.

"Turkey border gridlock hints at pain to come for Brexit Britain" .

Financial Times , February 16, 2017 v t e Foreign relations of the European Union Bilateral relations See also : Economic relationships with third countries Africa Algeria Cape Verde Egypt Libya Morocco South Africa Sudan Tunisia Americas Argentina trade Brazil Canada Colombia Cuba Greenland Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Bahrain Bangladesh China India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Lebanon Malaysia Nepal North Korea Pakistan Palestine † Philippines South Korea Syria Taiwan Vietnam Yemen Europe Internal Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Poland Slovenia External Albania Andorra Armenia Accession negotiations Azerbaijan Belarus Bosnia and Herzegovina Faroe Islands Georgia Accession negotiations Iceland Kosovo † Liechtenstein Moldova Accession negotiations Monaco Montenegro North Macedonia Northern Cyprus † Norway Russia San Marino Serbia Sovereign Military Order of Malta Switzerland Turkey Accession negotiations Ukraine Accession negotiations United Kingdom Vatican City Oceania Australia Micronesia New Zealand Papua New Guinea Former Yugoslavia General Overseas territories of member states European microstates Largest trading partners Association Agreements Free trade agreements European Union Sanctions †= Disputed state, may not be recognised as an independent state by some or all European Union members.

Multilateral relations and initiatives Organisations Arab League ASEAN Council of Europe ECHR G7 ICC IOC Mercosur NATO UN Initiatives African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States Asia–Europe Meeting CARIFORUM Customs Union Eastern Partnership Energy Community Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly European Common Aviation Area European Economic Area Euro-Mediterranean free trade area Euro-Mediterranean Partnership Euronest Economic Partnership Agreements EU CBRN Risk Mitigation CoE Initiative Neighbourhood Policy Northern Dimension Mediterranean Union Stabilisation and Association Process Administration and policies Foreign and Security Policy Global Strategy Neighbourhood Policy Enlargement Security and Defence Policy Administration Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Department Directorate-General for International Cooperation and Development External Action Service Foreign Affairs Council High Representative Josep Borrell Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee Foreign Policy Instruments Service Diplomatic missions of the EU ( ambassadors ) / to the EU Special Representatives Funding Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance Global Europe v t e Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union Leadership High Representative Director General of the Military Staff/Director of the Military Planning and Conduct Capability Director of the Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability Chairman of the Military Committee European Council Foreign Affairs Council Structure External Action Service Command structure on the civilian/military strategic and operational levels ( Military Planning and Conduct Capability within the Military Staff , Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability , Joint Support Coordination Cell ) Intelligence and Situation Centre ( Club de Berne ) Crisis Management and Planning Directorate Security & Defence College Agencies Defence Agency Institute for Security Studies Satellite Centre Council preparatory  bodies Committee of Permanent Representatives Political and Security Committee Politico-Military Group Military Committee Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management European Commission bodies Directorate-General for Defence Industry and Space Funding Defence Fund Policies Security Strategy Everything but Arms Annual Review Equipment Galileo navigation system Secure Software-defined Radio (PESCO) Decorations Service medal Medal for Extraordinary Meritorious Service Monitor mission medal Related Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) Headline Goal 2010 Military Erasmus Military Mobility (PESCO) Intelligence School (PESCO) Kortenberg building NATO relations ( Berlin Plus agreement , Joint Declaration ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Union_Customs_Union&oldid=1294539374 " Categories : Customs treaties European Union Customs Union European Union law Treaties entered into by the European Union Treaties of Andorra Treaties of Monaco Treaties of San Marino Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from August 2016 Use dmy dates from August 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 09:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Union Customs Union 31 languages Add topic

