Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Prehistorical portraiture 1.2 Historical portraiture 2 Self-portraiture 3 Official portraits 4 Portrait photography 5 Literature 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Portrait 71 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 贛語 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Patois Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artistic representation of one or more persons For other uses, see Portrait (disambiguation) .

"Ritratto" redirects here. For the 2020 opera, see Ritratto (opera) .

Portrait of an Achaemenid Satrap of Asia Minor (the Herakleia head , from Heraclea , in Bithynia ), end of 6th century BCE.

[ 1 ] This is an Eastern portrait in purely East Greek Archaic style, one of the two known forerunners of extant Greek portraits, along with the Sabouroff head .

[ 1 ] A Roman bust of the Athenian General Themistocles , based on a Greek original. The lost original of this bust, dated c.

470 BCE , has been described as "the first true portrait of an individual European".

[ 2 ] The Mona Lisa , a painting by Leonardo da Vinci of Lisa Gherardini , is the world's most famous portrait.

A portrait is a painting , photograph , sculpture , or other artistic representation of a person, in which the face is always predominant. In arts, a portrait may be represented as half body and even full body. If the subject in full body better represents personality and mood, this type of presentation may be chosen. The intent is to display the likeness, personality , and even the mood of the person. For this reason, in photography a portrait is generally not a snapshot , but a composed image of a person in a still position. A portrait often shows a person looking directly at the painter or photographer, to most successfully engage the subject with the viewer, but portrait may be represented as a profile (from aside) and 3/4.

History [ edit ] Prehistorical portraiture [ edit ] See also: Prehistoric art Plastered skull , Baysamun , Pre-Pottery Neolithic B , c.

9000 BC Plastered human skulls were reconstructed human skulls that were made in the ancient Levant between 9000 and 6000 BC in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B period. They represent some of the oldest forms of art in the Middle East and demonstrate that the prehistoric population took great care in burying their ancestors below their homes. The skulls denote some of the earliest sculptural examples of portraiture in the history of art .

[ 3 ] Historical portraiture [ edit ] Main article: Portrait painting Roman-Egyptian funeral portrait of a young boy Most early representations that are clearly intended to show an individual are of rulers, and tend to follow idealizing artistic conventions, rather than the individual features of the subject's body, although when there is no other evidence as to the ruler's appearance the degree of idealization may be hard to assess. Nonetheless, many subjects, such as Akhenaten and some other Egyptian kings , may be recognised by their distinctive features. The 28 surviving rather small statues of Gudea , ruler of Lagash in Sumer between c.

2144 –2124 BC, show a consistent appearance with some individuality, although it is sometimes disputed that these count as portraits.

[ 4 ] Some of the earliest surviving painted portraits of people who were not rulers are the Greco-Roman funeral portraits that survived in the dry climate of Egypt's Faiyum district. These are almost the only paintings from the classical world that have survived, apart from frescos , although many sculptures and portraits on coins have fared better. Although the appearance of the figures differs considerably, they are considerably idealized, and all show relatively young people, making it uncertain whether they were painted from life.

Moche ceramic portrait.

Larco Museum Collection. Lima-Peru The art of the portrait flourished in Ancient Greek and especially Roman sculpture , where sitters demanded individualized and realistic portraits, even unflattering ones. During the fourth century, the portrait began to retreat in favor of an idealized symbol of what that person looked like. (Compare the portraits of Roman Emperors Constantine I and Theodosius I at their entries.) In the Europe of the Early Middle Ages representations of individuals are mostly generalized. True portraits of the outward appearance of individuals re-emerged in the late Middle Ages , in tomb monuments , donor portraits , miniatures in illuminated manuscripts , and then panel paintings .

Moche culture of Peru was one of the few ancient civilizations which produced portraits. These works accurately represent anatomical features in great detail. The individuals portrayed would have been recognizable without the need for other symbols or a written reference to their names. The individuals portrayed were members of the ruling elite, priests, warriors, and even distinguished artisans.

[ 5 ] They were represented during several stages of their lives. The faces of deities were also depicted. There is particular emphasis on the representation of the details of headdresses, hairstyles, body adornment, and face painting.

One of the best-known portraits in the Western world is Leonardo da Vinci 's painting entitled Mona Lisa , which is a painting of Lisa del Giocondo . What has been claimed as the world's oldest known portrait was found in 2006 in the Vilhonneur grotto near Angoulême and is thought to be 27,000 years old.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Self-portraiture [ edit ] Main articles: Self-portraiture and Self-portrait Self-portrait by Yun Du-seo , 1710, South Korea ( Joseon ) A daguerreotype of Robert Cornelius in 1839. The oldest surviving photographic self-portrait When the artists create portraits of themselves, they are called a “self-portrait”. Identifiable examples become numerous in the late Middle Ages. But if the definition is extended, the first was by the Egyptian Pharaoh Akhenaten 's sculptor, Bak, who carved a representation of himself and his wife, Taheri c.

1365 BC . However, it seems likely that self-portraits go back to the cave paintings , the earliest representational art, and literature records several classical examples that are now lost.

Official portraits [ edit ] Dutch naval officers hanging a new portrait of Queen Juliana in Fort Amsterdam Contemporary official portraits are photographs of important personalities, such as monarchs, politicians, or business executives. The portrait is usually decorated with official colors and symbols such as a flag , presidential stripes, or a coat of arms , belonging to a country, state, or municipality. The image may be used during events or meetings, or on products.

[ 8 ] A well-known example is the portraying of presidents of the United States , a tradition that has existed since the country's founding.

In politics , portraits of the leader are often used as a symbol of the state . These may include paintings. In most countries, it is common protocol for a portrait of the head of state to appear in important government buildings. In many countries, official portraits of monarchs are often also hung in minor government buildings such as courts, city halls, or police stations. During World War II, portraits of exiled heads of state became symbols of unity and resistance. Resistance members would often illegally keep portraits of heads of state hidden in their homes, such as those of Queen Wilhelmina . The tradition of displaying portraits of the presidents of the country often has extended to states in the USA as well.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Portrait photography [ edit ] Main article: Portrait photography Portrait of Albert Bierstadt made by his brother Edward Bierstadt , c.

1895, possibly the oldest surviving color portrait photograph Portrait photography is a popular commercial industry all over the world. Many people enjoy having professionally made family portraits to hang in their homes, or special portraits to commemorate certain events, such as graduations or weddings.

Since the dawn of photography, people have made portraits. The popularity of the daguerreotype in the middle of the nineteenth century was due in large part to the demand for inexpensive portraiture. Studios sprang up in cities around the world, some cranking out more than 500 plates a day. The style of these early works reflected the technical challenges associated with 30-second exposure times and the painterly aesthetic of the time. Subjects were generally seated against plain backgrounds and lit with the soft light of an overhead window and whatever else could be reflected with mirrors.

As photographic techniques developed, an intrepid group of photographers took their talents out of the studio and onto battlefields, across oceans and into remote wilderness.

William Shew 's Daguerreotype Saloon , Roger Fenton 's Photographic Van , and Mathew Brady 's What-is-it?

wagon set the standards for making portraits and other photographs in the field. Some photographers took the technique to other countries.

Augustus Washington moved to Monrovia, Liberia from Hartford, Connecticut and created daguerreotype portraits for many political leaders for the country.

Literature [ edit ] Main article: Portrait (literature) In literature the term portrait refers to a written description or analysis of a person or thing. A written portrait often gives deep insight, and offers an analysis that goes far beyond the superficial. For example, the American author Patricia Cornwell wrote a best-selling 2002 book entitled Portrait of a Killer about the personality, background, and possible motivations of Jack the Ripper , as well as the media coverage of his murders, and the subsequent police investigation of his crimes.

However, in literature a portrait of a character is a subtle combination of fact and fiction, exploring the individual psychology of the character in the wider context of their environment. When the subject of the narrative is a historical figure, then the writer is free to create a compelling and dramatic portrait of the person that draws on imaginative invention for verisimilitude. An example is Hilary Mantel 's Wolf Hall (2009) which, while acknowledging the work of the historian Mary Robertson for background information, imagines an intimate portrait of Thomas Cromwell and his intense relationship with Henry VIII at a critical time in English history. It could be argued that in literature any portrait is a discreet assembly of facts, anecdotes, and author's insights.

Plutarch 's Parallel Lives , written in the second century AD, offer a prime example of historical literary portraits, as a source of information about the individuals and their times. Painted portraits can also play a role in literature. These may be fictional portraits, such as that of Dorian Gray in the eponymous 1891 novel by Oscar Wilde . But sometimes also real portraits feature in literature. An example is the portrait of Richard III that plays a role in Josephine Tey 's 1951 novel The Daughter of Time .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Caricature Environmental portrait Head shot Hidden face Hierarchy of genres Painting the Century: 101 Portrait Masterpieces 1900–2000 Royal Society of Portrait Painters Self-portrait References [ edit ] ^ a b Cahn, Herbert A.; Gerin, Dominique (1988). "Themistocles at Magnesia".

The Numismatic Chronicle .

148 : 20 & plate 3.

JSTOR 42668124 .

^ Tanner, Jeremy (2006).

The Invention of Art History in Ancient Greece: Religion, Society and Artistic Rationalisation . Cambridge University Press. p. 97.

ISBN 9780521846141 .

^ Kleiner, Fred S. (2012).

Gardner's Art through the Ages: Backpack Edition . Cengage Learning. p. 42.

ISBN 9780840030542 .

^ Winter, Irene (2009). "What/When is a portrait?".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

153 .

^ Donnan, Christopher B.

Moche Portraits from Ancient Peru University of Texas Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-292-71622-2 .

^ Jones, Jonathan (6 June 2006).

"Old masters" .

The Guardian . London.

^ Sage, Adam (5 June 2006).

"Cave face 'the oldest portrait on record' " .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-01-04 .

^ Portuguese Almanac of Photography , 1957 edition, Mário Nogueira. Lisbon, Portugal, 1957 ^ Jojola, Jeremy, Case, Angela, Trump portrait to come down at Colorado Capitol after president complained about it , 9news.com , March 23, 2025 ^ Olivares, José, ‘Insecure baby’: Trump draws ridicule after throwing fit over Colorado capitol portrait , The Guardian , March 24, 2025 ^ Friend, Stacie "Real Portraits in Literature" (2020). Maes, Hans (ed.).

Portraits and Philosophy . Routledge.

External links [ edit ] Look up portrait , portraiture , or portraitist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Portraits .

How to Draw Faces , a how-to article from wikiHow Digital Portraitindex (in German) National Portrait Gallery , Smithsonian Institution Home page , National Portrait Gallery, London National Portrait Gallery Moscow Jeanne Ivy's self-portrait page – What Artists Find When They Search in the Mirror .

Portrait Detectives – Fun interactive introduction to the analysis of portraiture.

Reportret – A gallery of reconstructions of missing portraits from world history.

Royal Society of Portrait Painters v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal Authority control databases International FAST 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other NARA Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐cg556
Cached time: 20250811235226
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.453 seconds
Real time usage: 0.577 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2052/1000000
Revision size: 16114/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 54076/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2457/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55407/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6380908/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  484.963      1 -total
 27.06%  131.245      1 Template:Reflist
 15.96%   77.390      2 Template:Cite_journal
 14.54%   70.519      1 Template:Art_world
 14.11%   68.414      1 Template:Navbox
 13.83%   67.085      1 Template:Short_description
  9.38%   45.487      2 Template:Sister_project
  9.36%   45.380      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.96%   43.433      2 Template:Side_box
  8.47%   41.092      1 Template:Gallery Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:210093:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235226 and revision id 1290082302. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portrait&oldid=1290082302 " Categories : Portrait art Visual arts genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using gallery without a media namespace prefix Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 18:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Portrait 71 languages Add topic

