Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key concepts 2 Disciplines 3 History 4 Journals 5 Branches and related topics 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Physical chemistry 102 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physics applied to chemical systems Not to be confused with Physiological chemistry or Chemical physics .

Between the flame and the flower is aerogel , whose synthesis has been aided greatly by physical chemistry.

Part of a series on Chemistry Index Outline Glossary History ( timeline ) Key components Matter Phase Bond Chemical reaction Ion Acid–base reaction Redox Chemical equilibrium Chemical law Branches Analytical chemistry Biochemistry Organic chemistry Inorganic chemistry Physical chemistry Research Chemist ( list ) List of chemistry awards List of journals List of unsolved problems Chemistry portal Category v t e Physical chemistry is the study of macroscopic and microscopic phenomena in chemical systems in terms of the principles, practices, and concepts of physics such as motion , energy , force , time , thermodynamics , quantum chemistry , statistical mechanics , analytical dynamics and chemical equilibria .

Physical chemistry, in contrast to chemical physics , is predominantly (but not always) a supra-molecular science, as the majority of the principles on which it was founded relate to the bulk rather than the molecular or atomic structure alone (for example, chemical equilibrium and colloids ).

Some of the relationships that physical chemistry strives to understand include the effects of: Intermolecular forces that act upon the physical properties of materials ( plasticity , tensile strength , surface tension in liquids ).

Reaction kinetics on the rate of a reaction .

The identity of ions and the electrical conductivity of materials.

Surface science and electrochemistry of cell membranes .

[ 1 ] Interaction of one body with another in terms of quantities of heat and work called thermodynamics .

Transfer of heat between a chemical system and its surroundings during change of phase or chemical reaction taking place called thermochemistry Study of colligative properties of number of species present in solution.

Number of phases, number of components and degree of freedom (or variance) can be correlated with one another with help of phase rule .

Reactions of electrochemical cells .

Behaviour of microscopic systems using quantum mechanics and macroscopic systems using statistical thermodynamics .

Calculation of the energy of electron movement in molecules and metal complexes.

Key concepts [ edit ] The key concepts of physical chemistry are the ways in which pure physics is applied to chemical problems.

One of the key concepts in classical chemistry is that all chemical compounds can be described as groups of atoms bonded together and chemical reactions can be described as the making and breaking of those bonds. Predicting the properties of chemical compounds from a description of atoms and how they bond is one of the major goals of physical chemistry. To describe the atoms and bonds precisely, it is necessary to know both where the nuclei of the atoms are, and how electrons are distributed around them.

[ 2 ] Disciplines [ edit ] Quantum chemistry , a subfield of physical chemistry especially concerned with the application of quantum mechanics to chemical problems, provides tools to determine how strong and what shape bonds are, [ 2 ] how nuclei move, and how light can be absorbed or emitted by a chemical compound.

[ 3 ] Spectroscopy is the related sub-discipline of physical chemistry which is specifically concerned with the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter.

Another set of important questions in chemistry concerns what kind of reactions can happen spontaneously and which properties are possible for a given chemical mixture. This is studied in chemical thermodynamics , which sets limits on quantities like how far a reaction can proceed, or how much energy can be converted into work in an internal combustion engine , and which provides links between properties like the thermal expansion coefficient and rate of change of entropy with pressure for a gas or a liquid .

[ 4 ] It can frequently be used to assess whether a reactor or engine design is feasible, or to check the validity of experimental data. To a limited extent, quasi-equilibrium and non-equilibrium thermodynamics can describe irreversible changes.

[ 5 ] However, classical thermodynamics is mostly concerned with systems in equilibrium and reversible changes and not what actually does happen, or how fast, away from equilibrium.

Which reactions do occur and how fast is the subject of chemical kinetics , another branch of physical chemistry. A key idea in chemical kinetics is that for reactants to react and form products , most chemical species must go through transition states which are higher in energy than either the reactants or the products and serve as a barrier to reaction.

[ 6 ] In general, the higher the barrier, the slower the reaction. A second is that most chemical reactions occur as a sequence of elementary reactions , [ 7 ] each with its own transition state. Key questions in kinetics include how the rate of reaction depends on temperature and on the concentrations of reactants and catalysts in the reaction mixture, as well as how catalysts and reaction conditions can be engineered to optimize the reaction rate.

The fact that how fast reactions occur can often be specified with just a few concentrations and a temperature, instead of needing to know all the positions and speeds of every molecule in a mixture, is a special case of another key concept in physical chemistry, which is that to the extent an engineer needs to know, everything going on in a mixture of very large numbers (perhaps of the order of the Avogadro constant , 6 x 10 23 ) of particles can often be described by just a few variables like pressure, temperature, and concentration. The precise reasons for this are described in statistical mechanics , [ 8 ] a specialty within physical chemistry which is also shared with physics. Statistical mechanics also provides ways to predict the properties we see in everyday life from molecular properties without relying on empirical correlations based on chemical similarities.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] See also: History of chemistry Fragment of M. Lomonosov's manuscript 'Physical Chemistry' (1752) The term "physical chemistry" was coined by Mikhail Lomonosov in 1752, when he presented a lecture course entitled "A Course in True Physical Chemistry" ( Russian : Курс истинной физической химии ) before the students of Petersburg University .

[ 9 ] In the preamble to these lectures he gives the definition: "Physical chemistry is the science that must explain under provisions of physical experiments the reason for what is happening in complex bodies through chemical operations".

Modern physical chemistry originated in the 1860s to 1880s with work on chemical thermodynamics , electrolytes in solutions, chemical kinetics and other subjects. One milestone was the publication in 1876 by Josiah Willard Gibbs of his paper, On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances .  This paper introduced several of the cornerstones of physical chemistry, such as Gibbs energy , chemical potentials , and Gibbs' phase rule .

[ 10 ] The first scientific journal specifically in the field of physical chemistry was the German journal, Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie , founded in 1887 by Wilhelm Ostwald and Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff . Together with Svante August Arrhenius , [ 11 ] these were the leading figures in physical chemistry in the late 19th century and early 20th century. All three were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry between 1901 and 1909.

Developments in the following decades include the application of statistical mechanics to chemical systems and work on colloids and surface chemistry , where Irving Langmuir made many contributions. Another important step was the development of quantum mechanics into quantum chemistry from the 1930s, where Linus Pauling was one of the leading names. Theoretical developments have gone hand in hand with developments in experimental methods, where the use of different forms of spectroscopy , such as infrared spectroscopy , microwave spectroscopy , electron paramagnetic resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy , is probably the most important 20th century development.

Further development in physical chemistry may be attributed to discoveries in nuclear chemistry , especially in isotope separation (before and during World War II), more recent discoveries in astrochemistry , [ 12 ] as well as the development of calculation algorithms in the field of "additive physicochemical properties" (practically all physicochemical properties, such as boiling point, critical point, surface tension, vapor pressure, etc.—more than 20 in all—can be precisely calculated from chemical structure alone, even if the chemical molecule remains unsynthesized), [ citation needed ] and herein lies the practical importance of contemporary physical chemistry.

See Group contribution method , Lydersen method , Joback method , Benson group increment theory , quantitative structure–activity relationship Journals [ edit ] Main category: Physical chemistry journals Some journals that deal with physical chemistry include Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie (1887) Journal of Physical Chemistry A (from 1896 as Journal of Physical Chemistry , renamed in 1997) Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (from 1999, formerly Faraday Transactions with a history dating back to 1905) Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics (1947) Annual Review of Physical Chemistry (1950) Molecular Physics (1957) Journal of Physical Organic Chemistry (1988) Journal of Physical Chemistry B (1997) ChemPhysChem (2000) Journal of Physical Chemistry C (2007) Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters (from 2010, combined letters previously published in the separate journals) Historical journals that covered both chemistry and physics include Annales de chimie et de physique (started in 1789, published under the name given here from 1815 to 1914).

Branches and related topics [ edit ] Chemical thermodynamics Chemical kinetics Statistical mechanics Quantum chemistry Gas-phase ion chemistry Microwave chemistry Electrochemistry Photochemistry Surface chemistry Solid-state chemistry Spectroscopy Biophysical chemistry Materials science Physical organic chemistry Micromeritics See also [ edit ] List of important publications in chemistry#Physical chemistry List of unsolved problems in chemistry#Physical chemistry problems Physical biochemistry Category:Physical chemists References [ edit ] ^ Torben Smith Sørensen (1999).

Surface chemistry and electrochemistry of membranes . CRC Press. p. 134.

ISBN 0-8247-1922-0 .

^ a b Atkins 2005 , p. 245.

^ Atkins 2005 , p. 324.

^ Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M. (1980).

Statistical Physics , 3rd Ed. p. 52. Elsevier Butterworth Heinemann, New York.

ISBN 0-7506-3372-7 .

^ a b Hill, Terrell L. (1986).

Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics , p. 1. Dover Publications, New York.

ISBN 0-486-65242-4 .

^ Schmidt 2005 , p. 30.

^ Schmidt 2005 , pp. 25, 32.

^ Chandler, David (1987).

Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics , p. 54. Oxford University Press, New York.

ISBN 978-0-19-504277-1 .

^ Vucinich, Alexander (1963).

Science in Russian culture . Stanford University Press. p. 388.

ISBN 0-8047-0738-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Josiah Willard Gibbs, 1876, " On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances ", Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Sciences ^ Laidler, Keith (1993).

The World of Physical Chemistry . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

48 .

ISBN 0-19-855919-4 .

^ Herbst, Eric (May 12, 2005). "Chemistry of Star-Forming Regions".

Journal of Physical Chemistry A .

109 (18): 4017– 4029.

Bibcode : 2005JPCA..109.4017H .

doi : 10.1021/jp050461c .

PMID 16833724 .

Sources [ edit ] Atkins, Peter ; Friedman, Ronald (2005).

Molecular Quantum Mechanics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-927498-3 .

LCCN 2005272751 .

OCLC 59148810 .

Schmidt, Lanny D. (2005).

The Engineering of Chemical Reactions (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-516925-5 .

LCCN 2004043285 .

OCLC 743218724 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: ref duplicates default ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Physical chemistry .

Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Physical chemistry At Wikiversity , you can learn more and teach others about Physical chemistry at the Department of Physical chemistry The World of Physical Chemistry (Keith J. Laidler, 1993) Physical Chemistry from Ostwald to Pauling (John W. Servos, 1996) Physical Chemistry: neither Fish nor Fowl?

(Joachim Schummer, The Autonomy of Chemistry , Würzburg, Königshausen & Neumann, 1998, pp. 135–148) The Cambridge History of Science: The modern physical and mathematical sciences (Mary Jo Nye, 2003) v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fbctf
Cached time: 20250818052134
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.539 seconds
Real time usage: 0.718 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2381/1000000
Revision size: 14664/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79459/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3057/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74529/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.326/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19593428/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  604.611      1 -total
 17.75%  107.293      1 Template:Reflist
 15.33%   92.698      1 Template:TopicTOC-Chemistry
 15.01%   90.774      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.77%   89.273      5 Template:Cite_book
 13.86%   83.825      1 Template:Langx
 10.18%   61.521      1 Template:Short_description
  9.67%   58.489      3 Template:Sister_project
  9.40%   56.860      3 Template:Side_box
  9.27%   56.073      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23635:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818052134 and revision id 1305618662. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physical_chemistry&oldid=1305618662 " Category : Physical chemistry Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 CS1 maint: ref duplicates default Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 03:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Physical chemistry 102 languages Add topic

