Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Positions on the status of Indigenous Americans 3 Works 4 Critical translations 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Francisco de Vitoria 36 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish philosopher (c. 1483–1546) For the bishop, see Francisco de Vitoria (bishop) .

Francisco de Vitoria Statue of Francisco de Vitoria at San Esteban , Salamanca Born c.

1483 Burgos , Crown of Castile Died 12 August 1546 Salamanca , Crown of Castile Philosophical work Era Renaissance philosophy Region Western philosophy Spanish philosophy School Thomism School of Salamanca Main interests Natural law Notable ideas International law Freedom of the seas Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Francisco de Vitoria OP ( c.

1483 – 12 August 1546; also known as Francisco de Victoria ) was a Spanish Roman Catholic philosopher , theologian , and jurist [ 2 ] of Renaissance Spain. He is the founder of the tradition in philosophy known as the School of Salamanca , which laid the groundwork for early free-market economics and individual rights , influencing the development of libertarian thought . Vitoria's work on natural law and the freedom of exchange contributed to later Austrian School economists' emphasis on the moral basis for voluntary commerce.

[ 3 ] Although less known than others of his kind, he has been considered one of the most influential humanists of the Renaissance.

[ 4 ] Noted especially for his concept of just war and international law , his defense of individual property rights and the notion of liberty in trade were pivotal in shaping ideas about non-intervention and economic freedom . He has in the past been described by scholars as the "father of international law", [ 5 ] along with Alberico Gentili and Hugo Grotius . American jurist Arthur Nussbaum noted Vitoria's influence on international law as it pertained to the right to trade overseas. Later this was interpreted as "freedom of commerce".

[ 6 ] His emphasis on voluntary exchange and opposition to monopolistic practices foreshadowed later free market economics.

[ 7 ] Life [ edit ] Vitoria was born c.

1483 [ 8 ] probably in Burgos [ 9 ] and was raised in Burgos , the son of Pedro de Vitoria, of Alava, and Catalina de Compludo, both of noble families.

[ 10 ] According to modern scholarship, he had Jewish ancestry on his maternal side (the Compludos), being related to famous converts like Paul of Burgos and Alfonso de Cartagena .

[ 11 ] He became a Dominican in 1504, and was educated at the College Saint-Jacques in Paris , where he was influenced by the work of Desiderius Erasmus . He went on to teach theology from 1516 (under the influences of Pierre Crockaert and Thomas Cajetan ). In 1522 he returned to Spain to teach theology at the college of Saint Gregory at Valladolid , where many young Dominicans were being trained for missionary work in the New World. In 1524, he was elected to the chair of theology at the University of Salamanca , where he was instrumental in promoting Thomism (the philosophy and theology of St. Thomas Aquinas ). Francisco de Vitoria died on 12 August 1546 [ 12 ] in Salamanca .

Positions on the status of Indigenous Americans [ edit ] A noted scholar, he was publicly consulted by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain. He worked to limit the type of power the Spanish Empire imposed on the Native Peoples. He said, "The upshot of all the preceding is this, then, that the aborigines undoubtedly had true dominion in both public and private matters, just like Christians, and that neither their princes nor private persons could be despoiled of their property on the ground of their not being true owners." [ 13 ] Vitoria denied that the native peoples could be understood as slaves by nature in Aristotelian terms.

[ 14 ] He adopted from Aquinas the Roman law concept of ius gentium ("the law of nations"). His defense of American Indians was based on a Scholastic understanding of the intrinsic dignity of man, a dignity he found being violated by Spain's policies in the New World.

[ citation needed ] In three lectures (relectiones) held between 1537 and 1539 Vitoria concluded that the Indians were rightful owners of their property and that their chiefs validly exercised jurisdiction over their tribes. This had already been the position of Palacios Rubios . Neither the pope nor Charles V had a rightful claim over Indian lives or property. No violent action could be taken against them, nor could their lands or property be seized, unless the Indians had caused harm or injury to the Spanish by violating the latter's lawful rights.

[ 15 ] In one of his lectures, "On the evangelization of unbelievers", Vitoria establishes that firstly, Indians, "should not be forcibly converted; but a second conclusion is that they may be forcibly restrained from hindering the missionaries of the faith, and from insulting Christ and Christians." [ 16 ] Throughout his lecture, "On the evangelization of unbelievers", Francisco de Vitoria employed the concept of what was considered Spanish Christian Universalism . Spanish Christian Universalism was the belief that all matters, arguments, and events were connected in the world, and Vitoria "visualized a universal society in the world into which any number of independent states might fit and foster relationships." [ 17 ] Francisco de Vitoria argued that forcible conversion of the Indians would, "cause great provocation and unrest among the heathen." Secondly, "instead of the benevolent and proper affection required for belief, forcible conversion would generate immense hate in them, and that in turn would give rise to pretense and hypocrisy." [ 18 ] Vitoria defended the Indians against other forms of harm which were being proposed, such as indirectly coercing the Indians into Christianity, "by taxes and levies by which they may be encouraged to become converts to the faith." He argued, "but as for tributes which cannot also be demanded of the faithful, I assert that they cannot be demanded of unbelievers with the intention of making them convert. Unbelievers cannot be deprived of their goods on the grounds of their unbelief, any more than other Christians, because they possess true right of ownership over their own property." [ 19 ] A supporter of the just war theory , in De iure belli Francisco pointed out that the underlying predicate conditions for a "just war" were "wholly lacking in the Indies".

[ 20 ] The only area where he saw justification for Spanish intervention in native affairs was to protect victims seized for human sacrifice, and because of the inherent human dignity of the victims themselves—whose rights were being violated and thus in need of defense.

[ 20 ] Thomas E. Woods goes on to describe how some wished to argue that the natives lacked reason, but the evidence was against this because the natives had obvious customs, laws, and a form of government.

[ 21 ] The Spaniards were in the practice of invoking in their American conquests the so-called " Requerimiento ", a document read to the Indians before the commencement of any hostilities. The "Requerimiento", declared the universal authority of the Pope, and the authority the Spanish monarchs had received from the Pope over this part of the New World for the purpose of colonizing and evangelizing it. The Indians had to accept the sovereignty of the Spanish monarchs or be compelled to submit by force. Vitoria denied the legitimacy of this document.

[ 10 ] Vitoria follows the arguments against Spanish rule of South-American territories by arguments that justify the Spanish practices, which are grounded in natural law. He asserts the right of the Spaniards to travel freely, and to trade, which includes searching for, mining, and exporting the abundant natural resources they find in South America. Unlawful resistance infringing upon the Spaniard's rights of travel, trade and exploitation, or infringing upon the Pope's right to spread Christianity, can be used to justify a "just war" of the Spaniards against the indigenous inhabitants, ending in Spanish rule over the territories in question.

[ 22 ] Vitoria's works are known only from his lecture notes, as he has published nothing in his lifetime. Nevertheless, his influence such as that on the Dutch legal philosopher Hugo Grotius was significant.

[ 23 ] Relectiones Theologicae was published posthumously several times (Lyon, 1557; Salamanca, 1565; Ingolstadt, 1580; Lyon, 1586 & 1587; Venice, 1626; Venice, 1640; Cologne & Frankfurt, 1696; and Madrid, 1765).

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Francisco de Vitoria's writings have been interpreted by various scholars to support contrary policies.

[ 26 ] Antony Anghie and others argue that Vitoria's humanitarianism legitimized conquest.

[ 27 ] Francisco de Vitoria presented strict interpretation of baptism of desire : When we postulate invincible ignorance on the subject of baptism or of the Christian faith, it does not follow that a person can be saved without baptism or the Christian faith. For the aborigines to whom no preaching of the faith or Christian religion has come will be damned for mortal sins or for idolatry, but not for the sin of unbelief. As St. Thomas says, however, if they do what in them lies, accompanied by a good life according to the law of nature, it is consistent with God's providence that he will illuminate them regarding the name of Christ.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Statue of Francisco de Vitoria, in Vitoria-Gasteiz Notes of his lectures from 1527 to 1540 were copied by students and published under the following titles: De potestate civili , 1528 Del Homicidio , 1530 De matrimonio , 1531 De potestate ecclesiae I and II , 1532 De Indis , 1532 De Jure belli Hispanorum in barbaros , 1532 De potestate papae et concilii , 1534 Relectiones Theologicae , 1557 Summa sacramentorum Ecclesiae , 1561 De Indis et De Jure Belli (1917 translation of a large part of the Relectiones Theologicae ) Critical translations [ edit ] Francisco de Vitoria: Political Writings , translated by Jeremy Lawrance, ed. Jeremy Lawrance and Anthony Pagden , Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Francisco de Vitoria: Relection on Homicide & Commentary on Summa theologiae IIa-IIae Q. 64 (Thomas Aquinas) , translated with an Introduction and Notes by John P. Doyle, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1997.

References [ edit ] Library resources about Francisco de Vitoria Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Francisco de Vitoria Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries ^ Gottfried, Paul (1990).

Carl Schmitt . Claridge Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-870626-46-0 .

^ Anghie, Antony (2007-04-26).

Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-70272-0 .

^ Grice-Hutchinson, Marjorie (1952).

The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary Theory, 1544-1605 (PDF) . Mises Institute.

^ Frayle Delgado, Luis (2004).

Pensamiento humanista de Francisco de Vitoria . San Esteban. p. 28-29.

ISBN 9788482601458 .

^ a b Scott, James Brown; Vitoria, Francisco de (2000).

The Spanish Origin of International Law: Francisco de Vitoria and His Law of Nations . The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-58477-110-4 .

^ Arthur Nussbaum (1947).

A concise history of the law of nations . New York: Macmillan Co. p. 82.

^ Grice-Hutchinson, Marjorie (1952).

The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary Theory, 1544-1605 (PDF) . Mises Institute.

^ Alves, Andre Azevedo; Moreira, Jose (2013-03-14).

The Salamanca School . Bloomsbury Publishing USA.

ISBN 978-1-62356-185-7 .

^ Vitoria, Francisco de (1991-10-31).

Vitoria: Political Writings . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-316-58344-9 .

^ a b Hernandez O.P., Ramon. "The Internationalization of Francisco de Vitoria and Domingo de Soto", translated by Jay J. Aragones, Fordham International Law Journal , Vol. 15, Issue 4, 1991 ^ Carlos G. Noreña, Studies in Spanish Renaissance Thought , Springer Science & Business Media (2012), p. 37 ^ Schroeder, Henry Joseph. "Francis of Vittoria." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 10 Sept. 2014 ^ Francisco de Vitoria, “The Law of War,” in War and Christian Ethics, ed. Author F. Holmes (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House, 1975), 118-119.

^ "Francisco de Vitoria", Columbia University ^ Pagden, Anthony (1991).

Vitoria: Political Writings (Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought) . UK: Cambridge University Press. p. xvi.

ISBN 0-521-36714-X .

^ Francisco de Vitoria, “On the Evangelization of Unbelievers,” 1534-35, in Colonial Latin America : A Documentary History . Denver: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002, 70.

^ Kenneth Mills et al., Colonial Latin America : A Documentary History.

Denver: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002, 67.

^ Kenneth Mills et al., Colonial Latin America : A Documentary History.

Denver: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002, 71.

^ Kenneth Mills et al., Colonial Latin America : A Documentary History.

Denver: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002, 75-76.

^ a b Salas Jr., Victor M., "Francisco de Vitoria on the Ius Gentium and the American Indios", Ave Maria Law Review , 2012 Archived 2014-09-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ Woods, Thomas E. (Jr.) (2005).

How The Catholic Church Built Western Civilization . Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 0-89526-038-7 .

^ Bentancor, Orlando (2014).

"Francisco de Vitoria, Carl Schmitt, and Originary Technicity" .

Política Común .

5 (20200129).

doi : 10.3998/pc.12322227.0005.002 .

hdl : 2027/spo.12322227.0005.002 .

ISSN 2007-5227 .

^ Borschberg, Peter (2011).

Hugo Grotius, the Portuguese and Free Trade in the East Indies . Singapore and Leiden: NUS Press and KITLV Press.

ISBN 978-9971-69-467-8 .

^ Ernest Nys, introduction to Francisco de Vitoria, De Indis et Ivre Belli , English translation of a substantial portion of Relectiones XII Theologicae , available online.

^ Coujou, Jean-Paul, & Zorroza, María Idoya.

Bibliografía Vitoriana . Pamplona: Publicaciones Universidad de Navarra, 2014.

[1] ^ Francisco Castilla Urbano, El pensamiento de Francisco de Vitoria. Filosofía, política e indio Americano (Barcelona, Anthropos, 1992) note 5, 317-323] ^ Koskenniemi, Martti (December 2009).

"Colonization of the 'Indies' – the Origin of International Law?" (PDF) . University of Helsinki. Archived from the original (PDF) on Dec 16, 2017.

Sources [ edit ] Johannes Thumfart: Die Begründung der globalpolitischen Philosophie. Zu Francisco de Vitorias "relectio de indis recenter inventis" von 1539 .

Berlin 2009. (256 pp.) English Wikisource has original works by or about: Francisco de Vitoria External links [ edit ] Francisco de Vitoria, De Indis (1532) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie 2 DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francisco_de_Vitoria&oldid=1302156856 " Categories : 1480s births 1546 deaths 16th-century Spanish jurists 16th-century Spanish male writers 16th-century Spanish philosophers 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic theologians Academic staff of the University of Salamanca Catholic philosophers International law scholars Natural law ethicists Scholastic philosophers School of Salamanca Spanish Dominicans Spanish male non-fiction writers Spanish people of Jewish descent Spanish Roman Catholic writers Spanish theologians Spanish humanists Thomists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles needing additional references from August 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 18:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francisco de Vitoria 36 languages Add topic

