Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Personal characteristics 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Figures of the Regions 2.2 Sustenance for Bodies and Souls 2.2.1 Principles of Interaction 2.2.2 Mental health and mental illness 2.2.3 Cognitive and medical psychology and cognitive therapy 2.2.4 Psychophysiology and psychosomatic medicine 2.2.5 Depression 2.2.6 Phobias 2.2.7 OCD 2.2.8 Managing fear 2.2.8.1 Knowledge of the cause 2.2.8.2 Exposure therapy 2.2.9 Core emotions 2.2.10 Sexual attributes 3 Politics 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Abu Zayd al-Balkhi 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano Қазақша Kurdî Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Română Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian polymath (850-934) This article is about the scientist. For the poet, see Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Balkhi-Rumi .

Abu Zayd Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi Born 850 Shamistiyan, Balkh , Khorasan (modern day northern Afghanistan ) Died 934 (aged 83–84) Philosophical work Era Islamic Golden Age Region Persian scholar School Persian science , Islamic science , Islamic geography , Islamic mathematics , Islamic medicine , Islamic psychological thought Main interests Geography , Mathematics , Medicine , Neuroscience , Psychology , Science Abu Zayd Ahmed ibn Sahl Balkhi ( Persian : ابو زید احمد بن سهل بلخی ) was a Persian Muslim polymath : a geographer , mathematician , physician , psychologist and scientist . Born in 850 CE in Shamistiyan, in the province of Balkh , Greater Khorasan , he was a disciple of al-Kindi . He also founded the "Balkhī school" of terrestrial mapping in Baghdad .

[ 1 ] Al-Balkhi is believed to have been one of the earliest to diagnose that mental illness can have psychological and physiological causes and he was the first to typify four types of emotional disorders: fear and anxiety; anger and aggression; sadness and depression; and obsessions.

Biography [ edit ] al-Balkhi was born in 850 CE in a small village called Shamisitiyan, in an area called Balkh which is now part of Afghanistan . As a young man, around the time of al-Kindi's death, [ 2 ] al-Balkhi travelled to Iraq.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] At this time Islamic culture was making strong efforts to absorb the knowledge of previous civilisations, and having its own cultural flowering. This period is sometimes termed the Islamic Golden Age .

al-Balkhi spent eight years in Iraq. One of his teachers was philosopher Abū Yūsof alKendī.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] He returned to Balḵ and began teaching what he had learned.

Ahmad ibn Sahl , the ruler of Balkh and its surroundings, offered him both a writing and a ministerial position and al-Balkh accepted the former and declined the latter. The king respected his decision and rewarded him handsomely.

al-Balkhi later travelled to Baghdad again, before returning to Balkh for the last time and staying there until his death in 934 CE.

[ 5 ] [ 4 ] Personal characteristics [ edit ] al-Balkhi had a reserved and isolated character, leading scholars to have a lack of knowledge on his personal life.

[ 5 ] According to Abu Muhammad al-Hassan ibn al-Waziri, one of his students, al-Balkhi's face was covered in scars that he acquired during an episode of smallpox .

Works [ edit ] Of the many books ascribed to him in the al-Fihrist by Ibn al-Nadim , one can note The Excellency of Mathematics and his On Certitude in Astrology . His Figures of the Climates ( Suwar al-aqalim ) consisted chiefly of geographical maps. He also wrote the medical and psychological work, Masalih al-Abdan wa al-Anfus ( Sustenance for Body and Soul ).

A modern scholar describes the bulk of his works as "more than 60 books and manuscripts, meticulously researching disciplines as varied in scope as geography, medicine, theology, politics, philosophy, poetry, literature, Arabic grammar, astrology, astronomy, mathematics, biography, ethics, sociology as well as others." [ 6 ] Figures of the Regions [ edit ] His Figures of the Regions ( Suwar al-aqalim ) consisted chiefly of geographical maps. It led to him founding the "Balkhī school" of terrestrial mapping in Baghdad . The geographers of this school also wrote extensively of the peoples, products, and customs of areas in the Muslim world , with little interest in the non-Muslim realms.

[ 1 ] Sustenance for Bodies and Souls [ edit ] The second part of this manuscript is known as Sustenance for the Soul.

Principles of Interaction [ edit ] His balance between technical terminology and common ethical sense could be found in his monograph where he talks about the interaction between the elements of the body, seasons, and the traditional "non-natural" health elements, such as food and sleep.

[ 2 ] Mental health and mental illness [ edit ] In Islamic psychology , the concepts of mental health and "mental hygiene" were introduced by Abu Zayd al-Balkhi, who often related it to spiritual health. In his Masalih al-Abdan wa al-Anfus ( Sustenance for Body and Soul ), he was the first to successfully discuss diseases related to both the body and the soul. He used the term al-Tibb al-Ruhani to describe spiritual and psychological health, and the term Tibb al-Qalb to describe mental medicine.

He criticized many medical doctors in his time for placing too much emphasis on physical illnesses and neglecting the psychological or mental illnesses of patients, and argued that "since man’s construction
is from both his soul and his body, therefore, human existence cannot be healthy without the ishtibak [interweaving or entangling] of soul and body." He further argued that "if the body gets sick, the nafs [psyche] loses much of its cognitive and comprehensive ability and fails to enjoy the desirous aspects of life" and that "if the nafs gets sick, the body may also find no joy in life and may eventually
develop a physical illness." Al-Balkhi traced back his ideas on mental health to verses of the Qur'an and hadiths attributed to Muhammad , such as: [ 7 ] "In their hearts is a disease." — Qur'an 2:10 "Truly, in the body there is a morsel of flesh, and when it is corrupt the body is corrupt, and when it
is sound the body is sound. Truly, it is the qalb [heart]." — Sahih al-Bukhari , Kitab al-Iman "Verily Allah does not consider your appearances or your wealth in (appraising you) but He considers your hearts and your deeds." — Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal , no. 8707 Cognitive and medical psychology and cognitive therapy [ edit ] Abu Zayd al-Balkhi was the first to differentiate between neurosis and psychosis , and the first to classify neurotic disorders and pioneer cognitive therapy in order to treat each of these classified disorders. He classified neurosis into four emotional disorders: fear and anxiety , anger and aggression , sadness and depression , and obsession . He further classified three types of depression: normal depression or sadness ( huzn ), endogenous depression originating from within the body, and reactive clinical depression originating from outside the body. He also wrote that a healthy individual should always keep healthy thoughts and feelings in his mind in the case of unexpected emotional outbursts in the same way drugs and First Aid medicine are kept nearby for unexpected physical emergencies . He stated that a balance between the mind and body is required for good health and that an imbalance between the two can cause sickness. Al-Balkhi also introduced the concept of reciprocal inhibition ( al-ilaj bi al-did ), which was re-introduced over a thousand years later by Joseph Wolpe in 1969.

[ 8 ] Psychophysiology and psychosomatic medicine [ edit ] The Muslim physician Abu Zayd al-Balkhi was a pioneer of psychotherapy, psychophysiology and psychosomatic medicine . He recognized that the body and the soul can be healthy or sick, or "balanced or imbalanced", and that mental illness can have both psychological and/or physiological causes. He wrote that imbalance of the body can result in fever , headaches and other physical illnesses, while imbalance of the soul can result in anger , anxiety , sadness and other mental symptoms.

Depression [ edit ] al-Balkhi recognized two types of depression : one caused by known reasons such as loss or failure , which can be treated psychologically through both external methods (such as persuasive talking, preaching and advising) and internal methods (such as the "development of inner thoughts and cognitions which help the person get rid of his depressive condition"); and the other caused by unknown reasons such as a "sudden affliction of sorrow and distress, which persists all the time, preventing the afflicted person from any physical activity or from showing any happiness or enjoying any of the pleasures". He thought this was caused by physiological reasons (such as impurity of the blood) and could be treated through physical medicine.

[ 7 ] He also wrote comparisons between physical disorders with mental disorders , and showed how psychosomatic disorders can be caused by certain interactions between them.

[ 8 ] Phobias [ edit ] Abu Zayd al-Balkhi initially wrote about phobia in the 9th century, calling it Fazaa'. As of today, it is still defined in a similar manner as to what was described by al-Balkhi. Al-Balkhi details the disorder as an extreme type of fear that results in the anxiety levels of a person spiking due to increasing the depth of blood in the body. This causes the person to become shaky and disoriented, preventing them from making decisions in a timely manner. Rather than taking medicine or proceeding with blood letting , which were common methods to help an individual, he suggested gradual exposure to the object or situation that caused the fear. This technique was known as reyadat al-nafs.

[ 8 ] OCD [ edit ] al-Balkhi differentiated OCD from other forms of mental illness.

[ 9 ] Managing fear [ edit ] Knowledge of the cause [ edit ] al-Balkhi quotes a saying that "most of the terror comes from anticipation of the terror" and advocates being informed and realistic about the true nature of a concern.

[ 10 ] Exposure therapy [ edit ] He advocates 'forcing oneself to repeatedly expose one's hearing and sight to noxious things' and to 'moved again and again near the thing it is scared of  until it becomes used to it and loses its fear.

[ 11 ] Core emotions [ edit ] al-Balkhi wrote that anxiety and distress were at the core of all harmful emotional symptoms (e.g. anger) and that happiness and joyfulness were the root cause of all positive emotional states (e.g. tranquility, pleasure and delight).

[ 12 ] Sexual attributes [ edit ] While the topic of sex is more widely discussed today, al-Balkhi explored the subject in detail, specifically various sexual attributes and the affects that they have on an individual. A specific talking point that he mentioned in his work was the act of remaining abstinent . By doing so, an individual subjects themself to physical ailments, since the act is deemed by him to be "unnatural". He also recommended a specific diet and to abstain from taking medications that were believed to enhance sexuality as a means to treat sexual impotence.

[ 5 ] Politics [ edit ] In a collection of works by the 10th-century al-Tawhidi , al-Balkhi describes politics as an art that aims to contribute to the rise of a country. Furthermore, he mentions five separate sources that play into the overall outcome of politics. These include the tangible cause as corresponding to the subjects' affairs, the official reason as to the overall well-being of the people, the driving force as "the ruler’s concern for the affairs of his subjects", the purpose as the preservation of public welfare, as well as the instrumental cause consisting of using "incitement and intimidation" to achieve the goal.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] List of scientists in medieval Islamic world Science in the medieval Islamic world Mathematics in medieval Islam Medicine in the medieval Islamic world References [ edit ] ^ a b E. Edson and Emilie Savage-Smith , Medieval Views of the Cosmos , pp. 61–3, Bodleian Library, University of Oxford ^ a b c d Biesterfeldt, Hans Hinrich (2011), "al-Balkhī, Abū Zayd" , in Lagerlund, Henrik (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

139– 141, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4_73 , ISBN 978-1-4020-9729-4 , retrieved 2021-12-15 ^ a b Foundation, Encyclopaedia Iranica.

"Welcome to Encyclopaedia Iranica" .

iranicaonline.org .

^ a b Who was Abu Zayd al-Balkhi? Malik Badri, introduction to Sustenance of the Soul, Gutenberg Press ^ a b c al-Balkhī, Abū Zayd; Badri, Malik (2013), "Who was Abū Zayd al-Balkhī?" , Abu Zayd AlBalkhi’s Sustenance of the Soul , The Cognitive Behavior Therapy of A Ninth Century Physician, International Institute of Islamic Thought, pp.

1– 7, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvh4zfhk.4 , JSTOR j.ctvh4zfhk.4 , retrieved 2021-12-15 ^ Malik Badri, Abu Zayd al-Balkhi’s Sustenance of the Soul: The Cognitive Behavior Therapy of a Ninth Century Physician , International Institute of Islamic Thought (IIIT) (2013), p. 1 ^ a b Nurdeen Deuraseh and Mansor Abu Talib (2005), "Mental health in Islamic medical tradition", The International Medical Journal 4 (2), p. 76–79.

^ a b c Amber Haque (2004), "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists", Journal of Religion and Health 43 (4): 357–377 [362] ^ Awaad, Rania; Ali, Sara (July 2015). "Obsessional Disorders in al-Balkhi′s 9th century treatise: Sustenance of the Body and Soul".

Journal of Affective Disorders .

180 : 185– 189.

doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2015.03.003 .

^ Sustenance of the soul, al-Balkhi, Gutenberg Press, p45 ^ Sustenance of the soul, al-Balkhi, Gutenberg Press, p49 ^ Sustenance of the soul, al-Balkhi, Gutenberg Press, p37 Sources [ edit ] M. J. de Goeje : "Die Istakhri-Balkhi Frage" ( Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft , vol. 25, 42–58, 1871).

H. Suter: Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber (211, 1900).

Bosworth, C. E.; Asimov, M. S., eds. (2003).

History of Civilizations of Central Asia, Volume IV. The age of achievement: A. D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publications. p. 745.

ISBN 9788120815964 .

External links [ edit ] Abu Zayd Balkhi's biography by W.M. Watt in Iranica v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Sweden Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8h6br
Cached time: 20250817052541
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.565 seconds
Real time usage: 0.684 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3207/1000000
Revision size: 16265/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 112284/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3387/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57048/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.399/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14383195/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  571.206      1 -total
 23.86%  136.289      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 19.99%  114.204      1 Template:Reflist
 19.84%  113.351      1 Template:Langx
 15.34%   87.627      2 Template:Citation
 13.18%   75.307      5 Template:Navbox
 11.13%   63.572      1 Template:Islamic_geography
  9.77%   55.831      1 Template:Short_description
  6.04%   34.520      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.23%   29.883      1 Template:Death_year_and_age Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1792709:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052541 and revision id 1304263926. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abu_Zayd_al-Balkhi&oldid=1304263926 " Categories : 9th-century Iranian mathematicians 10th-century Iranian physicians Balkhi school 9th-century Iranian physicians 10th-century Iranian geographers 10th-century Iranian mathematicians 850 births 934 deaths Psychology in the medieval Islamic world People from Balkh Province Obsessive–compulsive disorder researchers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Persian-language text This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 00:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abu Zayd al-Balkhi 25 languages Add topic

