Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient practice 2 Vicarello cups 3 Later meanings 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Itinerarium 15 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Roman travel guide in the form of a list Further information: Travel itinerary An itinerarium , as seen on one of the 1st century Vicarello Cups An itinerarium (plural: itineraria ) was an ancient Roman travel guide in the form of a listing of cities, villages ( vici ) and other stops on the way, including the distances between each stop and the next. Surviving examples include the Antonine Itinerary and the Bordeaux Itinerary . The term later evolved and took wider meanings (see later meanings below ).

These text-based route descriptions were complemented by physical markers on the ground in the form of the miliarium , or Roman milestone, which confirmed the distances along the described route.

Ancient practice [ edit ] The Romans and ancient travelers in general did not use maps . While illustrated maps existed as specialty items, they were hard to copy and not in general use. On the Roman road system, however, the traveller needed some idea of where he or she was going, how to get there, and how long it would take. The itinerarium filled this need. In origin, it was simply a list of cities along a road: "at their most basic, itineraria involve the transposition of information given on milestones , which were an integral feature of the major Roman roads , to a written script." [ 1 ] It was only a short step from lists to a master list. To sort out the lists, the Romans drew diagrams of  parallel lines showing the branches of the roads. Parts of these were copied and sold on the streets. The very  best featured symbols for cities, way stations, water courses, and so on. The maps did not represent landforms but they served the purpose of a simple schematic diagram for the user.

The Roman government from time to time undertook to produce a master itinerary of all Roman roads.

Julius Caesar and Mark Antony commissioned the first known such effort in 44 BC. Zenodoxus, Theodotus, and Polyclitus, three Greek geographers, were hired to survey the system and compile a master itinerary. This task required over 25 years. The result was a stone engraved master itinerarium set up near the Pantheon , from which travelers and itinerary sellers could make copies.

Vicarello cups [ edit ] Archaeology has turned up some itinerary material in unexpected places. The four Vicarello Cups , made of silver and dated to 1st century AD, were found in 1852 by workmen excavating a foundation at Vicarello [ it ] (near Bracciano ), 37 kilometres (23 miles) northwest of Rome. They are engraved with the names and distances of 104 stations on the road between Gades (modern-day Cadiz ) and Rome, covering in total a distance of 1,840 Roman miles (2,723.2 km (1,692.1 mi)). Believed to be a votive offering by merchants travelling from Gades to Rome, the inscription is a valuable source of information about the road network at the time, and scholars refer to this artefact as the Itinerarium Gaditanum . Similarly, the Itinerarium Burdigalense (Bordeaux Itinerary) is a description of a route taken by a pilgrim from Bordeaux in France to the Holy Land in AD 333 .

Later meanings [ edit ] The term changed meaning over the centuries. For example, the Itinerarium Alexandri is a list of the conquests of Alexander the Great .  In the medieval period, the term was applied to guide-books written by travelers, most of which were accounts of pilgrimages to the Holy Land .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Tabula Peutingeriana Periplus References [ edit ] ^ Jaś Elsner , "The Itinerarium Burdigalense : politics and salvation in the geography of Constantine's Empire" The Journal of Roman Studies (2000), pp. 181–195, p. 184.

^ Bechtel, Florentine Stanislaus (1910).

"Itineraria" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8.

Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Itinerarium&oldid=1305519540 " Categories : Roman itineraries Map types Maps Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 14:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Itinerarium 15 languages Add topic

