Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research 2 Career 3 Major publications 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Dirk Berg-Schlosser 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German political scientist (born 1943) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "Dirk Berg-Schlosser" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dirk Berg-Schlosser (born 10 December 1943 in Ruhlsdorf ) is professor emeritus of political science at University of Marburg in Germany.

Berg-Schlosser has studied economics, sociology and political science at the University of Munich , SciencesPo Paris, and the Free University Berlin . He graduated in Munich with a degree of Dipl.oec. publ. in 1968, equivalent to a master's degree. From 1968 to 1970 he did graduate work at the University of California at Berkeley . In 1971 he received a doctorate in political science from the University of Munich . This was followed by field work in Kenya from 1973 to 1975. In 1979 he completed his Ph.D. in political science at UC Berkeley and received his “ Habilitation ” (Dr. phil. habil.) from the University of Augsburg /Germany.He has conducted major research projects funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft , Volkswagen-Foundation, Nuffield Foundation , Daimler Chrysler Foundation.

Research [ edit ] Berg-Schlosser's major research interests include the study of political culture, democratization, development studies, and comparative methodology. He has held professorships and visiting professorships at the Universities of Munich, Augsburg, Eichstätt, Charles University Prague, Sciences Po Lille and Sciences Po Paris, Stellenbosch/South Africa and UC Berkeley. In addition he has given courses on comparative methodology at the Universities of Essex, Ljubljana, São Paulo, Stellenbosch, Singapore, METU Ankara, the Higher School of Economics Moscow and St. Petersburg, the Institute of Higher Studies at Vienna, and FLACSO Mexico City. He is currently a fellow of the Stellenbosch Institute of Advanced Studies (STIAS).

Career [ edit ] Berg-Schlosser has been member of the executive committee of the German Political Science Association (DVPW), 1980–1986, 2003–2009; the executive committee of the “ European Consortium for Political Research ” (ECPR), 2000–2006 and its Chair 2003-2006; the executive committee of the International Political Science Association (IPSA) 2003-2009, 2006 - 2009  as vice-president and chair of the Committee on Research and Training (CRT). He was IPSA summer school coordinator (2009 - 2016) and responsible for the summer schools at São Paulo, Stellenbosch,  Singapore, Ankara, Mexico City, St.Petersburg.

He is member of the Editorial Boards of International Journal of Comparative Sociology , International Political Science Review 2003 - 2012, International Political Science Abstracts , Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Politikwissenschaft , European Political Science Review , Taiwan Journal of Democracy ; Co-editor of the ECPR book series on Comparative Politics for Oxford University Press , 2009 - 2012); member of the Prize Committee of the Johan Skytte Prize in Political Science , 2009 - 2016.

He has been appointed as European Research Council (ERC) referee 2009–2013, and has served as referee for Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft , Leibniz-Gemeinschaft , Volkswagen Foundation, Swedish Rijksbank, Swiss National Fund, Austrian Science Foundation, International Science Foundation; National Research Foundation/South Africa, Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (fnrs), Czech Science Foundation.

Major publications [ edit ] SAGE Handbook of Political Science (ed. with Bertrand Badie and Leonardo Morlino), 3 vol., SAGE, London, 2020.

Political Science – A Global Perspective (with Bertrand Badie and Leonardo Morlino), SAGE, London, 2017.

Mixed Methods in Comparative Politics, Palgrave, 2012.

International Encyclopedia of Political Science (ed. with Bertrand Badie and Leonardo Morlino), 8 vol., SAGE, Los Angeles, 2011.

Aktuelle Methoden der Vergleichenden Politikwissenschaft (with Lasse Cronqvist), Barbara Budrich Publishers, Opladen, 2011.

Democratization – The State of the Art (ed.), Barbara Budrich Publishers, Opladen & Farmington Hills, 2nd ed., 2007.

Poverty and Democracy (with Norbert Kersting), ZED Books, London, 2003.

Vergleichende Politikwissenschaft, Leske-Verlag, Opladen (co-author and co-editor with Ferdinand Müller-Rommel), 4th ed., 2003.

Authoritarianism and Democracy in Europe 1919-39. Comparative Analyses (co-author and co-editor with Jeremy Mitchell), Palgrave, London, 2002.

Perspectives of Democratic Consolidation in Eastern Europe (ed. with Raivo Vetik), Columbia University Press, New York, 2001.

Einführung in die Politikwissenschaft, Verlag C.H. Beck, München, 7th. edition 2003, (with Theo Stammen); Czech edition: Prague, 2000.

Conditions of Democracy in Europe, 1919-1939 - Systematic Case Studies (Co-author and co-editor: Jeremy Mitchell), Macmillan, London, 2000.

Perspektiven der Demokratie - Probleme und Chancen im Zeitalter der Globalisierung (ed. with Hans-Joachim Giegel), Campus Verlag, Frankfurt a.M., 1999.

Empirische Demokratieforschung - Exemplarische Analysen, Campus Verlag, Frankfurt a.M., 1999.

Political Culture in Germany, (co-author and co-editor with Ralf Rytlewski), Macmillan Press, London, 1993.

Political Stability and Development: A Comparative Analysis of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda (with Rainer Siegler), Lynne Rienner Publishers, Boulder/Col., 1990.

Politische Kultur in Deutschland - Bilanz und Perspektiven der Forschung, PVS-Sonderheft 18, Opladen, 1987 (co-author and co-editor with Jakob Schissler).

Tradition and Change in Kenya - A Comparative Analysis of seven Major Ethnic Groups, Verlag F. Schöningh, Paderborn, 1984.

Politische Kultur - eine neue Dimension politikwissenschaftlicher Analyse, Ernst-Vögel-Verlag, München, 1972.

Numerous articles in major journals and contributions to collective volumes.

External links [ edit ] Personal page (University of Marburg) Prof. Dr. Dirk Berg-Schlosser Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Belgium People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dirk_Berg-Schlosser&oldid=1224824011 " Categories : 1943 births German political scientists University of California, Berkeley alumni Living people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles lacking reliable references from December 2017 All articles lacking reliable references BLP articles lacking sources from December 2017 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 20 May 2024, at 17:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dirk Berg-Schlosser 1 language Add topic

