Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Local economy Toggle Local economy subsection 2.1 Transport 3 Notable buildings 4 Gallery 5 References Toggle the table of contents Gorey, Jersey 4 languages Deutsch Français Nederlands Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 49°12′00″N 2°01′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 49.199887°N 2.021304°W ﻿ / 49.199887; -2.021304 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Village Gorey Village A view of Gorey from Mont Orgueil Map of Jersey zoomed on Gorey.

Crown Dependency Jersey , Channel Islands Time zone GMT • Summer ( DST ) UTC+01 Gorey ( French : Gouray ; Jèrriais : Gouôrray ) is a village in the parishes of St Martin and Grouville , vingtaines of Faldouet and Marais, on the east coast of Jersey . The harbour is one of the three main harbours of the island, and is located in St Martin. The main centre of the village is located at Gorey Pier near Mont Orgeuil Castle , a 13th-century fortification, in St Martin, while there is a small community with a few shops and restaurants. The church in the village is known as Gouray Church.

History [ edit ] Its position as the closest strategic mainland point to the Cotentin Peninsula has meant that it has a history of fortification going back at least to the Iron Age . After the division of the Duchy of Normandy in 1204 the strategic location of the harbour led to the construction of the castle of Mont Orgueil to protect the island against the French, also serving as residence for Governors of Jersey until the late 16th century when Elizabeth Castle was constructed off Saint Helier . The castle was anciently called Gouray Castle, but Mont Oreguil is a more recent name (in official use by the late 17th century).

[ 1 ] There is a significant oyster bed off the coast of Gorey. In the early 19th century, at least 2,000 men were employed in the industry at Gorey, and a number of cottages were built in the village to accommodate the new English residents. This also led to the construction of Gouray Church to provide English services for the residents (most of the Anglican services on the island at the time were delivered in French).

[ 2 ] :236 In 2010, it was announced that the Harbour Master's house would be sold, and the proceeds used to carry out restoration work to Gorey Pier.

[ 3 ] In the same year, plans were submitted for 52 homes on the Jersey Pottery site.

[ 4 ] Local economy [ edit ] The Eastern Railway formerly terminated at Gorey Pier.

The pier below the castle has been the site of the annual Fête de la Mer (seafood gastronomic festival) until 2010, [ 5 ] and also contains an interpretation centre exhibiting the history and environment of the area. The annual Gorey Fête in August is one of the largest such events in Jersey.

[ 6 ] There are a number of hotels, shops, restaurants, and bars.  Many of these facilities are located along the pier, and are used by tourists and locals.

Transport [ edit ] Part of the Eastern Cycle Network Gorey Pier is the eastern terminus of the A3 La Rue à Don , which is the main road linking the village to Grouville Church and to St Helier . It was formerly the terminus for the Jersey Eastern Railway .

[ 7 ] As part of the Eastern Cycle Network plans, Gorey will be connected to St Helier with a direct off-main road cycle route. A cycle path was constructed along the side of La Rue à Don in Gorey in 2011 in a move to link the village to the local primary school.

[ 8 ] Later on, the cycle lane was extended south along the Royal Golf Course (at a cost of £190,000) [ 9 ] and north to connect to Gorey Pier along the coast.

Notable buildings [ edit ] Buildings of note in Gorey include Mont Orgueil castle, and Gouray Church, an Anglican church, which serves the village and surrounding district.

Gallery [ edit ] Mont Orgueil Castle over Gorey Harbour The castle of Mont Orgueil dominates village and harbour of Gorey Another view of Gorey Better quality photograph with a view of Gorey The pier below the castle contains restaurants, cafés and shops Gorey Harbour, looking south from the pier across the Royal Bay of Grouville towards La Rocque A view across the harbour from the pier at low tide Gouray Church can be seen on the hill at left A sculptural ensemble commemorates the 19th century shipyards of Gorey On 19 January 1945, the harbour was the scene of an escape by two American officers A view from Mont Orgueil Gorey Village Oyster boat in the harbour at Gorey The harbour of Gorey falls dry at low tide Church St Martin de Gouray References [ edit ] ^ Poingdestre, Jean (c. 1682).

Caesarea . Jersey: Société Jersiaise.

^ Syvret, Marguerite (2011).

Balleine's History of Jersey . The History Press.

ISBN 978-1860776502 .

^ Proceeds from sale of Harbour Master's House to restore pier ^ Homes plan unveiled for Jersey Pottery ^ Axed Jersey seafood festival could return ^ Gorey Fete in full swing ^ "Jersey Eastern Railway - theislandwiki" .

www.theislandwiki.org . Retrieved 24 February 2018 .

^ "New cycle path in the east" .

jerseyeveningpost.com . Retrieved 24 January 2021 .

^ "Plans unveiled to extend a popular cycle track: Do we need more routes?" .

jerseyeveningpost.com . Retrieved 24 January 2021 .

49°12′00″N 2°01′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 49.199887°N 2.021304°W ﻿ / 49.199887; -2.021304 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gorey,_Jersey&oldid=1259656740 " Categories : Villages in Jersey Ports and harbours of Jersey Saint Martin, Jersey Grouville Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use dmy dates from May 2017 Use British English from May 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox settlement with no coordinates Articles containing French-language text Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 November 2024, at 10:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gorey, Jersey 4 languages Add topic

