Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Technology 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents RealD 3D 19 languages Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español 한국어 Italiano ქართული Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Digital stereoscopic projection technology RealD 3D Two pairs of RealD glasses demonstrating the polarization effect Type 3D projection technology Manufacturer RealD Website http://www.reald.com RealD 3D is a digital stereoscopic projection technology made and sold by RealD . It is currently the most widely used technology for watching 3D films in theaters.

[ 1 ] Worldwide, RealD 3D is installed in more than 26,500 auditoriums by approximately 1,200 exhibitors in 72 countries as of June 2015.

[ 2 ] Technology [ edit ] RealD 3D cinema technology is a polarized 3D system that uses circularly polarized light to produce stereoscopic image projection. The advantage of circular polarization over linear polarization is that viewers are able to tilt their head and look about the theater naturally without seeing double or darkened images.

[ 3 ] However, as with other systems, any significant head tilt will result in incorrect parallax and prevent the brain from correctly fusing the stereoscopic images.

The high-resolution, digital cinema grade video projector alternately projects right-eye frames and left-eye frames, switching between them 144 times per second.

[ 3 ] The projector is either a Texas Instruments Digital Light Processing device or Sony 's reflective LCOS ( liquid crystal on silicon ). A push-pull electro-optical liquid crystal modulator called a ZScreen is placed immediately in front of the projector lens to alternately polarize each frame. It circularly polarizes the frames clockwise for the right eye and counter-clockwise for the left eye.

[ 4 ] The audience wears circularly polarized glasses that have oppositely polarized lenses that ensures each eye sees only its designated frame. In RealD Cinema, each frame is projected three times to reduce flicker, a system called triple flash. The source video is usually produced at 24 frames per second per eye (total 48 frames/s), which may result in subtle ghosting and stuttering on horizontal camera movements. A silver screen is used to maintain the light polarization upon reflection and to reduce reflection loss to counter some of the significant light loss due to polarization filter absorption. The result is a 3D pictures that seems to extend behind and in front of the screen itself.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Polarized 3D system Lists of 3D films Digital 3D IMAX 3D Disney Blu-ray 3D Panavision 3D Dolby 3D XpanD 3D MasterImage 3D Lenny Lipton 4DX References [ edit ] ^ Verrier, Richard (2009-03-26).

"3-D technology firm RealD has starring role at movie theaters" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2011-02-05 .

^ " "Jurassic World" In 3D Delivers Approximately 65% Of Universal Pictures Record-Breaking International Opening Weekend" .

RealD . Archived from the original on June 22, 2015 . Retrieved June 22, 2015 .

^ a b Cowan, Matt.

"Real D 3D Theatrical System" (PDF) . European Digital Cinema Forum. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-07-24 . Retrieved 2009-03-28 .

^ "RealD - Visual Technology" .

RealD - Visual Technology .

^ Cowan, Matt.

"Presentations (technical)" . RealD Media Room downloadable files. Archived from the original on 2009-08-03 . Retrieved 2009-03-28 .

Further reading [ edit ] US patent 7477206 , "Enhanced ZScreen modulator techniques", issued January 13, 2009,  assigned to RealD US patent 6975345 , "Polarizing modulator for an electronic stereoscopic display", issued December 13, 2005,  assigned to StereoGraphics Corporation US patent 5481321 , "Stereoscopic motion picture projection system", issued January 2, 1996,  assigned to Lenny Lipton US patent 4884876 , "Achromatic liquid crystal shutter for stereoscopic and other applications", issued December 5, 1989,  assigned to Lenny Lipton US patent 4792850 , "Method and system employing a push-pull liquid crystal modulator", issued December 20, 1988,  assigned to StereoGraphics Corporation External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to RealD .

Official website Who is Lenny Lipton?

About Inventor and Chief technical officer of RealD through 2008 v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=RealD_3D&oldid=1306157767 " Categories : Motion picture film formats Film and video technology 3D imaging 3D cinema Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 07:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents RealD 3D 19 languages Add topic

