Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gameplay 2 Development 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Arcaea 5 languages 한국어 日本語 Português 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2017 rhythm video game by lowiro This article is about a rhythm game. For the domain of single-celled organisms, see Archaea .

This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. The reason given is: Needs details about reception.

( July 2025 ) 2017 video game Arcaea Logo Developer(s) Lowiro Publisher(s) Lowiro Producer(s) Anton Prydatko (Guy) Designer(s) Alexander J. Lin (Toaster), Vernon Tan (Nitro), Alice Prowse (Popo), Ken Tang (k//eternal) Artist(s) シエラ (cierra) [ ja ] Writer(s) Terrence Smith Composer(s) ak+q, N² (ANTIREAL), Puru Engine Cocos2d-x Platform(s) iOS , Android , Nintendo Switch Release iOS , Android 9 March 2017 Nintendo Switch 18 May 2021 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Genre(s) Rhythm Mode(s) Single-player , multiplayer Arcaea is a rhythm video game developed and published by Lowiro (stylized as lowiro).

[ 3 ] The game was released on iOS and Android mobile platforms on 9 March 2017. A single-player version of the game was released for the Nintendo Switch on 18 May 2021.

[ 4 ] The game serves as both a rhythm game with quite a bit of a visual novel side gameplay, as it has a curated story novel with illustrations covering the two main female heroines Tairitsu and Hikari. It is a three-dimensional music game, letting opportunity for unique and challenging gameplay.

Gameplay [ edit ] Unlike other mobile rhythm games, Arcaea's gameplay uses three-dimensional chart lanes that are split into two parts, top lane and bottom lane. The top lane consists of two different note types; Arcs in blue(L) or pink(R) that are color coded to indicate which hand to play with, that require the player to hold the note throughout its duration (arcs go in 360 degrees of direction, creating unique chart patterns), and sky notes that are single-tap notes that are present on the top lane. The bottom lane consists of two note types as well; floor notes and long notes. Floor notes are basic single-tap notes that are present on the bottom lane (much like the sky notes) and long notes are ones that require the player to hold throughout its duration.

During gameplay, players must keep track of two sets of notes moving across the screen, [ 5 ] and tap the screen or press controller buttons when the notes intersect with the guiding lines.

The game has 5 base difficulties: Past, Present, Future, Eternal, [ 6 ] and Beyond [ 7 ] (shortened to PST, PRS, FTR, ETR, and BYD). It has a difficulty scale of 1-12, having + variants present as lowest as the FTR difficulty (e.g. Future 9+) as a system better known to accurately capture chart constants. The Arcaea chart constant is a detailed numerical value representing the difficulty/complexity of a song chart, providing a far more precise measure than the displayed difficulty level.

[ 8 ] The game features 3D rhythm mechanics, especially on the Present, Future and Beyond difficulty levels. This screenshot showcases such mechanics in a song on Future difficulty.

The game includes characters referred to as partners that give various beneficial effects while playing the rhythm game, and they gain experience points when selected for gameplay to play in World Mode, a gameplay mode consisting of worlds that allows players to actively play songs to collect more songs, in-game currency, story progress, and possibly partners. This is where the Stamina features takes in play, as different Worlds require different amount of stamina taken every song play. The game starts with 12 bars of stamina by default, where it takes exactly thirty minutes to gain a bar. Worlds typically take either 0, 2, or options for anything up to 6 bars of stamina.

[ 5 ] A player's overall skill level or rank on Arcaea is calculated by Potential, a player starts with 0.00 PTT and the current highest potential ever reached by any player is around 13.27 PTT. Potential are results to a mathematical calculations that revolves around a completed song of its chart difficulty, song grade, and score. A player's potential can either drop, rise, or stay after completing a song based on one's performance. This potential system does not contribute to gameplay in any way, with an exception of some songs that may only be unlocked to play once the player meets the requirement of a certain potential level, usually at 11.00 PTT for many boss songs.

Arcaea's story is accessed through the Story Mode feature, where players progress through every separated little parts of the chapters (also known as Story Packs) by playing the required songs under any difficulty.

Development [ edit ] Arcaea began as a single-developer project by Anton Prydatko, inspired by Japanese arcade rhythm games .

[ 9 ] Prydatko founded Lowiro in the United Kingdom, though many of the musicians involved in Arcaea are Japanese indie or doujin composers , and the majority of its player base are also from Japan.

[ 10 ] It was important to the developers that the game's monetization method allow players to "own" their purchased content. Players can buy "packs" of songs and play them an unlimited number of times, unlike the "stamina" model commonly used in mobile game monetization, which restricts play time.

[ 10 ] Reception [ edit ] Eric Ford of TouchArcade says that it has "an awesome art style combined with very up-beat songs and a nice twist to the traditional rhythm formula". But he also mentioned that some of the gameplay elements could make the game potentially difficult.

[ 11 ] Digitally Downloaded ' s Mike S. praised the game's aesthetic and music, and described its character art as "impeccable", though not memorable compared to other rhythm games. He disliked the game's requirements for unlocking new songs, considering them to be inappropriate for the game's paid release on the Nintendo Switch.

[ 5 ] Dani Maddox of Siliconera said the game's music was "just amazing", with a large range of songs and genres. However, she found the game's story mode to be poor, and encountered issues with controls in the Nintendo Switch version, such as the console's size when playing in touchscreen mode and the game being "finicky" with a controller.

[ 12 ] Arcaea Song Packs (mobile) Main Story packs bolded Side Story packs italicized 2017 Arcaea Eternal Core Crimson Solace Memory Archive Dynamix Collaboration Ambivalent Vision Vicious Labyrinth 2018 Lanota Collaboration Binary Enfold Luminous Sky Tone Sphere Collaboration 2019 Groove Coaster Collaboration Absolute Reason CHUNITHM Collaboration Adverse Prelude Sunset Radiance 2020 Black Fate Extended Archive 1: Visions Ephemeral Page Ephemeral Page: The Journey Onwards O.N.G.E.K.I. Collaboration 2021 maimai Collaboration CHUNITHM Collaboration Chapter 2 Esoteric Order Esoteric Order: Pale Tapestry Esoteric Order: Light of Salvation WACCA Collaboration Binary Enfold: Shared time Divided Heart Muse Dash Collaboration 2022 Lanota Collaboration Chapter 2 Final Verdict Final Verdict: Silent Answer O.N.G.E.K.I. Collaboration Chapter 2 2023 Extend Archive 2: Chronicles maimai Collaboration Chapter 2 CHUNITHM Collaboration Chapter 3 Cytus II Collaboration Cytus II Collaboration Chapter 2 Lasting Eden Severed Eden Lasting/Severed Eden: Shifting Veil WACCA Collaboration Chapter 2 2024 World Extend 3: Illusions [ 13 ] Groove Coaster Collaboration Chapter 2 Absolute Nihil Rotaeno Collaboration Lucent Historia O.N.G.E.K.I. Collaboration Chapter 3 CHUNITHM Collaboration Chapter 4 2025 maimai Collaboration Chapter 3 UNDERTALE Collaboration DJMAX Collaboration References [ edit ] ^ Brian (29 April 2021).

"Rhythm game Arcaea heading to Switch" .

Nintendo Everything .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2022 .

^ Romano, Sal (30 April 2021).

"Rhythm game Arcaea coming to Switch on May 18" .

Gematsu .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2022 .

^ "lowiro" .

www.lowiro.com . Retrieved 2022-07-21 .

^ "Arcaea for Nintendo Switch - Nintendo Official Site" .

www.nintendo.com . Retrieved 2022-07-21 .

^ a b c S., Matt (21 May 2021).

"Review: Arcaea (Nintendo Switch)" .

Digitally Downloaded .

^ "Arcaea on X: "To further improve the early experience of Arcaea and to make progressions smoother to people of all skill levels, 5.4 delivers a 4th new difficulty: Eternal (ETR)." " . 29 February 2024.

^ "Arcaea on X: "The long-awaited hour has finally come. Introducing Arcaea's fourth difficulty level: Beyond." " . 28 May 2020.

^ "Arcaea on X: "With the introduction of the 4th new difficulty "Eternal" in v5.4, song level ratings have been adjusted to clarify progression at intermediate levels." " . 29 February 2024.

^ Lawton, Tilly (29 June 2022).

"Arcaea reaches a crescendo with its 'momentous finale' " .

Pocket Tactics .

^ a b " "Players really appreciate having constant access to what they've paid for" " .

Pocket Gamer . 28 July 2022.

^ Ford, Eric (February 23, 2017).

"Futuristic Rhythm Game 'Arcaea' Looks Not For the Faint of Heart – TouchArcade" .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2017 . Retrieved 21 July 2022 .

^ Maddox, Dani (31 May 2021).

"Arcaea's Nintendo Switch Port Holds Up, Somewhat" .

Siliconera . Retrieved 31 May 2021 .

^ "Arcaea on the App Store" .

apps.apple.com . Archived from the original on 2024-11-28.

Version History.

External links [ edit ] video games portal Official website Official English Twitter Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arcaea&oldid=1305861683 " Categories : 2017 video games Indie games Music video games Video games developed in the United Kingdom Android (operating system) games IOS games Nintendo Switch games Multiplayer and single-player video games Video games featuring female protagonists Rhythm games Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from July 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using Infobox video game using locally defined parameters Articles using Wikidata infoboxes with locally defined images This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 14:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arcaea 5 languages Add topic

