Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General discussion 2 Types of antonyms Toggle Types of antonyms subsection 2.1 Gradable antonyms 2.2 Complementary antonyms 2.3 Relational antonyms 3 Auto-antonyms 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Opposite 79 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Башҡортса Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Íslenska Jawa ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Opposite (semantics) ) Linguistic concept "Opposites" redirects here. For other uses, see Opposite (disambiguation) .

In lexical semantics , opposites are words lying in an inherently incompatible binary relationship. For example, something that is even entails that it is not odd . It is referred to as a 'binary' relationship because there are two members in a set of opposites. The relationship between opposites is known as opposition . A member of a pair of opposites can generally be determined by the question: "What is the opposite of X ?

" The term antonym (and the related antonymy ) is commonly taken to be synonymous with opposite, but antonym also has other more restricted meanings. Graded (or gradable) antonyms are word pairs whose meanings are opposite and which lie on a continuous spectrum ( hot , cold ). Complementary antonyms are word pairs whose meanings are opposite but whose meanings do not lie on a continuous spectrum ( push , pull ).

Relational antonyms are word pairs where opposite makes sense only in the context of the relationship between the two meanings ( teacher , pupil ). These more restricted meanings may not apply in all scholarly contexts, with Lyons (1968, 1977) defining antonym to mean gradable antonyms, and Crystal (2003) warning that antonymy and antonym should be regarded with care.

General discussion [ edit ] Opposition is a semantic relation in which one word has a sense or meaning that negates or, in terms of a scale , is distant from a related word. Some words lack a lexical opposite due to an accidental gap in the language's lexicon . For instance, while the word "devout" has no direct opposite, it is easy to conceptualize a scale of devoutness, where "devout" lies at the positive end with a missing counterpart at the negative end. In certain cases, opposites can be formed with prefixes like "un-" or "non-," with varying levels of naturalness. For example, "undevout" is found in Webster's 1828 dictionary, while the prefix pattern of "non-person" could theoretically extend to "non-platypus." Conversely, some words appear to be derived from a prefix suggesting opposition, yet the root term does not exist. An example is "inept," which seems to be "in-" + *"ept," although the word "ept" itself does not exist [ citation needed ] . Such words are known as unpaired words .
Opposites may be viewed as a special type of incompatibility.

[ 1 ] Words that are incompatible create the following type of entailment (where X is a given word and Y is a different word incompatible with word X): [ 2 ] sentence A is X entails  sentence A is not Y [ 3 ] An example of an incompatible pair of words is cat : dog : It's a cat entails It's not a dog [ 4 ] This incompatibility is also found in the opposite pairs fast : slow and stationary : moving , as can be seen below: It's fast entails It's not slow [ 5 ] It's stationary entails It's not moving Cruse (2004) identifies some basic characteristics of opposites: binarity , the occurrence of opposites as a lexical pair inherentness , whether the relationship may be presumed implicitly patency , the quality of how obvious a pair is Some planned languages abundantly use such devices to reduce vocabulary multiplication.

Esperanto has mal- (compare bona = "good" and malbona = "bad"), Damin has kuri- ( tjitjuu "small", kuritjitjuu "large") and Newspeak has un- (as in ungood , "bad").

Some classes of opposites include: antipodals , pairs of words which describe opposite ends of some axis, either literal (such as "left" and "right", "up" and "down", "east" and "west") or figurative or abstract (such as "first" and "last", "beginning" and "end", "entry" and "exit") disjoint opposites (or "incompatibles"),  members of a set which are mutually exclusive but which leave a lexical gap unfilled, such as "red" and "blue", "one" and "ten", or "Monday" and "Friday".

reversives , pairs of verbs which denote opposing processes, in which one is the reverse of the other. They are (or may be) performed by the same or similar subject(s) without requiring an object of the verbs, such as "rise" and "fall", "accelerate" and "decelerate", or "shrink" and "grow".

converses (or relational opposites or relational antonyms ), pairs in which one describes a relationship between two objects and the other describes the same relationship when the two objects are reversed, such as parent and child , teacher and student , or buy and sell .

overlapping antonyms , a pair of comparatives in which one, but not the other, implies the positive: An example is "better" and "worse". The sentence " x is better than y " does not imply that x is good, but " x is worse than y " implies that x is bad. Other examples are "faster" and "slower" ("fast" is implied but not "slow") and "dirtier" and "cleaner" ("dirty" is implied but not "clean"). The relationship between overlapping antonyms is often not inherent, but arises from the way they are interpreted most generally in a language. There is no inherent reason that an item be presumed to be bad when it is compared to another as being worse (it could be "less good"), but English speakers have combined the meaning semantically to it over the development of the language.

Types of antonyms [ edit ] An antonym is one of a pair of words with opposite meanings. Each word in the pair is the antithesis of the other. A word may have more than one antonym. There are three categories of antonyms identified by the nature of the relationship between the opposed meanings.

Gradable antonyms [ edit ] A gradable antonym is one of a pair of words with opposite meanings where the two meanings lie on a continuous spectrum. Temperature is such a continuous spectrum so hot and cold , two meanings on opposite ends of the spectrum, are gradable antonyms. Other examples include: heavy : light , fat : skinny , dark : light , young : old , early : late , empty : full , dull : interesting .

Complementary antonyms [ edit ] A complementary antonym, sometimes called a binary or contradictory antonym (Aarts, Chalker & Weiner 2014), is one of a pair of words with opposite meanings, where the two meanings do not lie on a continuous spectrum. There is no continuous spectrum between odd and even but they are opposite in meaning and are therefore complementary antonyms. Other examples include: mortal : immortal , exit : entrance , exhale : inhale , occupied : vacant .

Relational antonyms [ edit ] A relational antonym is one of a pair of words that refer to a relationship from opposite points of view. There is no lexical opposite of teacher , but teacher and pupil are opposite within the context of their relationship. This makes them relational antonyms. Other examples include: husband : wife , doctor : patient , predator : prey , teach : learn , servant : master , come : go , parent : child .

Auto-antonyms [ edit ] An auto-antonym is a word that can have opposite meanings in different contexts or under separate definitions: enjoin (to prohibit, issue injunction ; to order , command ) fast (moving quickly; fixed firmly in place) cleave (to split ; to adhere ) sanction ( punishment , prohibition; permission) stay ( remain in a specific place, postpone; guide direction, movement) See also [ edit ] -onym Antithesis Litotes Property (philosophy) Semantic differential Thesaurus Notes [ edit ] ^ Incompatibility can be compared to exclusive disjunction in logic.

^ There are four types of entailment useful to lexical semantics: unilateral entailment : It's a fish unilaterally entails It's an animal . (It is unilateral, i.e. one-directional, because It's an animal does not entail It's a fish since it could be a dog or a cat or some other animal.) logical equivalence (or multilateral entailment ): The party commenced at midnight entails The party began at midnight and The party began at midnight also entails The party commenced since both cannot be simultaneously true. On the Aristotelian square of opposition, the A and E type propositions ( All As are Bs and No As are Bs , respectively) are contraries of each other. Propositions that cannot be simultaneously false (e.g. 'Something is red' and 'Something is not red') are said to be subcontraries .

contradiction : It's dead entails It's not alive and It's not alive entails It's dead and It's alive entails It's not dead and It's not dead entails It's alive .

It's dead and It's alive are said to be in a contradictory relation.

^ Stated differently, if the proposition expressed by the sentence A is X is true, then the proposition expressed by the sentence A is not Y is also true.

^ It is assumed here that it has the same referent .

^ It is also assumed here the reference point of comparison for these adjectives remains the same in both sentences. For example, a rabbit might be fast compared to turtle but slow compared to a sport car. It is essential when determining the relationships between the lexical meaning of words to keep the situational context identical.

Bibliography [ edit ] Aarts, Bas; Chalker, Sylvia; Weiner, Edmund (2014), The Oxford Dictionary of English Grammar , Oxford University Press, p. 80, ISBN 978-0-19-965823-7 Crystal, David. (2003).

A dictionary of linguistics and phonetics (5th ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.

Cruse, D. Alan. (1986).

Lexical semantics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cruse, D. Alan. (1992).

Antonymy revisited: Some thoughts on the relationship between words and concepts . In A. J. Lehrer & E. F. Kittay (Eds.), Frames, fields, and contrasts: New essays in semantic and lexical organization (pp. 289–306). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Cruse, D. Alan. (2002). Paradigmatic relations of exclusion and opposition II: Reversivity. In D. A. Cruse, F. Hundsnurscher, M. Job, & P.-R. Lutzeier (Eds.), Lexikologie: Ein internationales Handbuch zur Natur und Struktur von Wörtern und Wortschätzen: Lexicology: An international handbook on the nature and structure of words and vocabularies (Vol. 1, pp. 507–510). Berlin: De Gruyter.

Cruse, D. Alan. (2004).

Meaning in language: An introduction to semantics and pragmatics (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cruse, D. Alan; & Togia, Pagona. (1995). Towards a cognitive model of antonymy.

Journal of Lexicology 1 , 113-141.

Davies, M. (2007) ‘The Attraction of Opposites: The ideological function of conventional and created oppositions in the construction of in-groups and out-groups in news texts’, in Jeffries, L., McIntyre, D. and Bousfield, D. (eds) Stylistics and Social Cognition , pp. 79–100.

Davies, M. (2013) Oppositions and Ideology in News Discourse. London: Bloomsbury Academic.

Gambino, Stephen.

The Subject Of Opposite.

33 types of Opposites. ( ISBN 979-8-8715-3854-8 ) Jeffries, L. (2009, forthcoming) Opposition in Discourse: The Construction of Oppositional Meaning London: Continuum.

Jones, S. (2002), Antonymy: A Corpus-based perspective London and New York: Routledge.

Lehrer, Adrienne J. (1985). Markedness and antonymy.

Journal of Linguistics , 21 , 397-421.

Lehrer, Adrienne J. (2002). Paradigmatic relations of exclusion and opposition I: Gradable antonymy and complementarity. In D. A. Cruse, F. Hundsnurscher, M. Job, & P.-R. Lutzeier (Eds.), Lexikologie: Ein internationales Handbuch zur Natur und Struktur von Wörtern und Wortschätzen: Lexicology: An international handbook on the nature and structure of words and vocabularies (Vol. 1, pp. 498–507). Berlin: De Gruyter.

Lehrer, Adrienne J.; & Lehrer, Keith. (1982). Antonymy.

Linguistics and Philosophy , 5 , 483-501.

Lyons, John. (1963).

Structural semantics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lyons, John. (1968).

Introduction to theoretical linguistics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lyons, John. (1977).

Semantics (Vol. 1). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mettinger, Arthur. (1994).

Aspects of semantic opposition in English . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Murphy, M. Lynne. (2003).

Semantic relations and the lexicon: Antonymy, synonymy, and other paradigms . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Palmer, F. R. (1976).

Semantics: A new outline . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Saeed, John I. (2003).

Semantics (2nd ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell v t e Lexicology Major terms Lexical item Lexicon Lexis Word Elements Chereme Glyphs Grapheme Lemma Lexeme Morpheme Phoneme Seme Sememe Semantic relations Antonymy Hypernymy and hyponymy Meronymy and holonymy Idiom Lexical semantics Semantic network Synonym Troponymy Functions Function word Headword Fields Controlled vocabulary English lexicology and lexicography International scientific vocabulary Lexicographic error Lexicographic information cost Linguistic prescription Morphology Specialized lexicography Linguistics portal v t e Lexicography Types of reference works Dictionary Glossary Lexicon Phrase book Thesaurus Types of dictionaries Advanced learner's Anagram Bilingual Biographical Conceptual Defining vocabulary Electronic Encyclopedic Etymological Explanatory Field Multi-field Single-field Sub-field Historical Idiom Language-for-specific-purposes Machine-readable Medical Monolingual learner's Picture Reverse Rhyme Rhyming Specialized Spelling dictionary Visual Other International scientific vocabulary List of lexicographers List of online dictionaries Linguistics portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opposite&oldid=1292100380 " Categories : Semantic relations Types of words Dichotomies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Opposite 79 languages Add topic

