Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geology 2 Ecology 3 Ranges 4 Regional landforms 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Maria fold and thrust belt 2 languages Català مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 33°53′54″N 114°35′32″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.8984°N 114.5923°W ﻿ / 33.8984; -114.5923 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Maria Fold and Thrust Belt ) Geologic feature in California and Arizona Maria Fold-and-Thrust-Belt Fault system Location San Bernardino County -CA Mohave County -AZ-(N) La Paz County -AZ-(S), Mojave Desert -NW— Sonoran Desert -SE, California, United States Age 86.3±1.3 – ~55 Ma [ 2 ] Orogeny Laramide Area • Total ~10,000 km 2 (3,900 sq mi) [ 1 ] (post- Basin & Range extension ) Dimensions • Length ~160 km (99 mi) (post- Basin & Range ext.

) • Width ~60 km (37 mi) (post- Basin & Range ext.

) The Maria fold and thrust belt (MFTB) is a portion of the North American Cordillera orogen in which geological structures accommodate roughly north–south to northwest-southeast vergent Mesozoic age crustal shortening . This lies in contrast to the remainder of the Cordillera, in which shortening is predominantly east–west. Structures associated with the Maria Fold and Thrust Belt are exposed in a series of mountain ranges in southeastern California and western Arizona .

[ 3 ] Many of the deep structures of the MFTB have been exposed due to east–west to northeast-southwest Cenozoic age extension and unroofing.

In some parts of this fold-and-thrust-belt region, the extension resulted in the emplacement of metamorphic core complexes , the 'type example' of which is defined by the Whipple Mountains in southeastern California.

Geology [ edit ] The Maria fold-and-thrust-belt is defined as the region where the compression that helped create the North American Cordillera – abruptly changed directions. North of the Maria fold-and-thrust-belt, the mountain ranges trend north–south, with east–west compression due to the subduction of the Farallon slab beneath western North America. At the Maria fold-and-thrust-belt, compressional deformation shifts to being generally north–south, with the front of the mountain ranges being defined by a roughly east–west line. This line then shifts gently to the east-southeast, where the Cordilleran deformation diffuses into a broad shear zone in northeastern Mexico .

Another notable feature that differentiates it from the rest of the Cordillera is that the deformation involves the rocks of the North American craton . Deformation in the remainder of the Cordillera only involves rocks that were part of the near-shore and offshore, sedimentary sequences.

Ecology [ edit ] Since soils and climate differ across the Maria fold-and-thrust-belt, this regional geologic structure can be considered a "dividing line" for a number of flora and fauna species. For example, the species range of the endangered California Fan Palm , Washingtonia filifera does not extend north of the Maria fold-and-thrust-belt, or more specifically the Turtle Mountains .

[ 4 ] Ranges [ edit ] The Maria fold-and-thrust-belt comprises a large number of ranges in the south-eastern Mojave and north-western Sonoran deserts, [ 1 ] including the: Big Horn Mountains Big Maria Mountains Bouse Hills Buckskin Mountains Dome Rock Mountains Granite Wash Mountains Harcuvar Mountains Harquahala Mountains Little Harquahala Mountains Little Maria Mountains McCoy Mountains Mesquite Mountains Moon Mountains Mule Mountains New Water Mountains Palen Mountains Plomosa Mountains Rawhide Mountains Riverside Mountains Whipple Mountains Regional landforms [ edit ] List of some regional landforms. (The ~east-west Bill Williams River appears as part of the central and northern perimeter of the Maria fold-and-thrust-belt, approximately paralleling the Rawhide Mountains , a slight northwest range on west end.) Alamo Lake State Park Bill Williams River Bouse Wash Butler Valley (Arizona) Cactus Plain Chemehuevi Wash Colorado River Colorado River Indian Reservation Lake Havasu La Posa Plain Lower Colorado River Valley McMullen Valley Ranegras Plain Rice Valley Vidal Valley See also [ edit ] List of mountain ranges of Arizona List of mountain ranges of California List of mountain ranges of the Lower Colorado River Valley References [ edit ] ^ a b Spencer, Jon; Reynolds, S. J. (1990). "Relationship between Mesozoic and Cenozoic tectonic features in west-central Arizona and adjacent southeastern California".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

95 (B1): 539– 555.

Bibcode : 1990JGR....95..539S .

doi : 10.1029/JB095iB01p00539 .

^ Salem, Anthony C. (2009-08-27).

Mesozoic tectonics of the Maria fold and thrust belt and McCoy basin : an examination of polyphase deformation and synorogenic response (PhD). The University of New Mexico.

^ Knapp, J. H.; Heizler, M. T. (1990). "Thermal History of Crystalline Nappes of the Maria Fold and Thrust Belt, West Central Arizona".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

95 (B12). American Geophysical Union: 20, 049– 20, 073.

Bibcode : 1990JGR....9520049K .

doi : 10.1029/jb095ib12p20049 .

^ C. Michael Hogan. 2009.

California Fan Palm: Washingtonia filifera , GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. Nicklas Stromberg Archived 2009-09-30 at the Wayback Machine 33°53′54″N 114°35′32″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.8984°N 114.5923°W ﻿ / 33.8984; -114.5923 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Maria fold and thrust belt .

External links [ edit ] Maria Fold and Thrust Belt , University of Colorado Western US Tectonics Course v t e Seismically active fault zones and tectonic blocks of California Statewide Faults San Andreas Fault Salinian Block Southern California Brawley Seismic Zone Chino Fault Elsinore Fault Zone Elysian Park Fault Garlock Fault Hollywood fault Hosgri Fault Imperial Fault Zone Laguna Salada Fault Newport–Inglewood Fault Northridge Blind Thrust Fault Peninsular Ranges Puente Hills Fault Raymond Fault Rose Canyon Fault Salton Trough San Cayetano Fault San Diego Trough Fault Zone San Felipe Fault Zone San Gabriel Fault San Jacinto Fault Zone Santa Maria River Fault Santa Ynez Fault Shoreline Fault Sierra Madre Fault Zone Ventura Fault White Wolf Fault Whittier Fault Yorba Linda Fault Northern California Bartlett Springs Fault Calaveras Fault Clayton-Marsh Creek-Greenville Fault Concord Fault Hayward Fault Zone Healdsburg Fault Maacama Fault Mendocino fracture zone Mendocino triple junction Mount Diablo Thrust Fault Monta Vista Fault Nacimiento Fault Pleasanton Fault Rinconada Fault San Gregorio Fault San Pablo Fault Seal Cove Fault Serra Fault Silver Creek Fault Tesla Fault West Napa Fault Sierra Nevada Death Valley Fault Zone Furnace Creek Fault Zone Honey Lake Fault Zone Kern Canyon Fault Maria fold and thrust belt Owens Valley Fault Rescue Lineament-Bear Mountains fault zone Sierra Nevada Batholith Sierra Nevada Fault Sierra Nevada–Great Valley Block Smartville Block Walker Lane Category California Geological Survey Seismic Hazards Mapping Act Mexico (list) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maria_fold_and_thrust_belt&oldid=1221645727 " Categories : Orogeny Geology of Arizona Geology of California Basin and Range Province North American Cordillera Mountain ranges of Southern California Mountain ranges of the Lower Colorado River Valley Mountain ranges of the Colorado Desert Mountain ranges of the Mojave Desert Mountain ranges of the Sonoran Desert Mountain ranges of Arizona Mountain ranges of La Paz County, Arizona Geography of Imperial County, California Geography of San Bernardino County, California Geography of Riverside County, California Mountain ranges of Mohave County, Arizona Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 May 2024, at 04:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maria fold and thrust belt 2 languages Add topic

