Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 General references 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov 18 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian astrophysicist (born 1935) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov Novikov in 2016 Born ( 1935-11-10 ) November 10, 1935 (age 89) Moscow , Russian SFSR Nationality Russian Scientific career Fields theoretical astrophysics and cosmology Thesis Early stages of cosmological expansion [Ранние стадии космологического расширения] (1970) Doctoral advisor Iosif Shklovsky Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov ( Russian : И́горь Дми́триевич Но́виков ; born November 10, 1935) is a Russian theoretical astrophysicist and cosmologist .

Novikov put forward the idea of white holes in 1964. He also formulated the Novikov self-consistency principle in the mid-1980s, a contribution to the theory of time travel .

Novikov moved to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he worked and taught at the Niels Bohr Institute . He returned to Russia in 2001.

Biography [ edit ] Novikov gained his PhD degree in astrophysics in 1965 and the Russian D.Sc.

degree in astrophysics in 1970. From 1974 to 1990 he was head of the Department of Relativistic Astrophysics at the Russian Space Research Institute in Moscow . Before 1991 he was head of the Department of Theoretical Astrophysics at the Lebedev Physical Institute in Moscow and has been a professor at Moscow State University . Since 1994 he has been director of the Theoretical Astrophysics Center (TAC) of the University of Copenhagen , Denmark . He is currently also a professor of astrophysics at the Observatory of the University of Copenhagen, where he has been since 1991. Since 1998 he has been a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society .

He is awarded the First John Archibald Wheeler Prize (2020), together with physicist Kip Thorne (Caltech) and Oxford University professor Roger Penrose . This award is presented for his contribution to the development of the general theory of relativity and the physics of black holes . The prize is awarded by the President of the Italian Physical Society at the official awards ceremony in Rome on May 22, 2020.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Closed timelike curve Cosmic microwave background Observational cosmology Quantum mechanics of time travel Primordial black hole Superradiance White hole References [ edit ] ^ "Space Observatory "Millimetron" ACC FIAN" .

General references [ edit ] Kolchinsky, I. G.; Korsun, A. A.; Rodriges, M. G. (1986).

Astronomy: Biografichesky spravochnik Астрономы: Биографический справочник [ Astronomy: Biographical Dictionary ] (in Russian) (2 ed.). Kiev: Naukova Dumka . p. 512.

Bisnovatyi-Kogan, G. S.

; Doroshkevich, A. G.; Zelenyi, L. M.

; Kardashev, N. S.

; Kolachevsky, N. N.; Komberg, B. V.; Kompaneets, D. A.; Lukash, V. N.; Mesyats, G. A.

; Pariiskii, Yu. N.; Rubakov, V. A.

; Cherepashchuk, A. M. (2016). "Igor Dmitrievich Novikov (on his 80th birthday)".

Physics-Uspekhi .

59 (1): 96– 97.

doi : 10.3367/UFNe.0186.201601f.0105 .

External links [ edit ] Oral history interview transcript with Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov on 21 August 1979, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library & Archives - interview conducted with Spencer R. Weart in Montreal, Canada Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Russia Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii ResearcherID zbMATH People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Igor_Dmitriyevich_Novikov&oldid=1305689626 " Categories : 1935 births Living people Russian astrophysicists Soviet astrophysicists Russian astronomers Soviet astronomers Corresponding Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences Russian scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 14:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov 18 languages Add topic

