Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Legal career Toggle Legal career subsection 2.1 Clerkships and private practice 2.2 Teaching and scholarship 3 Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals (2017–2020) Toggle Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals (2017–2020) subsection 3.1 Nomination and confirmation 3.2 Selected cases 3.2.1 Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 3.2.2 Employment discrimination 3.2.3 Immigration 3.2.4 Abortion-related cases 3.2.5 Second Amendment 3.2.6 Criminal procedure 3.2.7 Qualified immunity 3.2.8 Environment 3.2.9 Consumer protection 3.2.10 Coronavirus measures 3.2.11 Civil procedure and standing 4 Nomination to the Supreme Court 5 U.S. Supreme Court (2020–present) Toggle U.S. Supreme Court (2020–present) subsection 5.1 Circuit assignment 5.2 Early oral argument participation 5.3 First votes as a justice 5.4 Abortion 5.5 Capital punishment 5.6 Environmental policy 5.7 LGBT rights and issues 5.8 Vaccine requirements 6 Judicial philosophy, academic writings, speeches, and political views Toggle Judicial philosophy, academic writings, speeches, and political views subsection 6.1 Textualism and originalism 6.1.1 Suspension of habeas corpus 6.2 Precedent 6.3 Affordable Care Act 6.4 Abortion 7 Personal life 8 Affiliations 9 Selected scholarly works 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Amy Coney Barrett 45 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Lombard Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US Supreme Court justice since 2020 "Justice Barrett" redirects here. For other uses, see Justice Barrett (disambiguation) .

Amy Coney Barrett Official portrait, 2021 Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Incumbent Assumed office October 27, 2020 Nominated by Donald Trump Preceded by Ruth Bader Ginsburg Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit In office November 2, 2017 – October 26, 2020 Nominated by Donald Trump Preceded by John Daniel Tinder Succeeded by Thomas Kirsch Personal details Born Amy Vivian Coney ( 1972-01-28 ) January 28, 1972 (age 53) New Orleans , Louisiana, U.S.

Spouse Jesse Barrett ​ ( m.

1999) ​ Children 7 Education Rhodes College ( BA ) University of Notre Dame ( JD ) Signature Amy Coney Barrett's voice Amy Coney Barrett delivers the opinion of the Court in Glacier Northwest v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters Recorded June 1, 2023 Amy Vivian Coney Barrett (born January 28, 1972) is an American lawyer and jurist serving since 2020 as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States .

[ 1 ] The fifth woman to serve on the court, she was nominated by President Donald Trump . She was a U.S. circuit judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit from 2017 to 2020.

Barrett graduated from Rhodes College before attending Notre Dame Law School , earning a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree in 1997 and ranked first in her class. She then clerked for Judge Laurence Silberman and Justice Antonin Scalia . In 2002, Barrett joined the faculty at Notre Dame Law School, becoming a professor in 2010.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] While a circuit judge, she continued to teach civil procedure, constitutional law, and statutory interpretation.

[ 6 ] On September 26, 2020, shortly after U.S. Supreme Court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg 's death, Trump nominated Barrett to succeed her.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Her nomination was controversial because the 2020 presidential election was only 38 days away and Senate Republicans had refused to hold hearings for Merrick Garland during an election year in 2016 .

[ 10 ] The next month, the U.S. Senate voted 52–48 to confirm her nomination, with all Democrats and one Republican in opposition.

[ 11 ] Described as a protégée of Justice Antonin Scalia , [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Barrett supports textualism in statutory interpretation and originalism in constitutional interpretation.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] While generally considered to be among the Court's conservative bloc , Barrett has demonstrated a growing pattern of independence and moderation as a swing vote in some controversial cases.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Early life and education Amy Vivian Coney was born in 1972 in New Orleans, Louisiana , to Linda ( née Vath) and Michael Coney.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The eldest of seven children, she has five sisters and a brother. Her father worked as an attorney for Shell Oil Company , and her mother was a high school French teacher and homemaker. Barrett has Irish and French ancestry.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Her maternal ancestors were from Ballyconnell , County Cavan , Ireland , while there is also Irish lineage among her father's ancestors. Her great-great-grandparents emigrated from France to New Orleans.

[ 25 ] Her family is devoutly Catholic , and her father is an ordained deacon at St. Catherine of Siena Parish in Metairie , Louisiana, where she grew up.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Barrett attended St. Mary's Dominican High School , an all-girls Roman Catholic high school in New Orleans.

[ 28 ] She was student body vice president of the school and graduated in 1990.

[ 29 ] After high school, Barrett attended Rhodes College in Memphis, Tennessee , where she majored in English literature and minored in French . She considers herself "somewhat fluent" in French, but with a Louisiana accent.

[ 30 ] She graduated in 1994, with a Bachelor of Arts , magna cum laude , and was inducted into Omicron Delta Kappa and Phi Beta Kappa .

[ 31 ] In her graduating class, she was named most outstanding English department graduate.

[ 32 ] Barrett then attended Notre Dame Law School on a full-tuition scholarship. She was an executive editor of the Notre Dame Law Review and graduated in 1997 with a Juris Doctor , summa cum laude , ranked first in her class.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Legal career Clerkships and private practice Barrett spent two years as a judicial law clerk after law school, first for Judge Laurence Silberman of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit from 1997 to 1998, and then for Justice Antonin Scalia of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1998 to 1999.

[ 34 ] From 1999 to 2002, Barrett practiced law at Miller Cassidy Larroca & Lewin, a boutique law firm for litigation in Washington, D.C.

, that merged with the Houston, Texas -based law firm Baker Botts in 2001.

[ 33 ] [ 35 ] While at Baker Botts, she worked on Bush v. Gore , the lawsuit that grew out of the 2000 United States presidential election , providing research and briefing assistance for the firm's representation of George W. Bush .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Teaching and scholarship In 2001, Barrett was a visiting associate professor and John M. Olin Fellow in Law at George Washington University Law School . In 2002, she joined the faculty of her alma mater, Notre Dame Law School.

[ 38 ] At Notre Dame, she taught federal courts, evidence, constitutional law, and statutory interpretation . In 2007, she was a visiting professor at the University of Virginia School of Law .

[ 39 ] Barrett was named a professor of law at Notre Dame in 2010, and from 2014 to 2017 held Notre Dame's Diane and M.O. Miller II Research Chair of Law.

[ 40 ] Her scholarship focused on constitutional law, originalism, statutory interpretation, and stare decisis .

[ 32 ] Her academic work has been published in the Columbia , Cornell , Virginia , Notre Dame Law Review , and Texas law reviews .

[ 38 ] At Notre Dame, Barrett received the "Distinguished Professor of the Year" award three times.

[ 38 ] From 2011 to 2016, she spoke on constitutional law at Blackstone Legal Fellowship , a summer program for law school students that the Alliance Defending Freedom established to inspire a "distinctly Christian worldview in every area of law".

[ 41 ] While serving on the Seventh Circuit, Barrett commuted between Chicago and South Bend , continuing to teach courses on statutory interpretation and constitutional theory.

[ 6 ] [ 42 ] In 2010, Chief Justice John Roberts appointed Barrett to serve on the Advisory Committee for the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure .

[ 38 ] Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals (2017–2020) Nomination and confirmation On May 8, 2017, President Donald Trump nominated Barrett to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit—the federal appellate court covering Illinois , Indiana , and Wisconsin —after Judge John Daniel Tinder took senior status .

[ 5 ] [ 43 ] A Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on her nomination was held on September 6, 2017.

[ 44 ] During the hearing, Senator Dianne Feinstein questioned Barrett about a law review article Barrett co-wrote in 1998 with Professor John H. Garvey in which they argued that Catholic judges should in some cases recuse themselves from death penalty cases due to their moral objections to the death penalty .

[ 45 ] Asked to "elaborate on the statements and discuss how you view the issue of faith versus fulfilling the responsibility as a judge today," Barrett said that she had participated in many death-penalty appeals while serving as law clerk to Scalia, adding, "My personal church affiliation or my religious belief would not bear on the discharge of my duties as a judge" [ 46 ] [ 47 ] and "It is never appropriate for a judge to impose that judge's personal convictions, whether they arise from faith or anywhere else, on the law." [ 48 ] Barrett emphasized that the article was written in her third year in law school and that she was "very much the junior partner in our collaboration." [ 49 ] Worried that Barrett would not uphold Roe v. Wade given her Catholic beliefs, Feinstein followed Barrett's response by saying, "the dogma lives loudly within you, and that is a concern." [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] The hearing made Barrett popular with religious conservatives.

[ 33 ] Feinstein's and other senators' questioning was criticized by some Republicans and other observers, such as university presidents John I. Jenkins of the University of Notre Dame and Christopher Eisgruber of Princeton , as an improper inquiry into a nominee's religious belief that employed an unconstitutional "religious test" for office; [ 48 ] [ 53 ] others, such as Nan Aron , defended Feinstein's line of questioning.

[ 54 ] Judge Laurence Silberman , for whom Barrett first clerked after law school, swearing her in at her investiture for the Seventh Circuit in 2018 Lambda Legal , an LGBT civil rights organization, co-signed a letter with 26 other gay rights organizations opposing Barrett's nomination. The letter expressed doubts about her ability to separate faith from her rulings on LGBT matters.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] During her Senate hearing, Barrett was questioned about landmark LGBTQ legal precedents such as Obergefell v. Hodges , United States v. Windsor , and Lawrence v. Texas . She said these cases are "binding precedents" that she intended to "faithfully follow if confirmed" to the appeals court, as required by law.

[ 55 ] The letter Lambda Legal co-signed read, "Simply repeating that she would be bound by Supreme Court precedent does not illuminate—indeed, it obfuscates—how Professor Barrett would interpret and apply precedent when faced with the sorts of dilemmas that, in her view, 'put Catholic judges in a bind.'" [ 55 ] Barrett's nomination was supported by every law clerk she had worked with and all of her 49 faculty colleagues at Notre Dame Law school. 450 former students signed a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee supporting her nomination.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] On October 5, 2017, the Senate Judiciary Committee voted 11–9 on party lines to recommend Barrett and report her nomination to the full Senate.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] On October 30, the Senate invoked cloture by a vote of 54–42.

[ 61 ] It confirmed her by a vote of 55–43 on October 31, with three Democrats— Joe Donnelly , Tim Kaine , and Joe Manchin —voting for her.

[ 31 ] She received her commission two days later.

[ 2 ] Barrett is the first woman to occupy an Indiana seat on the Seventh Circuit.

[ 62 ] Selected cases Oral arguments from Cook County, Illinois v. Chad F. Wolf , one of the last cases that Barrett took in the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals in 2020 On the Seventh Circuit, Barrett wrote 79 majority opinions (including two that were amended and one that was withdrawn on rehearing), four concurring opinions (one a per curiam opinion ), and six dissenting opinions (six published and one in an unpublished order).

[ 39 ] Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 In June 2019, the court, in a unanimous decision written by Barrett, reinstated a suit brought by a male Purdue University student ( John Doe ) who had been found guilty of sexual assault by Purdue University, which resulted in a one-year suspension, loss of his Navy ROTC scholarship, and expulsion from the ROTC affecting his ability to pursue his chosen career in the Navy.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Doe alleged the school's Advisory Committee on Equity discriminated against him on the basis of his sex and violated his rights to due process by not interviewing the alleged victim, not allowing him to present evidence in his defense, including an erroneous statement that he confessed to some of the alleged assault, and appearing to believe the victim instead of the accused without hearing from either party or having even read the investigation report. The court found that Doe had adequately alleged that the university deprived him of his occupational liberty without due process in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment and had violated his Title IX rights "by imposing a punishment infected by sex bias", and remanded to the District Court for further proceedings.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Employment discrimination In 2017, the Seventh Circuit rejected the federal government's appeal in a civil lawsuit against AutoZone ; the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission argued that AutoZone's assignment of employees to different stores based on race (e.g., "sending African American employees to stores in heavily African American neighborhoods") violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act . Following this, Barrett joined the court as it received a petition for rehearing en banc . Three judges—Chief Judge Diane Wood and judges Ilana Rovner and David Hamilton —voted to grant rehearing, and criticized the three-judge panel's opinion as upholding a " separate-but-equal arrangement". Barrett did not join the panel opinion, but voted with four judges to deny the petition to rehear the case. The petition was unsuccessful by a 5–3 decision.

[ 67 ] [ 33 ] In 2019, Barrett wrote the unanimous three-judge panel opinion affirming summary judgment in the case of Smith v. Illinois Department of Transportation . Smith was a Black employee who claimed racial discrimination upon his dismissal by the department and that he was called a "stupid-ass nigger " by a Black supervisor; the department claimed Smith failed work-level expectations during probationary periods. Barrett wrote that usage of the racial slur was egregious, but Smith's testimony showed no evidence that his subjective experience of the workplace changed because of the slur, nor did it change the department's fact that his discharge was related to "poor performance".

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Immigration In June 2020, Barrett wrote a 40-page dissent when the majority upheld a preliminary injunction against the Trump administration's controversial " public charge rule ", which heightened the standard for obtaining a green card .

[ 70 ] In her dissent, she argued that any noncitizens who disenrolled from government benefits because of the rule did so due to confusion about the rule itself rather than from its application, writing that the vast majority of the people subject to the rule are not eligible for government benefits in the first place. On the merits, Barrett departed from her colleagues Wood and Rovner, who held that DHS's interpretation of that provision was unreasonable under Chevron Step Two. Barrett would have held that the new rule fell within the broad scope of discretion granted to the Executive by Congress through the Immigration and Nationality Act .

[ 71 ] The public charge issue is the subject of a circuit split .

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] In May 2019, the court rejected a Yemeni citizen and her U.S. citizen husband's challenge to a consular officer 's decision to twice deny her visa application under the Immigration and Nationality Act. The U.S. citizen argued that this had deprived him of a constitutional right to live in the United States with his spouse.

[ 73 ] In a 2–1 majority opinion authored by Barrett, the court held that the plaintiff's claim was properly dismissed under the doctrine of consular nonreviewability . Barrett declined to address whether the husband had been denied a constitutional right (or whether the constitutional right to live in the United States with his spouse existed at all) because the consular officer's decision to deny the visa application was facially legitimate and bona fide, and under Supreme Court precedent, in such a case courts will not "look behind the exercise of that discretion". The dispute concerned what it takes to satisfy this standard. A petition for rehearing en banc was denied, with Chief Judge Wood, joined by Rovner and Hamilton, dissenting. Barrett wrote a rare opinion concurring in the denial of rehearing en banc (joined by Judge Joel Flaum ).

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Abortion-related cases Barrett had never ruled directly on abortion before joining the Supreme Court, but she did vote to rehear a successful challenge to Indiana's parental notification law in 2019. In 2018, she voted against striking down another Indiana law requiring burial or cremation of fetal remains. In both cases, Barrett voted with the minority. The Supreme Court later reinstated the fetal remains law, and in July 2020 it ordered a rehearing in the parental notification case.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] In February 2019, Barrett joined a unanimous panel decision upholding a Chicago "bubble ordinance" that prohibits approaching within a certain distance of an abortion clinic or its patrons without consent.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Citing the Supreme Court's buffer zone decision in Hill v. Colorado , the court rejected the plaintiffs' challenge to the ordinance on First Amendment grounds.

[ 79 ] Second Amendment In March 2019, Barrett dissented when the court upheld the federal law prohibiting felons from possessing firearms.

[ 80 ] The majority rejected the as-applied challenge raised by plaintiff Rickey Kanter, who had been convicted of felony mail fraud , and upheld the felony dispossession statute as "substantially related to an important government interest in preventing gun violence." In her dissent, Barrett argued that while the government has a legitimate interest in denying gun possession to felons convicted of violent crimes, there is no evidence that denying guns to nonviolent felons promotes this interest, and that the law violates the Second Amendment .

[ 81 ] President Trump pardoned Kanter in December 2020.

[ 82 ] Criminal procedure In May 2018, Barrett dissented when the panel majority found that an accused murderer's right to counsel was violated when the state trial judge directly questioned the accused while forbidding his attorney from speaking.

[ 83 ] Following rehearing en banc , a majority of the circuit's judges agreed with her position.

[ 84 ] In August 2018, Barrett wrote for a unanimous panel when it determined that the police had lacked probable cause to search a vehicle based solely upon an anonymous tip that people were "playing with guns", because no crime had been alleged.

[ 85 ] Barrett distinguished Navarette v. California and wrote, "the police were right to respond to the anonymous call by coming to the parking lot to determine what was happening. But determining what was happening and immediately seizing people upon arrival are two different things, and the latter was premature...Watson's case presents a close call. But this one falls on the wrong side of the Fourth Amendment ." [ 86 ] In February 2019, Barrett wrote for a unanimous panel when it found that police officers had been unreasonable to assume "that a woman who answers the door in a bathrobe has authority to consent to a search of a male suspect's residence." Therefore, the district court should have granted the defendant's motion to suppress evidence found in the residence as the fruit of an unconstitutional search .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Qualified immunity In January 2019, Barrett wrote for a unanimous panel when it denied qualified immunity to a civil lawsuit sought by a defendant who as a homicide detective had knowingly provided false and misleading information in the probable cause affidavit that was used to obtain an arrest warrant for the plaintiff.

[ 89 ] (The charges were later dropped and the plaintiff was released.) The court found the defendant's lies and omissions violated "clearly established law" and the plaintiff's Fourth Amendment rights and thus the detective was not shielded by qualified immunity.

[ 90 ] In Howard v. Koeller (7th Cir. 2018), in an unsigned order by a three-judge panel that included Barrett, the court found that qualified immunity did not protect a prison officer who had labeled a prisoner a " snitch " and thereby exposed him to risk from his fellow inmates.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] Environment In Orchard Hill Building Co. v. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , 893 F.3d 1017 (7th Cir. 2018), Barrett joined a unanimous panel decision, written by Judge Amy J. St. Eve , in a case brought by a property developer challenging the Corps ' determination that a wetland 11 mi (18 km) from the nearest navigable river was among the " waters of the United States ." [ 93 ] The court found that the Corps had not provided substantial evidence of a significant nexus to navigable-in-fact waters under Justice Kennedy 's concurrence in the Supreme Court's decision in Rapanos v. United States . The case was remanded to the Corps to reconsider whether such a significant nexus exists between the wetlands in question and navigable waters for it to maintain jurisdiction over the land.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Consumer protection In June 2018, Barrett wrote for the unanimous panel when it found that a plaintiff could not sue Teva Pharmaceuticals for alleged defects in her IUD due to the lack of supportive expert testimony, writing, "the issue of causation in her case is not obvious." [ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Coronavirus measures In early September 2020, Barrett joined Wood's opinion upholding the district court's denial of the Illinois Republican Party 's request for a preliminary injunction to block Governor J. B. Pritzker 's COVID-19 orders.

[ 34 ] [ 99 ] On August 12, 2021, she rejected a challenge to Indiana University 's vaccine mandate, marking the first legal test of COVID-19 vaccine mandates before the Supreme Court of the United States.

[ 100 ] Civil procedure and standing In June 2019, Barrett wrote for the unanimous panel when it found that the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act cannot create a cause of action for a debtor who received collection letters lacking notices required by the statute because she suffered no injury-in-fact to create constitutional standing to sue under Article III .

[ 101 ] Wood dissented from the denial of rehearing en banc. The issue created a circuit split.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] In August 2020, Barrett wrote for the unanimous panel when it held that a Teamsters local did not have standing to appeal an order in the Shakman case because it was not formally a party to the case.

[ 105 ] The union had not intervened in the action, but rather merely submitted a memorandum in the district court opposing a motion, which the Seventh Circuit determined was insufficient to give the union a right to appeal.

[ 106 ] Nomination to the Supreme Court Main article: Amy Coney Barrett Supreme Court nomination President Donald Trump nominated Barrett to the Supreme Court on September 26, 2020.

Barrett was on Trump's list of potential Supreme Court nominees since 2017, almost immediately after her court of appeals confirmation.

[ 107 ] In July 2018, after Justice Anthony Kennedy's retirement announcement, she was reportedly one of three finalists Trump considered, along with Kavanaugh and Judge Raymond Kethledge .

[ 40 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] After Kavanaugh's selection in 2018, Barrett was viewed as a possible nominee for a future U.S. Supreme Court vacancy.

[ 110 ] After the death of Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg on September 18, 2020, Barrett was widely mentioned as the front-runner to succeed her.

[ 111 ] On September 26, 2020, Trump announced his intention to nominate Barrett to fill the vacancy created by Ginsburg's death.

[ 8 ] [ 112 ] Barrett's nomination was generally supported by Republicans, who sought to confirm her before the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ 113 ] She was a favorite among the Christian right and social conservatives.

[ 75 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] Democrats generally opposed the nomination, and were opposed to filling the court vacancy while election voting was already underway in many states.

[ 113 ] Many observers were angered by the move to fill the vacancy only four months before the end of Trump's term, as the Senate Republican majority had refused to consider President Barack Obama 's nomination of Merrick Garland in 2016, more than ten months before the end of his presidency.

[ 113 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] In October, the American Bar Association rated Barrett "well qualified" for the Supreme Court opening, its highest rating.

[ 118 ] The ABA confines its evaluation to the qualities of "integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament".

[ 119 ] Barrett's nomination came during a White House COVID-19 outbreak . On October 5, Senator Lindsey Graham formally scheduled the confirmation hearing, [ 120 ] which began on October 12 as planned and lasted four days.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] On October 22, the Judiciary Committee reported her confirmation favorably by a 12–0 vote, with all 10 Democrats boycotting the committee meeting.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] On October 25, the Senate voted mostly along party lines to end debate on the confirmation.

[ 125 ] On October 26, the Senate confirmed Barrett to the Supreme Court by a vote of 52–48, 30 days after her nomination and 8 days before the 2020 presidential election.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Every Republican senator except Susan Collins voted to confirm her, whereas every member of the Senate Democratic Caucus [ 128 ] voted in opposition.

[ 129 ] Barrett is the first justice since 1870 to be confirmed without a single vote from the Senate minority party.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] The nature of her appointment was criticized by numerous Democratic politicians; Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer called it "the most illegitimate process I have ever witnessed in the Senate." [ 132 ] Republicans responded that they were merely exercising their constitutional rights, and that accusations of hypocrisy were nothing more than "an unwarranted tantrum from the left ".

[ 132 ] U.S. Supreme Court (2020–present) Justice Clarence Thomas administers the oath of office to Barrett on October 26, 2020, at the White House alongside President Donald Trump .

Chief Justice John Roberts administers the judicial oath to Barrett on October 27, 2020. Justice Barrett's husband, Jesse M. Barrett, holds the Bible.

Barrett became the 103rd associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States on October 27, 2020. On the evening of the confirmation vote, Trump hosted a swearing-in ceremony at the White House. As Barrett requested, Justice Clarence Thomas administered the oath of office to her, [ 131 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] the first of two necessary oaths. She took the judicial oath, administered by Chief Justice John Roberts, the next day.

[ 135 ] Upon joining the Court, Barrett became the only justice who did not receive their Juris Doctor from Harvard or Yale .

[ 136 ] She is also the first justice without an Ivy League degree since the 2010 retirement of John Paul Stevens (who graduated from the University of Chicago and Northwestern University School of Law ) and the first to be appointed since Sandra Day O'Connor , who graduated from Stanford University and Stanford Law School .

[ 137 ] She is the first graduate of Notre Dame Law School and the first former member of the Notre Dame faculty to serve on the Supreme Court.

[ 138 ] Barrett uses her maiden and married surnames in public. She has chosen to be called "Justice Barrett" in written orders and opinions of the court, [ 139 ] as she did as a Seventh Circuit judge.

[ 140 ] Circuit assignment In November 2020, Barrett was assigned to the Seventh Circuit .

[ 141 ] This assignment's duties include responding to emergency applications to the Court that arise from the circuit's jurisdiction, either by herself or else by referring them to the full Court for review.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] Early oral argument participation Having hired her allotted four law clerks , Barrett took part in her first oral argument on November 2, hearing the case U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service v. Sierra Club.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] On November 4, the Court heard Fulton v. Philadelphia , in which the plaintiff, Catholic Social Services , sued the city of Philadelphia after being denied a new contract under the city's Fair Practices Ordinance, which bars discrimination in public accommodations . The Archdiocese -affiliated CSS said that for religious reasons it cannot properly vet potential foster parents who are gay couples . CSS argued that under relevant precedent , the Court should find that CSS as a faith-based charity was unfairly singled out, given that the city allows race- and disability-based exceptions within foster-care placements .

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] CSS further claimed the law is shown not to be neutral as required by the Court's 1990 decision Employment Division v. Smith , which allows the government to enforce neutral and generally applicable laws without having to make exceptions for individual religions , because the city labeled CSS's motives "discrimination that occurs under the guise of religious freedom." [ 146 ] [ 147 ] According to the New York Times, Barrett's questions during oral arguments were "evenhanded and did not reveal her position." [ 148 ] First votes as a justice On November 26, 2020, Barrett joined the Supreme Court's majority in Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn v. Cuomo , [ 149 ] in an unsigned [ 150 ] 5–4 preliminary injunction in favor of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn and the Orthodox Jewish organization Agudath Israel of America , saying that certain COVID-19 restrictions instituted by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo had likely violated the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment , in that they "single out houses of worship for especially harsh treatment." [ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] The Court said that the restrictions had likely impinged on the fundamental right of the free exercise of religion without their (in constitutional legal parlance ) passing the legal test of " strict scrutiny ." [ 155 ] Cuomo's order was more restrictive than governmental orders involved in similar cases involving churches in California and Nevada that the Court had allowed to stand by a 5–4 vote.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] Ross Guberman, author of Point Taken: How to Write Like the World's Best Judges , told the Times he believed Barrett was the principal author of the Court's decision because of its measured tone and word choices, including its use of the word "show".

[ 159 ] Barrett delivered her first concurring opinion on February 5, 2021, in the case South Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Newsom .

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Abortion In September 2021, Barrett joined the majority, in a 5–4 vote, to reject a petition to temporarily block a Texas law banning abortion after six weeks of pregnancy ; Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh joined her in the majority.

[ 162 ] In June 2022, Barrett joined with the same majority in Dobbs v. Jackson , voting to completely overturn Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey .

[ 163 ] Capital punishment In January 2022, the Supreme Court voted to allow the execution of an inmate to proceed in Alabama; the case was decided by a 5–4 vote, with Barrett joining Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan in dissent.

[ 164 ] Environmental policy Barrett wrote her first majority opinion in United States Fish and Wildlife Service v. Sierra Club , which was decided on March 4, 2021.

[ 160 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] Traditionally the first opinion delivered by a new justice reflects the opinion of a unanimous court, but not always. While Gorsuch and Kavanaugh wrote unanimous first opinions, Barrett, like her predecessor Justice Ginsburg, wrote an opinion for a divided court.

[ 160 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] Although Barrett ruled against environmentalists in March, she voted against oil refineries in her first dissent, Hollyfrontier Cheyenne Refining v. Renewable Fuels Association .

[ 169 ] LGBT rights and issues In June 2021, Barrett joined a unanimous decision in Fulton v. City of Philadelphia , ruling in favor of a Catholic social service agency that had been denied funding from the City of Philadelphia because it does not adopt to same-sex couples ; the ruling also declined to overturn Employment Division v. Smith , "an important precedent limiting First Amendment protections for religious practices." [ 170 ] In the same month, Barrett was among the six justices who rejected the appeal of a Washington State florist whom lower courts had ruled violated non-discrimination laws by refusing to sell floral arrangements to a same-sex couple based on her religious beliefs against same-sex marriage , leaving the lower court judgments in place.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] [ 173 ] In November 2021, Barrett voted with the majority in a 6–3 decision to reject an appeal from Mercy San Juan Medical Center , a hospital affiliated with the Roman Catholic Church, which had sought to deny a hysterectomy to a transgender patient on religious grounds.

[ 174 ] The Court's decision not to hear the case left in place a lower court ruling in favor of the transgender patient; justices Thomas, Alito, and Gorsuch dissented.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] In November 2023, Barrett voted with the 6–3 majority to decline to hear an appeal of a decision that upheld Washington 's ban on conversion therapy for minors, allowing the law to stand; Kavanaugh, Thomas, and Alito dissented.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Vaccine requirements Barrett wrote a concurring opinion in Does v. Mills, a case challenging Maine's vaccine requirement for health care workers. She was in the majority in the 6–3 decision to deny a stay of the vaccine requirement, explaining that the case had not been fully briefed or argued.

[ 179 ] Judicial philosophy, academic writings, speeches, and political views This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Many of Barrett's academic writings are about a professed imperative that jurists limit their work to determining the meanings of constitutional and statutory texts, reconciling these meanings with Supreme Court precedent, and using such precedent to mediate among various jurisprudential philosophies.

[ 180 ] According to an analysis by University of Virginia law professors Joshua Fischman and Kevin Cope, Barrett was the rightmost Seventh Circuit judge, though not statistically distinguishable from six other Republican-appointed judges on the court.

[ 181 ] Compared to the other Seventh Circuit judges, she was more conservative on civil rights issues and less conservative on cases involving employment discrimination , labor and criminal defendants.

[ 181 ] According to a review by Reuters , Barrett's Seventh Circuit rulings showed that she mostly sided with police and prison guards when they were accused of excessive force.

[ 182 ] Due to the judicial doctrine of qualified immunity, police-officer defendants in many of these cases were shielded from civil liability because their actions were deemed not in violation of clearly established law . Jay Schweikert, who advocates for the Court's or Congress's elimination of qualified immunity, [ 183 ] believes that her "decisions all look like reasonable applications of existing precedent." [ 182 ] [ 184 ] Legal commentator Jacob Sullum argues that while Barrett was on the Seventh Circuit she took "a constrained view of the doctrine's scope." [ 185 ] Textualism and originalism Barrett is considered a textualist , a proponent of the idea that statutes should be interpreted literally, without considering their legislative history or underlying purpose, [ 186 ] [ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] and an originalist (of the original-public-meaning , rather than original-intent , variety), a proponent of the idea that the Constitution should be interpreted as perceived at the time of enactment.

[ 186 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] [ 192 ] According to her, "Originalism is characterized by a commitment to two core principles. First, the meaning of the constitutional text is fixed at the time of its ratification. Second, the historical meaning of the text 'has legal significance and is authoritative in most circumstances.'" [ 190 ] For the purpose of "describing the disagreement between originalists and nonoriginalists about the authoritativeness of the original public meaning," she refers [ 190 ] to a section of a law review article by Keith Whittington , "Originalism: A Critical Introduction", [ 193 ] that reads, "Critics of originalism have suggested a range of considerations that might trump original meaning if the two were to come into conflict. From this perspective, fidelity to original meaning is not the chief goal of constitutional theory . ...Confronted with suitably unpleasant results, the nonoriginalist might posit that the original meaning should be sacrificed. Alternatively, we might think that contemporary public opinion should trump original meaning. ...Underlying all these considerations is a view that courts are authorized to impose constitutional rules other than those adopted by the constitutional drafters. ...the originalist must insist that judges not close their eyes to the discoverable meaning of the Constitution and announce some other constitutional rule to supersede it. It is at that point that the originalist and the nonoriginalist must part ways." [ 193 ] Textualism, Barrett says, requires that judges construe statutory language consistent with its "ordinary meaning": "The law is comprised of words—and textualists emphasize that words mean what they say, not what a judge thinks that they ought to say." According to Barrett, "Textualism stands in contrast to purposivism , a method of statutory interpretation that was dominant through much of the 20th century." If a court concludes that statutory language appears to be in tension with a statute's overarching goal, "purposivists argue that a judge should go with the goal rather than the text". For Barrett, textualism is not literalism, nor is it about rigid dictionary definitions. "It is about identifying the plain communicative content of the words".

[ 194 ] Barrett clerked for Justice Antonin Scalia, and has spoken and written of her admiration of his adherence to the text of statutes and to originalism, [ 195 ] writing: "His judicial philosophy is mine, too. A judge must apply the law as written. Judges are not policymakers, and they must be resolute in setting aside any policy views they may hold." [ 196 ] In one article she quoted Scalia on the importance of the original meaning of the Constitution: "The validity of government depends upon the consent of the governed ... [s]o what the people agreed to when they adopted the Constitution ... is what ought to govern us." [ 190 ] In a 2017 article in the law review Constitutional Commentary , reviewing a book by Randy E. Barnett , Barrett wrote: "The Constitution's original public meaning is important not because adhering to it limits judicial discretion, but because it is the law. ...The Constitution's meaning is fixed until lawfully changed; thus, the court must stick with the original public meaning of the text even if it rules out the preference of a current majority." [ 197 ] [ 198 ] According to Barrett, textualists believe that when a court interprets the words of statutes, it should use the most natural meaning of those words to an ordinary skilled user of words at the time, even if the court believes that the legislature intended that the words be understood in a different sense. If the legislature wishes the words of a statute to carry a meaning different from how a non-legislator would understand them, it is free to define the terms in the statute. As Scalia put it, "[A]ll we can know is that [the legislature] voted for a text that they presumably thought would be read the same way any reasonable English speaker would read it." Scalia insisted that "it is simply incompatible with democratic government, or indeed, even with fair government, to have the meaning of a law determined by what the lawgiver meant, rather than by what the lawmaker promulgated." [ 199 ] [ 200 ] Barrett has been critical of legal process theory, which gives a more expansive role to theory in shaping the interpretation of law than do textualism and originalism.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] She said that one example of the "process-based" approach can be found in King v. Burwell , in which the Supreme Court, for reasons related to the unorthodox legislative process that produced the Affordable Care Act , interpreted the phrase "Exchange established by the State" to mean "Exchange established by the State or the federal government." [ 200 ] Suspension of habeas corpus In a journal article, "Suspension and Delegation", [ 201 ] Barrett noted that constitutionally only Congress has the authority to decide the terms under which habeas corpus may be legitimately suspended.

[ 202 ] In all but one of the previous suspensions of habeas corpus, Barrett thought that Congress violated the Constitution "by enacting a suspension statute before an invasion or rebellion occurred—and in some instances, before one was even on the horizon." [ 84 ] [ 201 ] In an educational essay, she sided with the dissenters in Boumediene v. Bush after considering historical factors.

[ 203 ] Precedent At her 2017 Senate confirmation hearing for the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals, Barrett said she would follow Supreme Court precedent while on the appellate bench. In 2020, during her nomination acceptance speech at the White House Rose Garden, Barrett said, "Judges are not policymakers, and they must be resolute in setting aside any policy views they might hold"; [ 204 ] [ 205 ] she also said judges "must apply the law as written".

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] She explained her view of precedent in response to questions at the hearing.

[ 208 ] In a 2013 article in the Texas Law Review on the doctrine of stare decisis , Barrett listed seven cases that she believed should be considered " superprecedents "—cases the Court would never consider overturning. They included Brown v. Board of Education and Mapp v. Ohio ( incorporating the Fourth Amendment onto the states), [ 209 ] but specifically excluded Roe v. Wade (1973). In explaining why it was excluded, Barrett referenced scholarship agreeing that in order to qualify as "superprecedent", a decision must have widespread support from not only jurists but politicians and the public at large to the extent of becoming immune to reversal or challenge (for example, the constitutionality of paper money ). She argued that the people must trust a ruling's validity to such an extent that the matter has been taken "off of the Court's agenda", with lower courts no longer taking challenges to them seriously. Barrett pointed to Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992) as evidence that Roe had not attained this status, and quoted Richard H. Fallon Jr.: "[A] decision as fiercely and enduringly contested as Roe v. Wade has acquired no immunity from serious judicial reconsideration, even if arguments for overruling it ought not succeed." [ 209 ] [ 210 ] Concerning the relationship of textualism to precedent, Barrett said, "It makes sense that one committed to a textualist theory would more often find precedent in conflict with her interpretation of the Constitution than would one who takes a more flexible, all-things-considered approach." [ 209 ] She referenced a study by Michael Gerhardt which found that, as of 1994, no two justices in that century had called for overruling more precedents than Justices Scalia and Hugo Black , both of whom were textualists, even though Black was a liberal and Scalia a conservative. Gerhardt also found that during the Rehnquist Court's last 11 years, the average number of times a justice called for the overruling of precedent was higher for textualist justices, with one per year coming from Ginsburg (non-textualist) up to just over two per year from Thomas (textualist). Gerhardt wrote that not all the calls for overruling were related to textualism issues, and that one must be careful in the inferences one draws from the numbers, which "do not indicate either why or on what basis the justices urged overruling." [ 209 ] Affordable Care Act In 2012, Barrett signed a letter criticizing the Obama administration's approach to providing employees of religious institutions with birth control coverage without having the religious institutions pay for it, calling it an "assault" to religious liberty.

[ 211 ] Barrett has been critical of the majority opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts in National Federation of Independent Businesses v. Sebelius (2012), which upheld the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act's individual mandate . She wrote in 2017: "Chief Justice Roberts pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute. He construed the penalty imposed on those without health insurance as a tax, which permitted him to sustain the statute as a valid exercise of the taxing power; had he treated the payment as the statute did—as a penalty—he would have had to invalidate the statute as lying beyond Congress's commerce power." [ 198 ] [ 212 ] [ 211 ] [ 213 ] Abortion Barrett opposes abortion .

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] In 2006, she signed an advertisement placed by St. Joseph County Right to Life, an anti-abortion group, in a South Bend, Indiana, newspaper. The ad read: "We, the following citizens of Michiana , oppose abortion on demand and defend the right to life from fertilization to natural death. Please continue to pray to end abortion." An unsigned, second page of the advertisement read, "It's time to put an end to the barbaric legacy of Roe v. Wade and restore laws that protect the lives of unborn children." [ 216 ] [ 217 ] [ 218 ] In 2013, Barrett signed another ad against Roe v. Wade that appeared in Notre Dame's student newspaper and described the decision as having "killed 55 million unborn children". The same year, she spoke at two anti-abortion events at the university.

[ 219 ] Personal life Barrett and her family with President Trump on September 26, 2020 Then-Judge Barrett with her husband, Jesse, in 2018 In 1999, Barrett married fellow Notre Dame Law School graduate Jesse M. Barrett, a partner at SouthBank Legal – LaDue Curran & Kuehn LLC, in South Bend, Indiana, [ 220 ] and a law professor at Notre Dame Law School.

[ 221 ] Previously, Jesse Barrett had worked as an assistant U.S. attorney for the Northern District of Indiana for 13 years.

[ 222 ] The couple live in South Bend and have seven children, two of whom were adopted from Haiti , one in 2005 and one after the 2010 Haiti earthquake .

[ 36 ] [ 223 ] Their youngest biological child has Down syndrome .

[ 224 ] Barrett is a practicing Catholic.

[ 225 ] Since birth, she has been a member of the Christian parachurch community People of Praise , [ 226 ] an ecumenical covenant community founded in South Bend. Associated with the Catholic charismatic renewal movement but not formally affiliated with the Catholic Church, [ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] about 90% of its approximately 1,700 members are Catholic.

[ 227 ] [ 229 ] In People of Praise, Barrett has served as a laypastoral women's leader in a position once termed "handmaiden" but now termed "women leader".

[ 230 ] [ 231 ] According to Politico , "a copy of Barrett's ballot history from the Indiana Statewide Voter Registration System obtained by POLITICO [shows] Barrett voted in the 2016 and 2018 general elections, and the 2016 Republican primary, though she pulled a Democratic ballot in the 2011 primary." [ 6 ] Affiliations Barrett was a member of the Federalist Society from 2005 to 2006 and from 2014 to 2017.

[ 51 ] [ 31 ] [ 33 ] She is a member of the American Law Institute .

[ 232 ] Selected scholarly works Amy Coney Barrett; John H. Garvey (1998).

"Catholic Judges in Capital Cases" .

Marquette Law Review .

81 : 303– 350.

Barrett (2003).

"Stare Decisis and Due Process" .

University of Colorado Law Review .

74 : 1011– 1074.

Barrett (2005).

"Statutory Stare Decisis in the Courts of Appeals" .

The George Washington Law Review .

73 : 317– 352.

Barrett (2006).

"The Supervisory Power of the Supreme Court" .

Columbia Law Review .

106 (2): 324– 387.

JSTOR 4099494 .

Barrett (2008).

"Procedural Common Law" (PDF) .

Virginia Law Review .

94 (4): 813– 888.

JSTOR 25470574 . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

Barrett (2010).

"Substantive Canons and Faithful Agency" (PDF) .

Boston University Law Review .

90 : 109– 182.

Barrett (2013).

"Precedent and Jurisprudential Disagreement" (PDF) .

Texas Law Review .

91 : 1711– 1737.

Barrett (2014).

"Suspension and Delegation" .

Cornell Law Review .

99 : 251– 326.

Barrett; John Copeland Nagle (2016).

"Congressional Originalism" .

University of Pennsylvania Journal of Constitutional Law .

19 : 1– 44.

Barrett (2017).

"Originalism and Stare Decisis" .

Notre Dame Law Review .

92 : 1921– 1944.

Barrett (2017).

"Congressional Insiders and Outsiders" .

University of Chicago Law Review .

84 : 2193– 2212.

JSTOR 45063672 .

See also Donald Trump Supreme Court candidates List of federal judges appointed by Donald Trump List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 9) White House COVID-19 outbreak , at a ceremony for Barrett's nomination Ziklag (organization) References ^ Arberg, Kathleen L. (October 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett Oath Ceremony" (Press release).

Supreme Court of the United States .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 23, 2020 .

^ a b "Amy Coney Barrett" .

Biographical Directory of Federal Judges . Archived from the original on July 7, 2018.

^ Wolf, Richard (September 19, 2020).

"Notre Dame's Amy Coney Barrett likely a front-runner for Supreme Court vacancy" .

The Indianapolis Star .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 19, 2020 – via South Bend Tribune .

^ Simon, Abigail (July 3, 2018).

"These Are Trump's Candidates for the Supreme Court" .

Time .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

Coney Barrett has written extensively about Constitutional originalism, a legal tradition that advocates for an interpretation of the Constitution based on the meaning it would have had at the time it was written.

^ a b "Presidential Nomination 369, 115th United States Congress" .

United States Congress . May 8, 2017.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2018 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

^ a b c Wren, Adam (September 27, 2020).

"How Amy Coney Barrett's Religious Group Helped Shape a City" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 .

^ "One Nomination Sent to the Senate" .

whitehouse.gov . September 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 20, 2021 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 – via National Archives .

^ a b Holland, Steve; Hurley, Lawrence; Chung, Andrew (September 26, 2020).

"Trump announces 'brilliant' conservative judge Barrett as Supreme Court pick" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 26, 2020 .

^ Miller, Zeke ; Mascaro, Lisa; Jalonick, Mary Clare (September 26, 2020).

"Trump picks conservative Amy Coney Barrett for Supreme Court" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 26, 2020 .

^ Fausset, Richard (October 16, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett Sworn In as Supreme Court Justice, Cementing Conservative Majority" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 15, 2021 .

^ Rocha, Veronica (October 26, 2020).

"Live updates: Amy Coney Barrett Senate confirmation vote" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ Newburger, Emma (September 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett pays homage to conservative mentor Antonin Scalia – 'His judicial philosophy is mine too' " .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ "Amy Coney Barrett, high court pick, is Antonin Scalia's true heir" .

The Dallas Morning News . September 26, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ Biskupic, Joan (October 12, 2020).

"Antonin Scalia's legacy looms over the Amy Coney Barrett hearings" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ Naylor, Brian (October 13, 2020).

"Barrett, An Originalist, Says Meaning Of Constitution 'Doesn't Change Over Time' " .

NPR .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ McCarthy, Tom (October 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett is a constitutional 'originalist' – but what does it mean?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2021.

^ Evans, Zachary (October 26, 2020).

"Senator Ed Markey Slams Judicial 'Originalism' as 'Racist,' 'Sexist,' and 'Homophobic' " .

National Review .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2021.

^ Liptak, Adam (July 8, 2024).

"Justice Amy Coney Barrett's Independent Streak Marked Supreme Court Term" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Groppe, Maureen.

"How Amy Coney Barrett emerged as the Supreme Court justice to watch" .

USA Today . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Hurley, Lawrence (June 30, 2024).

"She cemented a conservative Supreme Court, but a 'cautious' Justice Barrett sometimes resists the far-right flank" .

NBC News . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ "Who is Amy Coney Barrett? Meet Trump's Supreme Court pick" .

Chicago Sun-Times . September 25, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ Covington, Abigail (September 26, 2020).

"Who Is Amy Coney Barrett?" .

Esquire .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ "Amy Coney Barrett: Views, Opinions and Experience" .

The Wall Street Journal . September 26, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

^ "Donald Trump nominates Amy Coney Barrett to Supreme Court" .

The Irish News . September 28, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 3, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ "Supreme Court Nominee Amy Coney Barrett Confirmation Hearing - Day 3, Part 2" .

C-SPAN .

^ "Dad, deacon, lawyer: Amy Coney Barrett's father shares his testimony of faith" .

Catholic Voice .

Catholic News Agency . September 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ "Deacon Mike Coney" .

St. Catherine of Siena Parish .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Stole, Bryn (July 6, 2018).

"Amy Coney Barrett: Mother of 7, Metairie native, solid conservative ... next Supreme Court justice?" .

The Times-Picayune / The New Orleans Advocate .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 22, 2020 .

^ "Louisiana reacts to Amy Coney Barrett's Supreme Court nomination" .

WVLA-TV . September 26, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 30, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ "Judge Amy Coney Barrett '97 J.D. speaks to ND Club of Washington, D.C." Notre Dame Law School. March 1, 2019 – via YouTube.

^ a b c Howe, Amy (July 4, 2018).

"Potential nominee profile: Amy Coney Barrett" .

SCOTUSblog .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2018 . Retrieved July 7, 2018 .

^ a b c "Law School Faculty Directory: Hon. Amy Coney Barrett, Professor of Law" . Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame School of Law . Archived from the original on April 2, 2019 . Retrieved March 14, 2019 .

^ a b c d e Howe, Amy (September 21, 2020).

"Profile of a potential nominee: Amy Coney Barrett" .

SCOTUSblog . Archived from the original on September 23, 2020.

^ a b Sweet, Lynn ; Seidel, Jon (September 24, 2020).

"How Amy Coney Barrett went from Notre Dame to Supreme Court frontrunner" .

Chicago Sun-Times .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ Carr, Thomas B. (July 26, 2004).

"Letters to the Editor: 'Now-Defunct' Miller, Cassidy" .

National Law Journal . Archived from the original on September 30, 2017 . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

(subscription required) ^ a b Tomazin, Farrah (September 27, 2020).

"Five things you should know about Trump's Supreme Court nominee Amy Coney Barrett" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ Andrew Kragie.

"How Amy Coney Barrett Describes Her Legal Career" .

law360.com .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ a b c d "Hon. Amy Coney Barrett" . University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019 . Retrieved August 19, 2020 .

^ a b Taylor, Julia (September 28, 2020).

"Judge Amy Coney Barrett: Selected Primary Material" . Congressional Research Service. LSB10539.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ a b Nicholas, Peter; Radnofsky, Louise (July 5, 2018).

"Trump Winnows Down Supreme Court Picks, Focusing on Three" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2018 . Retrieved July 5, 2018 .

^ Brown, Emma; Swaine, Jon (September 27, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett, Supreme Court nominee, spoke at program founded to inspire a 'distinctly Christian worldview in every area of law' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ Sheckler, Christian (September 24, 2020).

"What Amy Coney Barrett's former Notre Dame colleagues say about her" .

The Indianapolis Star . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ "Trump Names 10 Conservatives It Plans to Nominate to Federal Courts" .

Chicago Tribune . May 8, 2017.

Archived from the original on September 30, 2017 . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

^ "Rescheduled Notice of Committee Hearing" . Senate Judiciary Committee. August 4, 2017. Archived from the original on October 6, 2017 . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ Barrett, Amy; Garvey, John (January 1, 1998).

"Catholic Judges in Capital Cases" .

Marq. L. Rev .

81 : 303.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 19, 2020 .

^ Johnson, Eliana.

"How Amy Coney Barrett vaulted onto Trump's Supreme Court shortlist" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved July 3, 2018 .

^ "Judicial and Justice Department Pending Nominations" .

C-SPAN .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved September 13, 2020 .

^ a b Gerstein, Josh (September 11, 2017).

"Senators take fire over questions for Catholic judicial nominee" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2018 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

^ Freking, Kevin (September 11, 2017).

"Catholics decry Dems' questioning of judicial pick" .

The Detroit News .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ Green, Emma (September 8, 2017).

"Should a Judge's Nomination Be Derailed by Her Faith?" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2018 . Retrieved July 1, 2018 .

^ a b Goodstein, Laurie (September 28, 2017).

"Some Worry About Judicial Nominee's Ties to a Religious Group" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2017 . Retrieved July 4, 2018 .

^ "Feinstein: 'The dogma lives loudly within you, and that is a concern' " .

The Washington Post . September 7, 2017.

Archived from the original on June 27, 2018 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

^ Eisgruber, Christopher L.

(September 8, 2017).

"Letter from President Eisgruber to the Senate Committee on the Judiciary Regarding the Use of Religious Tests" .

Princeton University: Office of the President .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2017 . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ Aron, Nan (September 15, 2017).

"Forget the critics, Feinstein did the right thing by questioning a judicial nominee on her faith and the law" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2018 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

^ a b c Moreau, Julie (July 8, 2018).

"Trump's Supreme Court shortlist alarms LGBTQ advocates" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved September 22, 2020 .

^ Wakefield, Lily (September 22, 2020).

"The 'frontrunner' to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg is a staunch Catholic who believes marriage is between a man and a woman" .

PinkNews .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ Boorstein, Michelle; Zauzmer, Julie (July 7, 2018).

"Analysis | The story behind potential Supreme Court nominee Amy Coney Barrett's little-known Catholic group, People of Praise" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ Howe, Amy (September 21, 2020).

"Profile of a potential nominee: Amy Coney Barrett" .

SCOTUSblog .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ Freking, Kevin (October 6, 2017).

"Committee Recommends Notre Dame Professor Amy Coney Barrett for U.S. Judicial Bench" .

South Bend Tribune .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on October 6, 2017 . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ "Daily Digest/Senate Committee Meetings, Committee on the Judiciary" .

Congressional Record, 115th Congress, 1st Session .

163 (160): D1059 – D1060 . October 5, 2017.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2017 . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ "U.S. Senate: U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 115th Congress – 1st Session" .

senate.gov .

Archived from the original on June 13, 2018 . Retrieved May 8, 2018 .

^ Voruganti, Harsh (June 6, 2017).

"Professor Amy Coney Barrett – Nominee to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit" .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 22, 2020 .

^ Doe v. Purdue University , 928 F.3d 652 (7th Cir. 2019).

^ Reinhard, Beth; Brown, Emma (September 20, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett, potential Supreme Court nominee, wrote influential ruling on campus sexual assault" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ Weliever, Alexander; Le, Jackie (July 2019).

"Appeals court reverses dismissal of sex-assault lawsuit" .

Purdue Exponent .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2019 . Retrieved July 8, 2019 .

^ Odendahl, Marilyn (July 2019).

"7th Circuit reinstates student case against Purdue in sexual assault case" .

The Indiana Lawyer .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2019 . Retrieved July 8, 2019 .

^ EEOC v. AutoZone , 875 F.3d 860 (7th Cir. 2017).

^ "A look at Judge Amy Coney Barrett's notable opinions, votes" .

Associated Press News . October 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

^ "TERRY L. SMITH v. ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION" .

uscourts.gov .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

^ Cook County v. Wolf , 962 F.3d 208 (7th Cir. 2020).

^ a b Thomsen, Jacqueline (August 5, 2020).

"Splitting With Other Circuits, Appeals Court Rules for Trump in 'Public Charge' Case" .

National Law Journal .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 21, 2020 .

^ Montoya-Galvez, Camilo (August 13, 2020).

"Trump administration can enforce green card wealth test in most states, court rules" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on August 20, 2020 . Retrieved September 21, 2020 .

^ a b Yafai v. Pompeo , 924 F.3d 969 (7th Cir. 2019)., en banc rev. denied Archived September 27, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , 924 F.3d 969 (7th Cir. 2019) (per curiam).

^ "Dissent Slams 7th Circ.'s Rehearing Denial For Yemeni Couple" .

Law360 .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2019 . Retrieved August 4, 2020 .

^ a b Wolfe, Jan (September 20, 2020).

"Notable opinions of U.S. Supreme Court contender Amy Coney Barrett" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2020 . Retrieved September 20, 2020 .

^ Biskupic, Joan ; Cole, Devan (September 26, 2020).

"Notable dissents from Judge Amy Coney Barrett" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on October 15, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Price v. Chicago , 915 F.3d 1107 (7th Cir. 2019).

^ Barnes, Robert (July 2, 2020).

"Supreme Court leaves in place laws in Chicago, Pennsylvania that restrict antiabortion protesters" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 9, 2020 .

^ "Price v. City of Chicago, Illinois" .

SCOTUSblog . Retrieved July 9, 2020 .

^ Kanter v. Barr , 919 F.3d 437 (7th Cir. 2019).

^ "Justice-in-waiting: If Donald Trump gets another Supreme Court pick..." .

The Economist . May 16, 2019.

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2019 . Retrieved October 21, 2022 .

^ Blackman, Josh (December 23, 2020).

"President Trump Pardons, Rickey Kanter. Last Year, Judge Barrett Found That Kanter Did Not Lose His Second Amendment Rights" .

Reason . Retrieved December 24, 2020 .

^ Schmidt v. Foster , 891 F.3d 302 (7th Cir. 2018).

^ a b "NCLA's Analysis of Hon. Amy Coney Barrett for the U.S. Supreme Court Based on her Administrative State Views" (PDF) .

nclalegal.org . New Civil Liberties Alliance. September 24, 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 7, 2020 .

^ United States v. Watson , 900 F.3d 892 (7th Cir. 2018).

^ "7th Circuit says vacated Fourth Amendment case was 'close call' " .

The Indiana Lawyer . August 20, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved March 14, 2019 .

^ United States v. Terry , 915 F.3d 1141 (7th Cir. 2019).

^ Barr, Luke (September 27, 2020).

"3 cases that hint at Amy Coney Barrett's views on policing" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Rainsberger v. Benner , 913 F.3d 640 (7th Cir. 2019).

^ "IMPD detective must stand trial on false affidavit in murder" .

The Indiana Lawyer . January 16, 2019.

Archived from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved March 14, 2019 .

^ "Suit alleging prison officer called man a snitch revived" .

Chicago Daily Law Bulletin .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "Howard v. Koeller & O'Donovan No. 14-CV-667" . December 10, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "Orchard Hill Bldg. Co. v. US Army Corps of Engineers, 893 F. 3d 1017 – Court of Appeals, 7th Circuit 2018" . Google Scholar.

Archived from the original on October 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Cavender, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP-Anthony B. (June 29, 2018).

"Seventh Circuit Remands "Waters of the United States" Case to Corps of Engineers to Determine Whether there is a "Significant Nexus" " .

Lexology .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

^ Grandoni, Dino.

"Analysis | The Energy 202: How Amy Coney Barrett may make it harder for environmentalists to win in court" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

^ Dalton v. Teva North America , 891 F.3d 687 (7th Cir. 2018).

^ Hogberg, David (September 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett's healthcare record to face heavy scrutiny" .

Washington Examiner .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ Katie, Stancombe (June 5, 2018).

"7th Circuit Affirms Ruling For Maker In IUD Liability Case" .

City-County Observer (theindianalawyer.com) .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ Illinois Republican Party v. Pritzker Archived January 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , No. 20-2175 (7th Cir. September 3, 2020).

^ Williams, Pete (August 12, 2021).

"Supreme Court rejects challenge to Indiana University's vaccination requirement" . NBC News. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved August 13, 2021 .

^ Casillas v. Madison Ave. Associates, Inc.

, 926 F.3d 329 (7th Cir. 2019).

^ Stancombe, Katie (June 5, 2019).

"7th Circuit debt collection ruling creates split among circuits" .

The Indiana Lawyer .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved August 4, 2020 .

^ "Seventh Circuit's "No Harm, No Foul" Holding Requires Concrete Harm in Consumer Lending Cases" .

Consumer Finance Legal Report . July 29, 2019.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved August 4, 2020 .

^ "7th Circuit rejects lawsuit over collection letter, says no harm shown" .

Reuters . June 5, 2019.

Archived from the original on June 9, 2019 . Retrieved August 4, 2020 .

^ Shakman v. Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County , 969 F.3d 810 (7th Cir. 2020).

^ "Appeals panel ends Teamsters' bid to keep federal hiring monitor out of grievance hearings at Cook court clerk's office" .

Cook County Record . August 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "President Donald J. Trump's Supreme Court List" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2021 . Retrieved August 19, 2020 – via National Archives .

^ Estepa, Jessica (June 28, 2018).

"Indiana's Amy Coney Barrett on list of 25 likely Supreme Court candidates" .

Indianapolis Star .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2019 . Retrieved June 29, 2018 .

^ Landler, Mark; Haberman, Maggie (July 9, 2018).

"Brett Kavanaugh to Supreme Court" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 10, 2018.

^ Seidel, Jon; Sweet, Lynn (July 18, 2018).

"Judge Amy Coney Barrett passed over for Supreme Court will stay in spotlight" .

Chicago Sun-Times . Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ Bennett, Geoff; Pettypiece, Shannon ; Alba, Monica.

"Amy Coney Barrett emerging as a front-runner to fill Ginsburg's Supreme Court seat" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2020 . Retrieved September 19, 2020 .

^ Baker, Peter; Fandos, Nicholas (September 26, 2020).

"Trump Announces Barrett as Supreme Court Nominee, Describing Her as Heir to Scalia" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 .

^ a b c Fandos, Nicholas ; Cochrane, Emily (September 29, 2020).

"With Friendly Visits to Republicans, Barrett Makes Her Capitol Debut" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Brown, Matthew (September 27, 2020).

"Fact check: 'Kingdom of God' comment by SCOTUS contender Amy Coney Barrett lacks context in meme" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

Barrett is a conservative and a favorite among the religious right ^ Kirchgaessner, Stephanie (September 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett: spotlight falls on secretive Catholic group People of Praise" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

...the Louisiana native and Notre Dame Law graduate, a favorite among Trump's evangelical Christian base...

^ Liptak, Adam ; Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (September 19, 2020).

"Shadow of Merrick Garland Hangs Over the Next Supreme Court Fight" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Viebeck, Elisa (October 9, 2018).

"McConnell signals he would push to fill a Supreme Court vacancy in 2020 despite 2016 example" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2018 . Retrieved October 12, 2018 .

^ Wise, Lindsay (October 15, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett's Character, Qualifications Discussed by Witnesses" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 .

^ Noel, Randall D. (October 11, 2020).

"Re: Nomination of Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court of the United States" (PDF) . American Bar Association.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2020 .

^ Evans, Zachary (October 5, 2020).

"Senator Graham Schedules Judiciary Committee Hearings for Amy Coney Barrett" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 .

^ Fandos, Nicholas (October 12, 2020).

" 'This is probably not about persuading each other.' Senators began four days of contentious hearings" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 12, 2020 .

^ Levine, Marianne; Desiderio, Andrew (October 13, 2020).

"Barrett avoids Democrats' questions on Obamacare, abortion" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

^ Wise, Lindsay (October 21, 2020).

"Democrats to Boycott Committee Vote on Amy Coney Barrett" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 22, 2020 .

^ Olsen, Tyler (October 22, 2020).

"Senate Judiciary Republicans advance Barrett nomination despite Democrats' boycott, committee rules" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 22, 2020 .

^ "Senate votes to cut off debate on Barrett confirmation" .

Roll Call . October 25, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2020 . Retrieved October 25, 2020 .

^ "Senate Confirms Judge Amy Coney Barrett to Supreme Court, 52-48" .

U.S. Senate .

C-SPAN . October 25, 2020 . Retrieved July 8, 2025 .

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

166 (184–Book II).

U.S. Government Publishing Office : S6588. October 25, 2020 . Retrieved July 8, 2025 .

^ "U.S. Senate: U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 116th Congress - 2nd Session" .

www.senate.gov . Retrieved August 15, 2021 .

^ Fandos, Nicholas (October 26, 2020).

"Senate Confirms Barrett, Delivering for Trump and Reshaping the Court" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ "U.S. Senate: Supreme Court Nominations: 1789–Present". www.senate.gov. United States Senate. Retrieved October 27, 2020.

^ a b Fausset, Richard (October 27, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett Sworn In as Supreme Court Justice, Cementing Conservative Majority" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ a b McEvoy, Jemima (October 22, 2020).

"After Boycotting Vote, Senate Democrats Continue To Protest 'Illegitimate' Amy Coney Barrett Confirmation" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ Dorman, Sam (October 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett sworn in as Supreme Court Associate Justice at White House ceremony" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ Meagan Vazquez (October 26, 2020).

"White House holds swearing-in ceremony for Amy Coney Barrett" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ "Press Release Regarding The Honorable Amy Coney Barrett Oath Ceremony" (Press release).

Washington, D.C.

: Press Office of the Supreme Court of the United States. October 26, 2020. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved October 22, 2022 .

^ Fink, Jenny (September 22, 2020).

"If Chosen for Supreme Court, Amy Coney Barrett or Barbara Lagoa Would be Only Justices Not to Graduate from Harvard or Yale" .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2021 .

^ Sheckler, Christian (September 28, 2020).

"Supreme Court nomination puts Notre Dame Law School front and center nationally" .

South Bend Tribune . Archived from the original on October 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 10, 2021 .

^ Notre Dame Law School (October 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett, alumna and longtime ND Law faculty member, confirmed as Supreme Court justice" .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2021 .

^ "Supreme Court of the United States case No. 20–542 Republican Party of Pennsylvania v.

Kathy Boockvar, Secretary of Pennsylvaania, et al, On Motion to eppedite considaration of the petition for writ of certiorari. At page 1" (PDF) . United States Supreme Court. October 28, 2020. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ "United States Court of Appeals For the Seventh Circuit Case No. 19-2092 United States of America v.

Hector Uriarte Appeal from the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division. No. 1:09-cr-00332-3 — Joan B. Gottschall, Judge. At Page 2" .

United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit . September 15, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ a b Naham, Matt (November 20, 2020).

"Supreme Court Reveals New Circuit Assignments for Justices — What You Need to Know" .

awandcrime.com . Law & Crime A Dan Abrams Production. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Public Information Office Supreme Court of the United States.

"A Reporter's Guide to Applications Pending Before The Supreme Court of the United States, at page 3" (PDF) . United States Supreme Court. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam (November 2, 2020).

"Justice Amy Coney Barrett Hears Her First Supreme Court Argument" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2020 . Retrieved November 3, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam (November 2, 2020).

"Justice Amy Coney Barrett Hears Her First Supreme Court Argument" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2020 . Retrieved November 3, 2020 .

^ Higgins, Tucker (November 4, 2020).

"Supreme Court leans in favor of Catholic adoption agency that won't work with LGBT couples" .

CNBC . Archived from the original on November 16, 2020.

^ a b Howe, Amy (October 28, 2020).

"Case preview: Court will tackle dispute involving religious foster-care agency, LGBTQ rights" . SCOTUSblog.

Archived from the original on November 5, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ "Fulton v. Philadelphia, Reply Brief for Petitioners" (PDF) . United States Supreme Court. September 24, 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam (November 4, 2020).

"Supreme Court Weighs Legacy of Same-Sex Marriage Case" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 8, 2020.

^ Vile, John R.

"Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn v. Cuomo (2020)" . The First Amendment Encyclopedia presented by the John Seigenthaler Chair of Excellence in First Amendment Studies.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2020 .

^ Howe, Amy (November 26, 2020).

"Justices lift New York's COVID-related attendance limits on worship services" . SCOTUSblog. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2020 .

^ "Supreme Court blocks New York coronavirus limits on houses of worship" .

PBS NewsHour . November 26, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 6, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam (November 26, 2020).

"Splitting 5 to 4, Supreme Court Backs Religious Challenge to Cuomo's Virus Shutdown Order" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 27, 2020 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (November 26, 2020).

"In a 5–4 ruling, Supreme Court sides with religious groups in a dispute over Covid-19 restrictions in New York" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ Aaro, David (November 26, 2020).

"Supreme Court rules against Cuomo's coronavirus limits -- with Barrett playing key role" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ Keller, Aaron (November 27, 2020).

"Gorsuch Took Aim at Legal Root of Abortion, Birth Control Law While Trashing Chief Justice and Gov. Cuomo" .

Law & Crime .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 29, 2020 .

^ "Supreme Court Backs Religious Challenge To New York COVID-19 Restrictions" .

NPR . November 27, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 28, 2020 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (November 26, 2020).

"In a 5–4 ruling, Supreme Court sides with religious groups in a dispute over Covid-19 restrictions in New York" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2021 . Retrieved November 27, 2020 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane.

"Gov. Andrew Cuomo says SCOTUS ruling on coronavirus restrictions is essentially a statement that "it's a different court." " .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam (November 26, 2020).

"Midnight Ruling Exposes Rifts at a Supreme Court Transformed by Trump" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 2, 2020.

^ a b c Jessica, Gresko (March 5, 2021).

"Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett delivers 1st opinion" .

ABC News .

Associated Press . Archived from the original on March 10, 2021 . Retrieved March 5, 2021 .

^ Millhiser, Ian (February 6, 2021).

"The Supreme Court's new, deeply fractured decision on churches and the pandemic, explained" .

Vox.com .

Vox.com . Archived from the original on February 21, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ Liptak, Adam ; Goodman, J. David; Tavernise, Sabrina (September 1, 2021).

"Supreme Court, Breaking Silence, Won't Block Texas Abortion Law" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2021 . Retrieved September 15, 2021 .

^ "Dobbs, State Health Officer of the Mississippi Department of Health, et al. v. Jackson Women's Health Organization et al" (PDF) . June 24, 2022.

^ de Vogue, Ariane (January 28, 2022).

"5-4 Supreme Court clears the way for Alabama execution" .

CNN . Retrieved January 28, 2022 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (March 5, 2021).

"Justice Amy Coney Barrett's first majority written opinion limits reach of FOIA" .

CNN . Archived from the original on March 15, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ Liptak, Adam (March 4, 2021).

"Justice Amy Coney Barrett Issues Her First Majority Opinion" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 11, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (March 8, 2021).

"Stephen Breyer adds 'respect' to his dissent of Amy Coney Barrett's first opinion" .

CNN . Archived from the original on March 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ Barnes, Robert (March 4, 2021).

"Courts & Laws: In Amy Coney Barrett's first signed majority opinion, Supreme Court sides with government over environmentalists" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on March 5, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ "Oil refineries win battle over renewable-fuel exemptions" .

SCOTUSblog . June 25, 2021.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

^ Liptak, Adam (June 17, 2021).

"Supreme Court Backs Catholic Agency in Case on Gay Rights and Foster Care" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane; Stracqualursi, Veronica (July 2, 2021).

"Supreme Court rejects appeal from florist who wouldn't make arrangement for same-sex wedding" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ Higgins, Tucker (July 2, 2021).

"Supreme Court declines to decide whether religious flower shop owner can refuse same-sex weddings" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ Dwyer, Devin (July 2, 2021).

"Gay couple wins case against florist after Supreme Court rejects appeal" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ "Supreme Court won't hear case involving transgender rights" .

Associated Press . November 1, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ Chung, Andrew; Hurley, Lawrence (November 2, 2021).

"U.S. Supreme Court spurns Catholic hospital appeal over transgender patient" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ "Supreme Court turns down Northern California Catholic hospital appeal over transgender patient" .

The Mercury News .

Associated Press . November 2, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ Cole, Devan (December 11, 2023).

"Supreme Court lets stand Washington state law barring conversion therapy for minors | CNN Politics" .

CNN . Retrieved December 11, 2023 .

^ Marimow, Ann E. (December 11, 2023).

"Supreme Court declines to hear challenge to 'conversion therapy' ban" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved December 11, 2023 .

^ "Court turns away religious challenge to Maine's vaccine mandate for health care workers" .

SCOTUSblog . October 29, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved October 30, 2021 .

^ Matthews, Dylan (September 24, 2020).

"The legal theories of Amy Coney Barrett, explained" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ a b Thomson-DeVeaux, Amelia (October 14, 2020).

"How Conservative Is Amy Coney Barrett?" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

^ a b Chung, Andrew; Hurley, Lawrence (October 25, 2020).

"Analysis: U.S. Supreme Court nominee Barrett often rules for police in excessive force cases" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2020 . Retrieved October 25, 2020 .

^ "End Qualified Immunity" .

Cato Institute .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2020 . Retrieved November 3, 2020 .

^ Schweikert, Jay (June 15, 2020).

"The Supreme Court's Dereliction of Duty on Qualified Immunity" .

Cato Institute .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ Sollum, Jacob (October 15, 2020).

"These 7th Circuit Decisions Suggest Amy Coney Barrett Takes a Constrained View of Qualified Immunity" .

Reason .

^ a b "Written responses by Amy Coney Barrett to questions from senators; see questions 30 and 31 by U.S. Senator Booker and the answers to it by Amy Coney Barrett at page 175 in the document contained within the source" .

CNN . October 20, 2020. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2020 .

^ Dias, Elizabeth; Liptak, Adam (September 28, 2020).

"To Conservatives, Barrett Has 'Perfect Combination' of Attributes for Supreme Court" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

^ Bernick, Evan (July 3, 2018).

"Judge Amy Coney Barrett on Statutory Interpretation: Textualism, Precedent, Judicial Restraint, and the Future of Chevron" .

Yale Journal on Regulation .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2020 . Retrieved October 6, 2020 .

^ Nourse, Victoria (October 4, 2020).

"Op-Ed: Why Judge Barrett's legal philosophy is deeply antidemocratic" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 6, 2020 .

^ a b c d Barrett, Amy Coney; Nagle, John Copeland (October 2016).

"Congressional Originalism" .

Journal of Constitutional Law .

19 (1). Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania : 5– 42.

Archived from the original on October 14, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ Kranish, Michael ; Barnes, Robert; Boburg, Sahwn; Merimow, Ann E. (September 26, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett, a disciple of Justice Scalia, is poised to push the Supreme Court further right" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ Matthews, Dylan (September 25, 202).

"The legal theories of Amy Coney Barrett, explained: An expert explains originalism, the Roberts Court, and what a Justice Barrett might do" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ a b Whittington, Keith E.

(November 2013).

"Originalism: A Critical Introduction" .

Fordham Law Review .

82 (2). New York City: Fordham University .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 11, 2020 .

^ Barrett, Amy Coney (September 2020).

"2019 Sumner Canary Memorial Lecture: Assorted Canards of Contemporary Legal Analysis: Redux" .

Case Western Reserve Law Review . Cleveland, Ohio: Case Western Reserve University .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved October 9, 2020 .

^ Kendall, Brent (September 20, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett Is Again a Top Contender for Supreme Court Nomination" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved September 21, 2020 .

^ "Confirmation Battle Looms as Trump Picks Barrett for Supreme Court" .

The New York Times . September 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Joseph, Cameron (September 25, 2020).

"Trump Plans to Pick Amy Coney Barrett to Replace RBG on the Supreme Court" .

Vice News .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ a b Barrett, Amy Coney (January 3, 2017).

"Countering the Majoritarian Difficulty" .

Constitutional Commentary . St. Paul, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Law School .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ a b Cross, Jesse M. (Winter 2020).

"Legislative History in the Modern Congress" (PDF) .

Harvard Journal on Legislation .

57 (1). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University : 93– 94.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ a b c Barrett, Amy Coney (2017).

"Congressional Insiders and Outsiders" .

The University of Chicago Law Review .

2017 . Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago : 2193– 2212.

Archived from the original on October 3, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ a b Barrett, Amy Coney (January 2014).

"Suspension and Delegation" .

Cornell Law Review .

99 (2). Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Law School : 251– 326.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2020 . Retrieved September 19, 2020 .

^ Huq, Aziz ; Ginsburg, Tom (March 23, 2018).

"How to Lose Your Constitutional Democracy" .

UCLA Law Review .

78 (65). Los Angeles, California: UCLA School of Law : 111.

Archived from the original on April 5, 2019 . Retrieved October 7, 2020 .

^ Barrett, Amy Coney (2020).

"The Scope of the Suspension Clause" .

National Constitution Center .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ Jasinski, Nicholas.

"What to Know About Judge Amy Coney Barrett, Trump's Supreme Court Nominee" .

barrons.com .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

^ "Barrett Could Be Most Conservative Justice Since Clarence Thomas" .

Bloomberg Law .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

^ "10 things you need to know today: September 27, 2020" .

The Week . September 27, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

^ Greenhouse, Linda (October 8, 2020).

"Opinion | Questions for Amy Coney Barrett" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

^ "Video Clip: Judge Amy Coney Barrett on Precedent and Stare Decisis" .

C-SPAN . October 13, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 28, 2020 .

^ a b c d Barrett, Amy C. (August 22, 2013).

"Precedent and Jurisprudential Disagreement" (PDF) .

Texas Law Review .

91 (7): 1711, 1734– 35.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 21, 2020 . Retrieved September 26, 2020 .

^ Fallon, Richard H. Jr.

(June 1, 2008).

"Constitutional Precedent Viewed through the Lens of Hartian Positivist Jurisprudence" .

North Carolina Law Review .

86 (5): 1116.

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved October 11, 2020 .

^ a b Wolf, Richard; Groppe, Maureen (September 27, 2020).

"On key issues: Statements and rulings by Amy Coney Barrett" .

South Bend Tribune .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2020 . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ "Who Is Amy Coney Barrett, Front-Runner For The Supreme Court Nomination?" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

^ Keith, Katie (September 20, 2020).

"After Justice Ginsburg's Loss, What A New Court Could Mean For The ACA" .

Health Affairs Forefront .

doi : 10.1377/forefront.20200920.954961 .

^ Liptak, Adam (October 1, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett, Trump's Supreme Court Pick, Signed Anti-Abortion Ad" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ Itkowitz, Colby (2020).

"Who is Amy Coney Barrett, the judge at the top of Trump's list to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

is fervently antiabortion ^ Ramesh Ponnuru , Barrett and That Pro-Life Ad Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , National Review (October 1, 2020).

^ Hughes, Siobhan (October 1, 2020).

"Supreme Court Nominee Amy Coney Barrett Signed Antiabortion Ad in 2006" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on October 4, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ "Barrett opposed 'abortion on demand,' raising doubts on Roe" .

Associated Press . October 1, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ Papenfuss, Mary (October 10, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett Submits Additional Anti-Abortion Docs To Senate After Scrutiny" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2020 . Retrieved October 10, 2020 .

^ "SouthBank Legal" .

southbank.legal .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ Weiss, Debra Cassens (September 21, 2020).

"A top SCOTUS contender, Amy Coney Barrett is likely to draw scrutiny for decisions on abortion, campus sex assault" .

ABA Journal .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ "Class Notes: Class of 1996" .

Notre Dame Magazine . Winter 2012–2013.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2013 . Retrieved May 8, 2017 .

^ Keeley, Matt (September 20, 2020).

"Who is Amy Coney Barrett's family? Potential Supreme Court nominee is a mother of seven and has six siblings" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 26, 2020 .

^ Dias, Elizabeth; Liptak, Adam (September 21, 2020).

"Who is Judge Amy Coney Barrett? What to know about the leading contender to replace Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 3, 2020 – via Boston.com.

^ Escobar, Allyson (September 21, 2020).

"Why do Catholics make up a majority of the Supreme Court?" .

America: The Jesuit Review .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ Boorstein, Michelle (October 16, 2020).

"Amy Coney Barrett's People of Praise faith group has had a complicated relationship to Catholicism" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 .

^ a b Parrott, Jeff (July 15, 2018).

"Supreme Court opening shines spotlight on local religious group People of Praise" .

South Bend Tribune .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2020.

^ Roberts, Judy (September 25, 2020).

"The People of Praise Community: What It Actually Is" .

National Catholic Register .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 .

^ a b Thorp, Adam (July 5, 2018).

"6 things to know about 'People of Praise' and Judge Amy Coney Barrett" .

Chicago Sun-Times .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ "High court nominee served as 'handmaid' in religious group" .

Associated Press . October 7, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2020 .

^ Brown, Emma; Swaine, Jon; Boorstein, Michelle.

"Amy Coney Barrett served as a 'handmaid' in Christian group People of Praise" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 7, 2020 .

^ "Members" . American Law Institute.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2019 . Retrieved August 5, 2020 .

Further reading United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary , Questionnaire for the Nominee to the Court of Appeals for Amy Coney Barrett 115th Cong., 1st Sess., September 2017 ———, Questionnaire for the Nominee to the Supreme Court for Amy Coney Barrett , 116th Cong., 2nd Sess., September 2020 Congressional Research Service Legal Sidebar LSB10540, President Trump Nominates Judge Amy Coney Barrett: Initial Observations , by Victoria L. Killion (September 28, 2020) ——— Legal Sidebar LSB10539, Judge Amy Coney Barrett: Selected Primary Material , Coordinated by Julia Taylor (September 28, 2020) ——— Report R46562, Judge Amy Coney Barrett: Her Jurisprudence and Potential Impact on the Supreme Court , Coordinated by Valerie C. Brannon, Michael John Garcia, and Caitlain Devereaux Lewis (October 6, 2020) External links Amy Coney Barrett at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Amy Coney Barrett at the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges , a publication of the Federal Judicial Center .

Amy Coney Barrett at Ballotpedia Amy Coney Barrett on LittleSis , a website that publishes data on who-knows-who between government, donors and business Appearances on C-SPAN Amy Coney Barrett publications indexed by the Scopus bibliographic database.

(subscription required) Selected Resources on Amy Coney Barrett from the Law Library of Congress Nomination Research Guide from the Georgetown University Law Center library "Profile" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2019.

at Notre Dame Law School Official Curriculum vitae by Notre Dame Law School The Suspension Clause by Amy Barrett and Neal K. Katyal in the National Constitution Center Interactive Constitution Selected works of Amy Barrett Archived March 31, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , University of Notre Dame: The Law School. Retrieved September 28, 2020 Legal offices Preceded by John Daniel Tinder Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 2017–2020 Succeeded by Thomas Kirsch Preceded by Ruth Bader Ginsburg Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States 2020–present Incumbent U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial) Preceded by Brett Kavanaugh as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Order of precedence of the United States as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Succeeded by Ketanji Brown Jackson as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court v t e Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Chief justices John Jay ( 1789–1795 , cases ) John Rutledge ( 1795 , cases ) Oliver Ellsworth ( 1796–1800 , cases ) John Marshall ( 1801–1835 , cases ) Roger B. Taney ( 1836–1864 , cases ) Salmon P. Chase ( 1864–1873 , cases ) Morrison Waite ( 1874–1888 , cases ) Melville Fuller ( 1888–1910 , cases ) Edward Douglass White ( 1910–1921 , cases ) William Howard Taft ( 1921–1930 , cases ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1930–1941 , cases ) Harlan F. Stone ( 1941–1946 , cases ) Fred M. Vinson ( 1946–1953 , cases ) Earl Warren ( 1953–1969 , cases ) Warren E. Burger ( 1969–1986 , cases ) William Rehnquist ( 1986–2005 , cases ) John Roberts ( 2005–present , cases ) Associate justices J. Rutledge * (1790–1791) Cushing (1790–1810) Wilson (1789–1798) Blair (1790–1795) Iredell (1790–1799) T. Johnson (1792–1793) Paterson (1793–1806) S. Chase (1796–1811) Washington (1798–1829) Moore (1800–1804) W. Johnson (1804–1834) Livingston (1807–1823) Todd (1807–1826) Duvall (1811–1835) Story (1812–1845) Thompson (1823–1843) Trimble (1826–1828) McLean (1829–1861) Baldwin (1830–1844) Wayne (1835–1867) Barbour (1836–1841) Catron (1837–1865) McKinley (1838–1852) Daniel (1842–1860) Nelson (1845–1872) Woodbury (1845–1851) Grier (1846–1870) Curtis (1851–1857) Campbell (1853–1861) Clifford (1858–1881) Swayne (1862–1881) Miller (1862–1890) Davis (1862–1877) Field (1863–1897) Strong (1870–1880) Bradley (1870–1892) Hunt (1873–1882) J. M. Harlan (1877–1911) Woods (1881–1887) Matthews (1881–1889) Gray (1882–1902) Blatchford (1882–1893) L. Lamar (1888–1893) Brewer (1890–1910) Brown (1891–1906) Shiras (1892–1903) H. Jackson (1893–1895) E. White * (1894–1910) Peckham (1896–1909) McKenna (1898–1925) Holmes (1902–1932) Day (1903–1922) Moody (1906–1910) Lurton (1910–1914) Hughes * (1910–1916) Van Devanter (1911–1937) J. Lamar (1911–1916) Pitney (1912–1922) McReynolds (1914–1941) Brandeis (1916–1939) Clarke (1916–1922) Sutherland (1922–1938) Butler (1923–1939) Sanford (1923–1930) Stone * (1925–1941) O. Roberts (1930–1945) Cardozo (1932–1938) Black (1937–1971) Reed (1938–1957) Frankfurter (1939–1962) Douglas (1939–1975) Murphy (1940–1949) Byrnes (1941–1942) R. Jackson (1941–1954) W. Rutledge (1943–1949) Burton (1945–1958) Clark (1949–1967) Minton (1949–1956) J. M. Harlan II (1955–1971) Brennan (1956–1990) Whittaker (1957–1962) Stewart (1958–1981) B. White (1962–1993) Goldberg (1962–1965) Fortas (1965–1969) T. Marshall (1967–1991) Blackmun (1970–1994) Powell (1972–1987) Rehnquist * (1972–1986) Stevens (1975–2010) O'Connor (1981–2006) Scalia (1986–2016) Kennedy (1988–2018) Souter (1990–2009) Thomas (1991–present) Ginsburg (1993–2020) Breyer (1994–2022) Alito (2006–present) Sotomayor (2009–present) Kagan (2010–present) Gorsuch (2017–present) Kavanaugh (2018–present) Barrett (2020–present) K. Jackson (2022–present) * Also served as chief justice of the United States v t e Judicial opinions of Amy Coney Barrett U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (October 31, 2017 – October 26, 2020); by calendar year 2017 2018 2019 2020 Supreme Court of the United States (October 26, 2020 – present); by term 2020 2021 2022 2023 Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Poland Israel Academics Scopus Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐462xt
Cached time: 20250817052125
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.537 seconds
Real time usage: 2.855 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26238/1000000
Revision size: 175568/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 663407/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21859/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 899628/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.509/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14380459/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2370.484      1 -total
 59.22% 1403.850      1 Template:Reflist
 27.72%  657.145    125 Template:Cite_news
 15.21%  360.495     67 Template:Cite_web
 12.52%  296.669      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  8.63%  204.461     27 Template:Cite_journal
  4.61%  109.365      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  4.11%   97.447     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  3.58%   84.882     13 Template:Cite_court
  2.81%   66.639      1 Template:SCOTUS_Justices Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:53992581:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052125 and revision id 1299471144. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amy_Coney_Barrett&oldid=1299471144 " Categories : 1972 births Living people 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American women lawyers 20th-century American women writers 20th-century Roman Catholics 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American women judges 21st-century American women lawyers 21st-century American women writers 21st-century Roman Catholics Alliance Defending Freedom people American people of French descent American people of Irish descent American Roman Catholic writers American women legal scholars American women non-fiction writers Catholics from Louisiana Catholics from Washington, D.C.

Constitutional court women judges Judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States Lawyers from New Orleans Lawyers from Washington, D.C.

Members of the American Law Institute Notre Dame Law School alumni Notre Dame Law School faculty People associated with Baker Botts Rhodes College alumni United States court of appeals judges appointed by Donald Trump United States federal judges appointed by Donald Trump University of Notre Dame faculty Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected biographies of living people Use American English from August 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2020 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata FJC Bio template with ID same as Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges People appearing on C-SPAN Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 16:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amy Coney Barrett 45 languages Add topic

