Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work 2 Major works 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Bob Jessop 10 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français مصرى 日本語 Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British academic (born 1946) Bob Jessop (2012) Bob Jessop FAcSS (born 3 March 1946) is a British academic who has published extensively on state theory and political economy . He is currently Distinguished Professor of Sociology at the University of Lancaster .

Work [ edit ] Jessop's major contribution to state theory is in treating the state not as an entity but as a social relation with differential strategic effects. This means that the state is not something with an essential, fixed property, such as a neutral coordinator of different social interests, an autonomous corporate actor with its own bureaucratic goals and interests, or the "executive committee of the bourgeoisie", as often described by pluralists , elitists / statists , and conventional Marxists , respectively. Rather, what the state is essentially determined by is the nature of the wider social relations in which it is situated, especially the balance of social forces.

The state can thus be understood as follows: First, the state has varied natures, apparatuses, and boundaries according to its historical and geographical developments as well as its specific conjunctures. One of these apparatuses is state projects, which include a mechanism that Jessop calls structural selectivity.

He claims that state structures "offer unequal chances to different forces within and outside that state to act for different political purposes".

[ 1 ] However, there is a strategic limit to this variation, imposed by the given balance of forces at specific time and space. Thus, second, the state has differential effects on various political and economic strategies in a way that privileges some over others, but at the same time, it is the interaction among these strategies that results in such exercise of state power. This approach is called the "strategic-relational approach" and can be considered as a creative extension and development of Marx 's concept of capital not as a thing but as a social relation and of Antonio Gramsci 's and Nicos Poulantzas 's concept of the state as a social relation, something more than narrow political society.

Jessop uses the term "time sovereignty" (or "temporal sovereignty") to stand for a government's right to have at its disposition the time that is required for considered political decision-making. He states that this "time sovereignty" is endangered as governments see themselves pressured to compress their own decision-making cycles so that they can make more timely and appropriate interventions.

[ 2 ] Major works [ edit ] The Capitalist State: Marxist Theories and Methods , Oxford: Blackwell 1982.

Nicos Poulantzas: Marxist Theory and Political Strategy , London: Macmillan 1985.

Thatcherism: a Tale of Two Nations , Cambridge: Polity (co-authors—Kevin Bonnett, Simon Bromley, Tom Ling) 1988.

State Theory: Putting the Capitalist State in Its Place , Cambridge: Polity 1990.

The Future of the Capitalist State , Cambridge: Polity 2002.

Beyond the Regulation Approach Putting Capitalist Economies in their Place (co-authored with Ngai-Ling Sum ) Cheltenham: Edward Elgar 2006. Winner of the Gunnar Myrdal Prize awarded given by the European Association for Evolutionary Political Economy for the best book published in 2006 broadly in line with its aims and objectives.

State Power: A Strategic-Relational Approach , Cambridge: Polity 2007.

Towards a Cultural Political Economy. Putting Culture in its Place in Political Economy (co-authored with Ngai-Ling Sum ) Cheltenham: Edward Elgar 2014.

The State. Past, Present, Future , Cambridge: Polity 2016.

See also [ edit ] Critical realism References [ edit ] ^ Jessop, Bob (1990).

State Theory: Putting the capitalist state in its place . Pennsylvania: University Park: Penn State University Press. p. 367.

^ Bob Jessop Globalization: It’s about Time too!

Archived 8 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine , 85, Political Science Series, Institute for Advanced Studies, Vienna, January 2003 External links [ edit ] The strategic-relational approach, realism and the state: from regulation theory to neoliberalism via Marx and Poulantzas, an interview with Bob Jessop . By Jamie Morgan.

Journal of Critical Realism . November 2021.

doi : 10.1080/14767430.2021.1995685 v t e Lancaster University Colleges Bowland Cartmel County Furness Fylde Graduate Grizedale Lonsdale Pendle People Chancellor: Alan Milburn Vice-Chancellor: Andy Schofield Academics Alumni Vice-Chancellor of the County Palatine of Lancaster Buildings Bailrigg InfoLab21 The Ruskin: Library, Museum and Research Centre Chaplaincy Centre Departments Lancaster Environment Centre Lancaster Institute for the Contemporary Arts Management School Medical School Lancaster Arts Richardson Institute Student life Lancaster University Students' Union Bailrigg FM LA1TV SCAN International Volunteers (InterVol) Boat Club Roses Tournament Symbols Coat of arms Red Rose of Lancaster Category Commons Portals : United Kingdom Biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID ResearcherID Scopus Google Scholar Publons People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bob_Jessop&oldid=1294162829 " Categories : 1946 births Living people Academics of Lancaster University Fellows of the Academy of Social Sciences British sociologists British Marxist writers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 00:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bob Jessop 10 languages Add topic

