Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Later life 2 Writing style and literary theory 3 Legacy and honors Toggle Legacy and honors subsection 3.1 Inhabited places 3.2 Bodies of water 3.3 Schools 3.4 Other 4 References 5 Citations and further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sidney Lanier 19 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Latina Македонски مصرى Nederlands Polski Русский Svenska ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American musician and poet (1842 – 1881) Sidney Lanier Born Sidney Clopton Lanier ( 1842-02-03 ) February 3, 1842 Macon, Georgia , U.S.

Died September 7, 1881 (1881-09-07) (aged 39) Lynn, North Carolina , U.S.

Resting place Green Mount Cemetery , Baltimore, Maryland Occupation Poet musician academic Nationality American Period 1867–1881 Sidney Clopton Lanier [ 1 ] (February 3, 1842 – September 7, 1881) was an American musician, poet and author. He served in the Confederate States Army as a private, [ 2 ] worked on a blockade-running ship for which he was imprisoned (resulting in his catching tuberculosis ), taught, worked at a hotel where he gave musical performances, was a church organist , and worked as a lawyer. As a poet he sometimes used dialects . Many of his poems are written in heightened, but often archaic, American English . He became a flautist and sold poems to publications. He eventually became a professor of literature at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore , and is known for his adaptation of musical meter to poetry. Many schools, other structures and two lakes are named for him, and he became hailed in the South as the "poet of the Confederacy".

[ 3 ] A 1972 US postage stamp honored him as an "American poet".

Biography [ edit ] Sidney Clopton Lanier was born February 3, 1842, in Macon , Georgia , [ 4 ] to parents Robert Sampson Lanier and Mary Jane Anderson. On his father's side he was descended of French Huguenots .

[ 5 ] His middle name, "Clopton", was in honor of David Clopton , a former classmate of his father's.

[ 6 ] He began playing the flute at an early age, and his love of that musical instrument continued throughout his life. He attended Oglethorpe University , which at the time was near Milledgeville, Georgia , and he was a member of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. He graduated first in his class shortly before the outbreak of the American Civil War .

[ 7 ] He returned to Oglethorpe the next year, as a tutor, and befriended Milton Harlow Northrup, a New York native, who was a conductor at the school.

[ 8 ] During the war, he served in the Confederate signal corps, primarily in the tidewater region of Virginia . Later, he and his brother Clifford served as pilots aboard English blockade runners , [ 9 ] and Lanier's ship, the Lucy , was captured by the USS Santiago de Cuba , on November 3, 1864.

[ 10 ] He was incarcerated in a military prison at Point Lookout in Maryland , where he contracted tuberculosis [ 11 ] (generally known as "consumption" at the time).

[ 12 ] He suffered greatly from this disease, then incurable and usually fatal, for the rest of his life.

Sidney Lanier Shortly after the war, he taught school briefly, [ 11 ] then moved to Montgomery, Alabama , where he worked as a night clerk at the Exchange Hotel (a hotel partly owned by his grandfather; his brother Clifford also worked there and became a part owner after the war [ 13 ] ), and also performed as a musician.  He was the regular organist at the First Presbyterian Church in nearby Prattville . He wrote his only novel, Tiger Lilies (1867), while in Alabama.

[ 14 ] This novel was partly autobiographical, describing a stay in 1860 at his grandfather's Montvale Springs resort hotel near Knoxville, Tennessee .

[ 15 ] In 1867, he moved to Prattville, at that time a small town just north of Montgomery, where he taught at a small school. He married Mary Day of Macon in 1867 [ 11 ] and moved back to his hometown, where he began working in his father's law office.

After passing the Georgia bar, Lanier practiced as a lawyer for several years.

[ 11 ] During this period he wrote a number of lesser poems, using the " cracker " and " negro " dialects of his day, about poor white and black farmers in the Reconstruction South. He traveled extensively through southern and eastern portions of the United States in search of a cure for his tuberculosis.

While on one such journey in Texas , he rediscovered his native and untutored talent for the flute and decided to travel to the northeast in hopes of finding employment as a musician in an orchestra. Unable to find work in New York City, Philadelphia , or Boston , he signed on to play flute for the Peabody Orchestra in Baltimore, Maryland , [ 11 ] shortly after its organization. He taught himself musical notation and quickly rose to the position of first flautist. He was famous in his day for his performances of a personal composition for the flute called "Black Birds", which mimics the song of that species.

In an effort to support Mary and their three sons, he also wrote poetry for magazines. His most famous poems were "Corn" (1875), "The Symphony" (1875), "Centennial Meditation" (1876), "The Song of the Chattahoochee" (1877), [ 11 ] " The Marshes of Glynn ", (1878) [ 11 ] " A Sunrise Song " (1881), and " Evening Song " (1884).

[ 16 ] These poems are generally considered his greatest works, and have been set to music by many composers, including Charles Tomlinson Griffes and Grace W. Root .

[ 16 ] "The Marshes of Glynn" and "A Sunrise Song" are part of an unfinished set of lyrical nature poems known as the "Hymns of the Marshes", which describe the vast, open salt marshes of Glynn County on the coast of Georgia. (The longest bridge in Georgia is in Glynn County and is named for Lanier.) Later life [ edit ] Later in his short 39-year life, he became a student, lecturer, and, finally, a faculty member at the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, specializing in the works of the English novelists, [ 11 ] Shakespeare , the Elizabethan sonneteers , Chaucer , and the Old English poets . He published a book entitled The Science of English Verse (1880) in which he developed a novel theory exploring the connections between musical notation and meter in poetry. In 1883, a posthumous collection of lectures, entitled The English Novel and Its Principle of Development was published.

The house in which Lanier died.

Memorial stone for Lanier.

Lanier finally succumbed to complications caused by his tuberculosis [ 11 ] on September 7, 1881, while convalescing with his family near Lynn, North Carolina . He was 39. He is buried in Green Mount Cemetery in Baltimore.

Writing style and literary theory [ edit ] A poet who connected musical notation with poetic meter, he was described by C.K. Williams as "a deft metrical technician",.

[ 17 ] He developed a unique style of poetry written in logaoedic dactyls , which was heavily influenced by the works of Anglo-Saxon poets.  He wrote several of his greatest poems in this meter, including "Revenge of Hamish" (1878), "The Marshes of Glynn" and "Sunrise". In Lanier's hands, the logaoedic dactylic meter led to a free-form, almost prose-like style of poetry that was greatly admired by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , Bayard Taylor , Charlotte Cushman , and other poets and critics of the day. The "sprung verse" metrical system developed by Gerard Manley Hopkins at about the same time superficially resembles Lanier's practice but shows no influence (and there is no evidence that they knew each other or that either had read any of the other's works).

Lanier also published essays on literary and musical topics. He edited a notable series of four abridgements , published by Charles Scribner's Sons , of literary works about knightly combat and chivalry in modernized language more appealing to the boys of his day: The Boy's Froissart (1879), a retelling of Jean Froissart 's Froissart's Chronicles , which tell of adventure, battle and custom in medieval "England, France, Spain, etc." [ 18 ] The Boy's King Arthur (1880), based on Sir Thomas Malory 's compilation of the legends of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table .

[ 19 ] The Boy's Mabinogion (1881), based on the early Welsh legends of King Arthur, as retold in the Red Book of Hergest .

[ 20 ] The Boy's Percy (published posthumously in 1882), consisting of old ballads of war, adventure and love based on Bishop Thomas Percy 's Reliques of Ancient English Poetry .

[ 21 ] He also wrote two travelogues that were widely read at the time, entitled Florida: Its Scenery, Climate and History (1875) and Sketches of India (1876) (although he never visited India).

Legacy and honors [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 1972 U.S. postage stamp, Sidney Lanier – American Poet The Sidney Lanier Cottage in Macon, Georgia , is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The square stone Four Southern Poets Monument , located between 7th and 8th Streets in Augusta, lists Lanier as one of Georgia's four great poets, all of whom were in the Confederate military.

[ 22 ] The southeastern side bears this inscription:  "To Sidney Lanier 1842–1880. The Catholic man who hath mightily won God out of knowledge and good out of infinite pain and sight out of blindness and purity out of a stain."  The other poets on the monument are James Ryder Randall , Fr.

Abram Ryan , and Paul Hayne .

Baltimore honored Lanier with a large and elaborate bronze and granite sculptural monument, created by Hans K. Schuler and located on the campus of the Johns Hopkins University . In addition to the monument at Johns Hopkins, Lanier was also later memorialized on the campus of Duke University in Durham, North Carolina . Upon the construction of the iconic Duke Chapel between 1930 and 1935 on the university's West Campus, a statue of Lanier was included alongside two fellow prominent Southerners, Thomas Jefferson and Robert E. Lee .

[ 23 ] This statue, which appears to show a Lanier older than the 39 years he actually lived, is situated on the right side of the portico leading into the chapel narthex. It is prominently featured on the cover of the 2010 autobiographical memoir Hannah's Child , by Stanley Hauerwas , a Methodist theologian teaching at Duke Divinity School .

[ 24 ] The United Daughters of the Confederacy worked successfully to enhance Lanier's legacy.

[ 25 ] Lanier's poem "The Marshes of Glynn" is the inspiration for a cantata by the same name that was created by the modern English composer Andrew Downes to celebrate the Royal Opening of the Adrian Boult Hall in Birmingham, England, in 1986.

Piers Anthony used Lanier, his life, and his poetry in his science-fiction novel Macroscope (1969).  He quotes from "The Marshes of Glynn" and other references appear throughout the novel.

In 1980, Yugoslav rock band Lutajuća Srca recorded the song "Večernja pesma", featuring lyrics from Lanier's "An Evening Poem" in Serbo-Croatian , the song becoming a minor hit for the band.

[ 26 ] Several entities have been named for Sidney Lanier. Among them are: Inhabited places [ edit ] Lanier County, Georgia Sidney Lanier Avenue, residential street, Athens, Georgia Sidney Lanier Lane, residential street, Greenwich, Connecticut Lanier Avenue, Fayetteville, Georgia Lanier Street, residential street, Decatur, Alabama Lanier Heights , neighborhood, Washington, D.C.

(Indirectly) USS Lanier , which was named for the county.

Bodies of water [ edit ] Lake Lanier , operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers northeast of Atlanta, Georgia Lake Lanier in Landrum, South Carolina .

Schools [ edit ] Sidney Lanier High School in Montgomery, Alabama (The Montgomery County Board of Education voted to close the school in 2024) Sidney Lanier School in Gainesville, Florida [ 27 ] Lanier University , short-lived university; first Baptist, then owned by the Ku Klux Klan for a year, in Atlanta, Georgia The Sidney Lanier Building (previously Sidney Lanier Elementary School) on the campus of Glynn Academy , in Brunswick, Georgia Lanier Middle School in Sugar Hill, Georgia Lanier High School in Sugar Hill, Georgia Lanier Elementary School in Gainesville, Georgia [ 28 ] Sidney Lanier Elementary School in Tulsa, Oklahoma Sidney Lanier High School in Austin, Texas. Renamed to Juan Navarro High School Feb, 2019 [ 29 ] Sidney Lanier Expressive Arts Vanguard Elementary School in Dallas, Texas Lanier Middle School in Houston, Texas (Now Bob Lanier Middle School after 90 years as Sidney Lanier Middle School) Lanier High School in San Antonio, Texas Sidney Lanier Elementary School in Tampa, Florida Lanier Technical College in Gainesville, Georgia Katherine Johnson Middle School in Fairfax, Virginia was named Sidney Lanier Middle School for 60 years before being renamed for Johnson in 2021.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Lanier Elementary school in Blount County, Tennessee [ 32 ] Other [ edit ] Sidney Lanier sat under this oak tree and was inspired to write the poem " The Marshes of Glynn ".

Sidney Lanier Cottage , the birthplace of Lanier, in Macon, Georgia Sidney Lanier Bridge over the South Brunswick River in Brunswick, Georgia Sidney Lanier Monument , a monument in Piedmont Park in Atlanta Lanier's Oak in Brunswick, Georgia The Lanier Library , Tryon, North Carolina. Lanier's widow, Mary, donated two of his volumes of poetry to begin the collection when the library was established in 1890.

Sidney Lanier Camp, Eliot, Maine.

Sidney Lanier Boulevard in Duluth, GA The Sidney Lanier Suite at The Harwood Cottage at Historic Macon, GA The World War II Liberty Ship SS Sidney Lanier was named in his honor.

A 1972 US eight-cent postage stamp: "Sidney Lanier - American poet" Sidney Lanier Memorial Scholarship at the University of California, Los Angeles [ 33 ] Lanier Island, in the Mackay River in Glynn County, Georgia.

References [ edit ] ^ "Sidney Clopton Lanier" . Netstate. September 24, 2009 . Retrieved December 6, 2012 .

^ Lomax, John (January 14, 2016).

"Should Houston's Lanier Middle School Lose Its Name Because Of Confederate Ties?" . TexasMonthly.

^ Noble, Don (May 5, 2014).

"Review of Brother Sid: A Novel of Sidney Lanier " .

NPR . Retrieved August 23, 2018 .

^ Anderson, Charles Robert.

Sidney Lanier: Poems and Letters . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1969: 90.

^ Starke 8.

^ Starke 10.

^ Starke 33.

^ Starke 38.

^ Compiled service records of Confederate Soldiers who served in organizations raised directly by the Confederate Government . Series: Carded Records Showing Military Service of Soldiers Who Fought in Confederate Organizations , 1903 - 1927. National Archives . Retrieved February 2, 2018 .

^ Starke 65 ^ a b c d e f g h i "Sidney Lanier/Prattville Male and Female Academy Site" .

Historical Marker Database . Archived from the original on March 15, 2016 . Retrieved September 24, 2015 .

^ George, Christopher T.

"Sidney Lanier—Baltimore's Southern Poet-Musician" .

^ Blue, Matthew Powers; Neeley, Mary Ann (2010).

The Works of Matthew Blue: Montgomery's First Historian . NewSouth Books. p. 64.

ISBN 9781588380319 .

^ Blount, Serena (June 26, 2013).

"Sidney Lanier" .

Encyclopedia of Alabama . Retrieved January 25, 2017 .

^ Martin, C. Brenden (2007).

Tourism in the Mountain South: A Double-edged Sword . Univ. of Tennessee Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-57233-575-2 . Retrieved December 22, 2013 .

^ a b "Evening song | Look off, dear Love, across the sallow sands | LiederNet" .

www.lieder.net . Retrieved February 10, 2024 .

^ C. K. Williams, Poets on Poets Carcanet Press, Manchester, 1997 ISBN 9781857543391 , p.436 ^ Lanier, Sidney , ed. (1879).

The Boy's Froissart being Sir John Froissart's Chronicles of Adventure, Battle, and Custom in England, France, Spain, etc . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ Lanier, Sidney , ed. (1880).

The Boy's King Arthur being Sir Thomas Malory's History of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ Lanier, Sidney , ed. (1881).

The Boy's Mabinogion being The Earliest Welsh Tales of King Arthur in the Famous Red Book of Hergest . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ Lanier, Sidney , ed. (1882).

The Boy's Percy being Old Ballads of War, Adventure and Love from Bishop Thomas Percy's Reliques of Ancient English Poetry . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ "Hanna's Child" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2012 . Retrieved April 30, 2010 .

^ "The Stonesetters" . Archived from the original on March 7, 2013 . Retrieved April 29, 2010 .

^ "Frankies Confederate Monuments and Memorials of the South" .

^ Noble, Don (May 5, 2014).

"Brother Sid: A Novel of Sidney Lanier" .

www.apr.org . Retrieved March 22, 2019 .

^ Janjatović, Petar (2007).

EX YU ROCK enciklopedija 1960–2006 . Belgrade: self-released. p. 138.

^ Sidney Lanier School Archived February 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Lanier Elementary School website [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Lanier Viking High School Website" . Archived from the original on March 29, 2019 . Retrieved April 2, 2019 .

^ Lanier Middle School in Fairfax website ^ City of Fairfax Schools press release ^ Staff reports (May 9, 2018).

"Lanier named for a poet" .

The Daily Times . Retrieved April 27, 2023 .

^ "Sidney Lanier Memorial Scholarship" .

University of California Los Angeles-Scholarships . Retrieved May 10, 2021 .

Citations and further reading [ edit ] De Bellis, Jack.

Sidney Lanier, Poet of the Marshes , in Southern Literature Series . Atlanta, Ga.: Georgia Humanities Council, 1988.

ISBN 0-8203-1319-X (assigned to the University of Georgia Press).

Fish, Tallu.

Sidney Lanier, America's Sweet Singer of Songs . Cynthiana, Ky.: Privately Printed ... [for distribution by] Betty Fish Smith, 1988. Without ISBN Fishburne, Charles C., junior.

Sidney Lanier, Poet of the Marshes, Visits Cedar Keys [in] 1875 . Cedar Key, Flor.: Sea Hawk Publications, 1986. Without ISBN Gabin, Jane S.

A Living Minstrelsy: The Poetry and Music of Sidney Lanier . Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 1985.

ISBN 0-86554-155-8 Lamar, May.

Brother Sid . Montgomery, AL.: The Donnell Group, 2012.

ISBN 0988416506 .

Starke, Aubrey Harrison.

Sidney Lanier: A Biographical and Critical Study . Chapel Hill, NC:  The University of North Carolina Press, 1933.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Sidney Lanier Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sidney Lanier .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Sidney Lanier .

Works by Sidney Lanier at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Sidney Lanier at the Internet Archive Works by Sidney Lanier at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) A Biography Of Sidney Lanier at Project Gutenberg Sidney Lanier papers at the Johns Hopkins University Sidney Lanier in The New Georgia Encyclopedia Sidney Lanier Cottage House Museum in Macon, Georgia Sheet music for "A ballad of trees and the master" , Boston: Oliver Ditson Company, 1899, from the Alabama Sheet Music Collection Sheet music for "Sunset" , New York: G. Schirmer, 1877, from the Alabama Sheet Music Collection v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Artists Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sidney_Lanier&oldid=1301612749 " Categories : 1842 births 1881 deaths Poets from Georgia (U.S. state) American people of English descent Johns Hopkins University alumni Johns Hopkins University faculty Confederate States Army soldiers Oglethorpe University alumni Oglethorpe University faculty People of Georgia (U.S. state) in the American Civil War Musicians from Macon, Georgia Musicians from Baltimore Mythopoeic writers Writers of modern Arthurian fiction Writers from Macon, Georgia Poets from Baltimore Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees 19th-century American poets American male poets 19th-century American musicians 19th-century American male writers 19th-century American male musicians American male organists American flautists American male novelists 19th-century American novelists Tuberculosis deaths in North Carolina 19th-century deaths from tuberculosis Burials at Green Mount Cemetery Blockade runners of the American Civil War American Civil War prisoners of war held by the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2015 Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sidney Lanier 19 languages Add topic

