Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Revealing the mysteries and effects of drugs and plants 2.2 Correction of temperament according to the rules of the treatment 2.3 Others 3 References Toggle the table of contents Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri 2 languages العربية Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2020 ) Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Born 17th century, Algiers Died 18th century Academic work Main interests Medicine , Pharmacology Abd El Razzaq Ibn Mouhammed Ibn Hamadouch Al-Jazaïri (Arabic: عبد الرزاق الجزائري), also known as Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri was an important 17-18th-century Algerian Muslim physician and scientist. His most important work was Kachef Eroumouz fi eharh-El-aquakir ou El-alchbab (Revealing the mysteries and effects of drugs and plants) , [ 1 ] which is a treatise on medical subject classified in alphabetical order. This book was very successful in Algeria and Maghreb , and more generally throughout all of the Arab world , and influenced Islamic medicine.

[ 2 ] The physician and historian Nicholas Lucien Leclerc writes that he can be considered as the last major representative of Arab medicine.

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Very little is known about him, other than that he was born in the 17th century in the State of Algiers [ 4 ] and died in the 18th century. In his book "Revealing the mysteries and the effects of drugs and plants" , Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri informs us that he collected certain pharmacological knowledge in Cairo during his pilgrimage to Mecca , in 1130 AH (i.e. during the year 1717 and 1718 of the Gregorian calendar ).

[ 5 ] Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri was influenced by various treatises of medicine of the 16 century Arab Ottoman physician Daoud Al-Antaki , notably by his book Tedkret; but also by the treatises of medicine of the 13 century Ibn Beithar .

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Revealing the mysteries and effects of drugs and plants [ edit ] After a definition and a brief description, the book gives the elementary qualities, the general properties, the special properties and the special uses of each drug with the dosage and the substitutes. Its work is preceded by an introduction on the general properties of drugs and preservation methods.

[ 4 ] The book describes more than 987 drugs and substances.

Correction of temperament according to the rules of the treatment [ edit ] Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri wrote in 1748 Tadil El-Mizadj Bisabai Koudin El Iladj (Correction of temperament according to the rules of the treatment) which is a book that deals with genital functions, their disorders and their treatment.

[ 6 ] Others [ edit ] The manuscript of the national library of Algiers has as a subtitle drawn in red ink: "Fourth volume of the book on simple medicines, description of their name - Work of the respectable Abd El Razzaq Ibn Mouhammed Al-Jazaïri (May God grant him missericorde, grant him his forgiveness and give him access to the highest degrees)" According to Gabriel Colin, this shows clearly that the book 'Revealing the mysteries and the effects of drugs and plants ' is only a small part of the work of Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Ben Larbey Seguir, Mohamed (1884).

La médecine arabe en Algérie . Paris : A. Parent (Licence ouverte / Open licence Etalab). pp. 25 and 26.

^ Abderrezzaq El-Jezâïri Médecin Arabe du XIIe siècle de l'Hégire: THÈSE Présentée et publiquement soutenue à la Faculté de Médecine de Montpellier le 9 Mars 190, par Gabriel COLIN. Page 75.

^ Abderrezzaq El-Jezâïri Médecin Arabe du XIIe siècle de l'Hégire: THÈSE Présentée et publiquement soutenue à la Faculté de Médecine de Montpellier le 9 Mars 190, par Gabriel COLIN. Page 39.

^ a b c Kachef er-roumouz (Révélation des énigmes) d'Abd Er-Rezzaq Ed-Djezaïry; ou Traité de matière médicale arabe d'Abd er-Rezzaq l'Algérien; Leclerc, Lucien, b. 1816 ^ Kachef er-roumouz (Révélation des énigmes) d'Abd Er-Rezzaq Ed-Djezaïry; ou Traité de matière médicale arabe d'Abd er-Rezzaq l'Algérien; Leclerc, Lucien, b. 1816; p 76 ^ Kachef er-roumouz (Révélation des énigmes) d'Abd Er-Rezzaq Ed-Djezaïry; ou Traité de matière médicale arabe d'Abd er-Rezzaq l'Algérien; Leclerc, Lucien, b. 1816; p 380 ^ Abderrezzaq El-Jezâïri Médecin Arabe du XIIe siècle de l'Hégire: THÈSE Présentée et publiquement soutenue à la Faculté de Médecine de Montpellier le 9 Mars 190, par Gabriel COLIN. Page 38.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abd_El_Razzaq_Al-Jazaïri&oldid=1250308532 " Categories : 17th-century Algerian people 17th-century Arab people 17th-century physicians Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 9 October 2024, at 17:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri 2 languages Add topic

