Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Academic career 3 Bibliography 4 Sources 5 References Toggle the table of contents Olga Bondareva 10 languages العربية Cymraeg Deutsch Français Italiano עברית مصرى Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Soviet mathematician and economist This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Olga Bondareva" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Russian .

(August 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Russian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Russian Wikipedia article at [[:ru:Бондарева, Ольга Николаевна]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|ru|Бондарева, Ольга Николаевна}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Olga Bondareva Ольга Николаевна Бондарева Born Olga Nikolaevna Bondareva ( 1937-04-27 ) April 27, 1937 Leningrad, USSR Died December 9, 1991 (1991-12-09) (aged 54) Saint Petersburg Alma mater Leningrad State University Known for Bondareva–Shapley theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics , Economics Doctoral advisor Nikolay Nikolaevich Vorobyev Olga Nikolaevna Bondareva (April 27, 1937 – December 9, 1991) was a distinguished Soviet mathematician and economist . She contributed to the fields of mathematical economics , especially game theory .

Bondareva is best known as one of the two independent discoverers of the Bondareva–Shapley theorem .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] In 1954 she entered the Mathematics and Mechanics Faculty of Leningrad State University ,  receiving her Candidate of Sciences degree in  1963 under the supervision of Nikolai Vorobyov . She defended her Doctor of Sciences degree  in 1984 at the Faculty of Computational Mathematics and Cybernetics, Moscow State University .

From October 1959 to April 1972 she worked as a junior researcher , then associate professor (in operations research ), and then   a senior researcher at the Mathematics and Mechanics Faculty of Leningrad State University. From June 1972 to July 1984 was a senior researcher at the Economic Faculty of the Leningrad State University, from  July 1984 to March 1989  a senior researcher at the Institute of Physics, and from October, 1989 to her death in 1991  a leading researcher of the Mathematics and Mechanics Faculty of Leningrad State University.

She was married to Lev Alexandrovich Gordon,  and had two sons: Maxim (b. 1966 ) and Gregory (b. 1974 ). She was killed in a car accident while crossing the street in St. Petersburg.

Academic career [ edit ] O. N. Bondareva has published more than 70 scientific papers on game theory and mathematics . She was a member of the editorial board of the international journal Games and Economic Behavior . Her work on cooperative game theory has received international recognition.

The most famous result of Bondareva, obtained during her PhD studies, is the necessary and sufficient conditions for the core of a cooperative game with transferable utility to be non-empty. It was published in the collection "Problems of Cybernetics", quite a prestigious publication, but not translated into English, and was not noticed in the West. In 1967, a similar result was published by Lloyd Shapley . Having learned about the publication of Bondareva, Shapley unconditionally recognized its priority, which ensured its universal recognition.

This theorem uses the notion of a balanced coverage , some analog of partition of unity in topology. This is the name of a set of non-negative numbers assigned to each coalition if their summation over all coalitions, including one (any) player, gives one. The Bondareva–Shapley theorem states that the core is non-empty if and only if, for any balanced covering, the sum over all coalitions of the values of the characteristic function with the corresponding weights does not exceed the value of the characteristic function for the complete coalition. With a small number of players, this theorem allows us to practically deal with any game to the end. In addition, it makes it possible to establish that the core is non-empty in some classes of games, regardless of the number of players, for example, in convex games.

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Bondareva studied game-theoretic dominance properties expressed in terms of abstract binary relations , essentially following the example of the seminal monograph Neumann and Morgenstern . In particular, she obtained a number of results on the convergence of spaces with a binary relation and on finite approximations.
She was also among the first to publish a theorem on the existence of a maximum element for an acyclic binary relation with open lower contours on a compact set, although her note, published in Russian in the proceedings of the conference (in Vilniuse ), went unnoticed.

In the late 1970s, Bondareva, together with her students T. E. Kulakovskaya and N. I. Naumova, brainstormed the problem of the existence of a von Neumann-Morgenstern solution in cooperative games with transferable utility (the possibility of non-existence was already known by that time ). In particular, they proved the existence of a solution in any four-player game.

Bibliography [ edit ] Бондарева О.Н. Некоторые применения методов линейного программирования к теории кооперативных игр // Проблемы кибернетики.

Выпуск 10. — М.: Государственное издательство физико-математической литературы, 1963. — p. 119—139.

translated as : Bondareva O. N. Some applications of linear programming to the theory of cooperative games // Selected Russian Papers in Game Theory 1959—1965. — Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968. p. 79—114.

Бондарева О. Н. О теоретико-игровых моделях в экономике. — Л.: Издательство Ленинградского университета, 1974. — 38 с. — 6240 экз.

Бондарева О. Н. Конечные приближения для ядер и решений кооперативных игр Журнал вычислительной математики и математической физики.

— 1976. —  16(3)624—633.

Bondareva O. N. Сходимость пространств с отношением и теоретико-игровые следствия Журнал вычислительной математики и математической физики . — 1978. — 10(1):84—92.

Bondareva O. N. Замечание к статье «Сходимость пространств с отношением и теоретико-игровые следствия» (письмо в редакцию) Журнал вычислительной математики и математической физики 1980. — 20(4)1078—1079.

Bondareva O. N, Кулаковская Т. Е., Наумова Н. И. Решение произвольной кооперативной игры четырех лиц // Вестник Ленинградского университета (Математика). — 1979. —  2(7):104—105.

Bondareva O. N. Развитие теоретико-игровых методов оптимизации в кооперативных играх и их применение к многокритериальным задачам // Современное состояние теории исследования операций. — Moscow: Наука, 1979. — p. 150—162.

Bondareva O. N Конечные приближения выбора на бесконечном множестве // Известия АН СССР. Серия «Техническая кибернетика». — 1987.   1:18—23.

Bondareva O. N. Domination, core and solution (A short survey of Russian results). Discussion Paper No. 185. IMW, University of Bielefeld, 1989.

Bondareva O. N. Revealed fuzzy preferences // Multiperson Decision Making Models Using Fuzzy Sets and Possibility Theory, ed. J. Kacprzyk and M. Fedrizzi.   Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990.

Bondareva O. N., Driessen T. S. H. "Extensive coverings and exact core bounds" Games and Economic Behavior — 1994. — v.6(2):212—219.

Sources [ edit ] Гордон Л. А. Дом. — СПб.: Товарищество журнала «Нева», 1992. — 240 с. — 295 экз. — ISBN 5-87516-010-1 In memoriam Olga Bondareva (1937—1991) Games and Economic Behavior . — 1992. — 4(2):318—324.

Rosenmüller J. Obituary and Kulakovskaja T. E., Naumova N. I. Olga Nikolajevna Bondareva. 1937—1991 International Journal of Game Theory.

— 1992. — Vol. 20(4):309—312.

Кукушкин Н. С., Меньшикова О. Р., Меньшиков И. С. Ольга Николаевна Бондарева (некролог) // Журнал вычислительной математики и математической физики. — 1992. — 32(6) 989—990. (в pdf-файле есть фотография) Wooders M. "Bondareva, Olga (1937—1991)" The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics.

2nd Edition. Eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. — Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. эл.версия Boldyrev, I.

Soviet Mathematics and Economic Theory in the Past Century: A Historical Reappraisal , Journal of Economic Literature. 2024. Vol. 62(4).

References [ edit ] ^ Bondareva, Olga N.

(1963).

"Some applications of linear programming methods to the theory of cooperative games (In Russian)" (PDF) .

Problemy Kybernetiki .

10 : 119– 139.

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Poland Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Olga_Bondareva&oldid=1291017352 " Categories : Game theorists Mathematical economists 20th-century Russian mathematicians 1937 births 1991 deaths Soviet economists Saint Petersburg State University alumni Mathematicians from Saint Petersburg Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references Biography articles needing translation from Russian Wikipedia Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 15:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Olga Bondareva 10 languages Add topic

