Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification of sources 2 Secondary literature 3 Science, technology, and medicine Toggle Science, technology, and medicine subsection 3.1 Library and information science 3.2 Mathematics 3.3 Humanities and history 3.3.1 Law 3.3.2 Family history 3.3.3 Autobiographies 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Secondary source 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Document that discusses information originally presented elsewhere For Wikipedia's policy on the use of secondary sources, see Wikipedia:No original research#Secondary .

Not to be confused with Second source or Secondary sector of the economy .

Scipione Amati's History of the Kingdom of Woxu (1615), an example of a secondary source In scholarship , a secondary source [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a document or recording that relates or discusses information originally presented elsewhere. A secondary source contrasts with a primary , or original , source of the information being discussed. A primary source can be a person with direct knowledge of a situation or it may be a document created by such a person.

A secondary source is one that gives information about a primary source. In a secondary source, the original information is selected, modified and arranged in a suitable format. Secondary sources involve generalization , analysis , interpretation, or evaluation of the original information.

The most accurate classification for any given source is not always obvious. "Primary" and "secondary" are relative terms, and some sources may be classified as primary or secondary, depending on how they are used.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] A third level, the tertiary source , such as an encyclopedia or dictionary , resembles a secondary source in that it contains analysis, but a tertiary source has a different purpose: it aims to elaborate a broad introductory overview of the topic at hand.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Classification of sources [ edit ] See also: Primary source § Classifying sources , and Source text § Classification in levels Making distinctions between primary and secondary symbolic sources (objects meant to communicate information) is both subjective and contextual, [ 8 ] such that precise definitions can sometimes be difficult to make.

[ 9 ] And indeed many sources can be classified as either primary or secondary based upon the context in which they are being considered.

[ 10 ] For example, if in careful study a historical text discusses certain old documents to the point of disclosing a new historical conclusion, then that historical text may now be considered a primary source for the new conclusion, but it is still a secondary source as regarding the old documents.

[ 11 ] Other examples for which a source can be assigned both primary and secondary roles would include an obituary or a survey of several volumes of a journal to count the frequency of articles on a certain topic.

[ 12 ] Further, whether a source is regarded as primary or secondary in a given context may change over time, depending upon the past and present states of knowledge within the field of study.

[ 13 ] For example, if a certain document refers to the contents of a previous but undiscovered letter, that document may be considered "primary", because it is the closest known thing to an original source—but if the missing letter is later found, that certain document may then be considered "secondary".

[ 14 ] Attempts to map or model scientific and scholarly communications need the concepts of primary, secondary and further "levels" of classification. One such model is provided by the United Nations as the UNISIST model of information dissemination. Within such a model, source classification concepts are defined in relation to each other, and acceptance of a particular way of defining the concepts for classification are connected to efficiently using the model. (Note: UNISIST is the United Nations International Scientific Information System; it is a model of a social system for communications between knowledge producers, knowledge users, and their intermediaries. The system also comprises institutions such as libraries, research institutes, and publishers.) [ 15 ] Secondary literature [ edit ] Some modern languages use more than one word for the English word "source". For example, German usually uses Sekundärliteratur ("secondary literature") for secondary sources regarding historical facts, leaving Sekundärquelle ("secondary source") to historiography . For example, a treatise on Goethe's Faust (e.g., on characters or motifs of the play) is called Sekundärliteratur .

[ 16 ] A Sekundärquelle may be a source, perhaps a letter, that quotes from a lost Primärquelle ("primary source")—say a report of minutes that is not known to still exist—such that the report of minutes is unavailable to the researcher as the sought-after Primärquelle .

Science, technology, and medicine [ edit ] In general, secondary sources in a scientific context may be referred to as "secondary literature", [ 17 ] and can be self-described as review articles or meta-analysis .

Primary source materials are typically defined as "original research papers written by the scientists who actually conducted the study." An example of primary source material is the Purpose, Methods, Results, Conclusions sections of a research paper (in IMRAD style) in a scientific journal by the authors who conducted the study.

[ 18 ] In some fields, a secondary source may include a summary of the literature in the introduction of a scientific paper, a description of what is known about a disease or treatment in a chapter in a reference book, or a synthesis written to review available literature.

[ 18 ] A survey of previous work in the field in a primary peer-reviewed source is secondary source information. This allows secondary sourcing of recent findings in areas where full review articles have not yet been published.

A book review that contains the judgment of the reviewer about the book is a primary source for the reviewer's opinion, and a secondary source for the contents of the book.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] A summary of the book within a review is a secondary source.

Library and information science [ edit ] In library and information sciences , secondary sources are generally regarded as those sources that summarize or add commentary to primary sources in the context of the particular information or idea under study.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Mathematics [ edit ] An important use of secondary sources in the field of mathematics has been to make difficult mathematical ideas and proofs from primary sources more accessible to the public; [ 21 ] in other sciences tertiary sources are expected to fulfill the introductory role.

Humanities and history [ edit ] Secondary sources in history and humanities are usually books or scholarly journals , from the perspective of a later interpreter, especially by a later scholar. In the humanities, a peer reviewed article is always a secondary source.
The delineation of sources as primary and secondary first arose in the field of historiography , as historians attempted to identify and classify the sources of historical writing.  In scholarly writing, an important objective of classifying sources is to determine the independence and reliability of sources.

[ 22 ] In original scholarly writing, historians rely on primary sources, read in the context of the scholarly interpretations.

[ 23 ] Following the Rankean model established by German scholarship in the 19th century, historians use archives of primary sources.

[ 24 ] Most undergraduate research projects rely on secondary source material, with perhaps snippets of primary sources.

[ 25 ] Law [ edit ] In the legal field, source classification is important because the persuasiveness of a source usually depends upon its history. Primary sources may include cases, constitutions, statutes , administrative regulations, and other sources of binding legal authority, while secondary legal sources may include books, the headnotes of case reports , articles , and encyclopedias .

[ 26 ] Legal writers usually prefer to cite primary sources because only primary sources are authoritative and precedential , while secondary sources are only persuasive at best.

[ 27 ] Family history [ edit ] "A secondary source is a record or statement of an event or circumstance made by a non-eyewitness or by someone not closely connected with the event or circumstances, recorded or stated verbally either at or sometime after the event, or by an eye-witness at a time after the event when the fallibility of memory is an important factor." [ 28 ] Consequently, according to this definition, a first-hand account written long after the event "when the fallibility of memory is an important factor" is a secondary source, even though it may be the first published description of that event.

Autobiographies [ edit ] An autobiography or a memoir can be a secondary source in history or the humanities when used for information about topics other than its subject.

[ 29 ] For example, many first-hand accounts of events in World War I written in the post-war years were influenced by the then prevailing perception of the war, which was significantly different from contemporary opinion.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Original research References [ edit ] ^ a b c " Primary, secondary and tertiary sources ". University Libraries, University of Maryland.

^ a b " Secondary sources Archived 2014-11-06 at the Wayback Machine ". James Cook University.

^ " Primary and secondary sources ". Ithaca College Library.

^ Kragh, Helge (1989), An Introduction to the Historiography of Science , Cambridge University Press, p. 121, ISBN 0-521-38921-6 , [T]he distinction is not a sharp one. Since a source is only a source in a specific historical context, the same source object can be both a primary or secondary source according to what it is used for.

^ Delgadillo, Roberto; Lynch, Beverly (1999), "Future Historians: Their Quest for Information" , College & Research Libraries , 60 (3): 245– 259, at 253, doi : 10.5860/crl.60.3.245 , [T]he same document can be a primary or a secondary source depending on the particular analysis the historian is doing , ^ Monagahn, E.J.; Hartman, D.K. (2001), "Historical research in literacy" , Reading Online , 4 (11), archived from the original on 2012-02-13 , retrieved 2022-01-21 , [A] source may be primary or secondary, depending on what the researcher is looking for.

^ Richard Veit and Christopher Gould, Writing, Reading, and Research (8th ed. 2009) p 335 ^ Dalton, Margaret Steig; Charnigo, Laurie (September 2004).

"Historians and Their Information Sources" .

College & Research Libraries : 416 n.3, 419 n.18.

^ Delgadillo & Lynch 1999 , p. 253.

^ Kragh, Helge (1989-11-24).

An Introduction to the Historiography of Science . Cambridge University Press. p. 121.

ISBN 9780521389211 .

^ "Important Sources of History (Primary and Secondary Sources)" .

History Discussion - Discuss Anything About History . 2013-09-23 . Retrieved 2020-02-06 .

^ Duffin, Jacalyn (1999), History of Medicine: A Scandalously Short Introduction , University of Toronto Press, p. 366, ISBN 0-8020-7912-1 ^ Henige, David (1986), "Primary Source by Primary Source? On the Role of Epidemics in New World Depopulation", Ethnohistory , 33 (3), Duke University Press: 292– 312, at 292, doi : 10.2307/481816 , JSTOR 481816 , PMID 11616953 , [T]he term 'primary' inevitably carries a relative meaning insofar as it defines those pieces of information that stand in closest relationship to an event or process in the present state of our knowledge . Indeed, in most instances, the very nature of a primary source tells us that it is actually derivative.…[H]istorians have no choice but to regard certain of the available sources as 'primary' since they are as near to truly original sources as they can now secure.

^ Henige 1986 , p. 292.

^ " UNISIST Study Report on the feasibility of a World Science Information System, by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International Council of Scientific Unions ".

Unesco , Paris, 1971.

^ Klaus Gantert: Bibliothekarisches Grundwissen.

9. Auflage. de Gruyter, Berlin/Boston 2016, ISBN 978-3-11-032145-6, doi : 10.1515/9783110321500 , S. 76.

^ Open University, " 4.2 Secondary literature ", Succeeding in postgraduate study , session 5, accessed 22 March 2023.

^ a b Garrard, Judith (2010).

Health Sciences Literature Review Made Easy . Jones & Bartlett Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4496-1868-1 . Retrieved 16 September 2012 .

^ Princeton (2011).

"Book reviews" .

Scholarly definition document . Princeton . Retrieved September 22, 2011 .

^ Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (2011).

"Book reviews" .

Scholarly definition document . Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Archived from the original on September 10, 2011 . Retrieved September 22, 2011 .

^ Edwards, H.M.

(2001), Riemann's Zeta Function , Mineola, New York: Courier Dover Publications, p. xi, ISBN 0-486-41740-9 , The purpose of a secondary source is to make the primary sources accessible to you. If you can read and understand the primary sources without reading this book, more power to you. If you read this book without reading the primary sources you are like a man who carries a sack lunch to a banquet ^ Helge (1989), p. 121.

^ Cipolla (1992), Between Two Cultures: An Introduction to Economic History , W.W. Norton & Co., ISBN 978-0-393-30816-7 ^ Frederick C. Beiser (2011).

The German Historicist Tradition . Oxford U.P. p. 254.

ISBN 9780199691555 .

^ Charles Camic; Neil Gross; Michele Lamont (2011).

Social Knowledge in the Making . U. of Chicago Press. p. 107.

ISBN 9780226092096 .

^ Bouchoux, Deborah E. (2000), Cite Checker: A Hands-On Guide to Learning Citation Form , Thomson Delmar Learning, p. 45, ISBN 0-7668-1893-4 ^ Bouchoux 2000 , p. 45.

^ Harland, p. 39 ^ Wallach, Jennifer J. (2006).

"Building a bridge of words: the literary autobiography as historical source material" .

Biography .

29 (3): 446– 61.

doi : 10.1353/bio.2006.0063 .

JSTOR 23540526 . Retrieved 18 November 2024 .

^ Holmes, particularly the introduction Further reading [ edit ] Jules R. Benjamin, A Student's Guide to History (2013) ISBN 9781457621444 Edward H. Carr , What is History?

(Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001) ISBN 9780333977019 Wood Gray, Historian's handbook, a key to the study and writing of history (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1991, ©1964) ISBN 9780881336269 Derek Harland, A Basic Course in Genealogy: Volume two, Research Procedure and Evaluation of Evidence (Bookcraft Inc, 1958) WorldCat record Richard Holmes , Tommy (HarperCollins, 2004) ISBN 9780007137510 Martha C. Howell and Walter Prevenier, From Reliable Sources: An Introduction to Historical Methods (2001) ISBN 9780801435737 Richard A. Marius and Melvin E. Page, A Short Guide to Writing About History (8th Edition) (2012) ISBN 9780205118601 Hayden White , Metahistory: the historical imagination in nineteenth-century Europe (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973) ISBN 9780801814693 v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Libraries and library science Types of library Academic Archive Branch Children's Christian Consortium Digital shadow Hybrid Law Lending Library of things Map Medicine Mobile Music National Presidential U.S.

Prison Private Public Carnegie Research School Learning Resource Centre virtual Special collections Special library Street Subscription Tool Toy Transportation Traveling Types of librarian Distance education E-science Law Music ensemble Periodicals/serials School Information professional Informationist Library and information scientist Library science Five laws Library and information science Education for librarianship Acquisitions Archival science Assessment Cataloging catalog OPAC Circulation Classification Collection development Collective collection Conservation Discovery system Electronic resource management Information literacy Inventory Legal deposit Library history Library instruction Library management Library publishing Preservation Readers' advisory Reference virtual roving Technical services Weeding History History of libraries History of library science Lists Libraries by country by size ancient destroyed medical national Library associations Library schools Librarians women fictional Archivists women Category:Libraries Category:Library science Commons Glossary Outline WikiProject External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Secondary Sources .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐r9zcd
Cached time: 20250815000129
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.760 seconds
Real time usage: 0.999 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7060/1000000
Revision size: 18863/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 365470/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8516/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 114741/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.409/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15657641/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  785.279      1 -total
 32.86%  258.082      1 Template:Historiography
 32.52%  255.403      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 31.97%  251.082      1 Template:Reflist
 28.51%  223.871     17 Template:Navbox
 16.15%  126.814      8 Template:Citation
 14.15%  111.113     36 Template:Ill
 11.91%   93.538      6 Template:Lang
  7.51%   59.006      1 Template:Short_description
  6.83%   53.620      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23499848:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815000129 and revision id 1302472679. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Secondary_source&oldid=1302472679 " Categories : Historiography History resources Information science Library science terminology Sources Works about history Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 16:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Secondary source 33 languages Add topic

