Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 2.1 Equipment 3 Organizations 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hydrography 73 languages Afrikaans العربية Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Hydrograph .

Measurement of bodies of water This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hydrography" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Table of geography, hydrography, and navigation, from a 1728 Cyclopaedia .

Hydrography is the branch of applied sciences which deals with the measurement and description of the physical features of oceans , seas , coastal areas , lakes and rivers , as well as with the prediction of their change over time, for the primary purpose of safety of navigation and in support of all other marine activities, including economic development, security and defense, scientific research, and environmental protection.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Alexander Dalrymple , the first Hydrographer of the Navy in the United Kingdom , appointed in 1795.

The origins of hydrography lay in the making of charts to aid navigation, by individual mariners as they navigated into new waters. These were usually the private property, even closely held secrets, of individuals who used them for commercial or military advantage. As transoceanic trade and exploration increased, hydrographic surveys started to be carried out as an exercise in their own right, and the commissioning of surveys was increasingly done by governments and special hydrographic offices. National organizations, particularly navies , realized that the collection, systematization and distribution of this knowledge gave it great organizational and military advantages. Thus were born dedicated national hydrographic organizations for the collection, organization, publication and distribution of hydrography incorporated into charts and sailing directions.

Prior to the establishment of the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office , Royal Navy captains were responsible for the provision of their own charts. In practice this meant that ships often sailed with inadequate information for safe navigation, and that when new areas were surveyed, the data rarely reached all those who needed it. The Admiralty appointed Alexander Dalrymple as Hydrographer in 1795, with a remit to gather and distribute charts to HM Ships. Within a year existing charts from the previous two centuries had been collated, and the first catalog published.

[ 2 ] The first chart produced under the direction of the Admiralty , was a chart of Quiberon Bay in Brittany , and it appeared in 1800.

Under Captain Thomas Hurd the department received its first professional guidelines, and the first catalogs were published and made available to the public and to other nations as well. In 1829, Rear-Admiral Sir Francis Beaufort , as Hydrographer, developed the eponymous Scale , and introduced the first official tide tables in 1833 and the first " Notices to Mariners " in 1834. The Hydrographic Office underwent steady expansion throughout the 19th century; by 1855, the Chart Catalogue listed 1,981 charts giving a definitive coverage over the entire world, and produced over 130,000 charts annually, of which about half were sold.

[ 3 ] The word hydrography comes from the Ancient Greek ὕδωρ ( hydor ), "water" and γράφω ( graphō ), "to write".

Overview [ edit ] Survey of the strategic port of Milford Haven produced by Lewis Morris in 1748 Large-scale hydrography is usually undertaken by national or international organizations which sponsor data collection through precise surveys and publish charts and descriptive material for navigational purposes. The science of oceanography is, in part, an outgrowth of classical hydrography. In many respects the data are interchangeable, but marine hydrographic data will be particularly directed toward marine navigation and safety of that navigation. Marine resource exploration and exploitation is a significant application of hydrography, principally focused on the search for hydrocarbons .

Hydrographical measurements include the tidal , current and wave information of physical oceanography. They include bottom measurements, with particular emphasis on those marine geographical features that pose a hazard to navigation such as rocks, shoals , reefs and other features that obstruct ship passage. Bottom measurements also include collection of the nature of the bottom as it pertains to effective anchoring. Unlike oceanography, hydrography will include shore features, natural and manmade, that aid in navigation. Therefore, a hydrographic survey may include the accurate positions and representations of hills , mountains and even lights and towers that will aid in fixing a ship's position, as well as the physical aspects of the sea and seabed.

Hydrography, mostly for reasons of safety, adopted a number of conventions that have affected its portrayal of the data on nautical charts. For example, hydrographic charts are designed to portray what is safe for navigation, and therefore will usually tend to maintain least depths and occasionally de-emphasize the actual submarine topography that would be portrayed on bathymetric charts . The former are the mariner 's tools to avoid accident. The latter are best representations of the actual seabed, as in a topographic map, for scientific and other purposes. Trends in hydrographic practice since c. 2003–2005 have led to a narrowing of this difference, with many more hydrographic offices maintaining "best observed" databases, and then making navigationally "safe" products as required. This has been coupled with a preference for multi-use surveys, so that the same data collected for nautical charting purposes can also be used for bathymetric portrayal.

HMS Waterwitch , a hydrographic survey vessel Even though, in places, hydrographic survey data may be collected in sufficient detail to portray bottom topography in some areas, hydrographic charts only show depth information relevant for safe navigation and should not be considered as a product that accurately portrays the actual shape of the bottom.  The soundings selected from the raw source depth data for placement on the nautical chart are selected for safe navigation and are biased to show predominantly the shallowest depths that relate to safe navigation. For instance, if there is a deep area that can not be reached because it is surrounded by shallow water, the deep area may not be shown. The color filled areas that show different ranges of shallow water are not the equivalent of contours on a topographic map since they are often drawn seaward of the actual shallowest depth portrayed. A bathymetric chart does show marine topology accurately. Details covering the above limitations can be found in Part 1 of Bowditch's American Practical Navigator . Another concept that affects safe navigation is the sparsity of detailed depth data from high resolution sonar systems.  In more remote areas, the only available depth information has been collected with lead lines. This collection method drops a weighted line to the bottom at intervals and records the depth, often from a rowboat or sail boat. There is no data between soundings or between sounding lines to guarantee that there is not a hazard such as a wreck or a coral head waiting there to ruin a sailor's day. Often, the navigation of the collecting boat does not match today's GPS navigational accuracies. The hydrographic chart will use the best data available and will caveat its nature in a caution note or in the legend of the chart.

A hydrographic survey is quite different from a bathymetric survey in some important respects, particularly in a bias toward least depths due to the safety requirements of the former and geomorphologic descriptive requirements of the latter.  Historically, this could include echosoundings being conducted under settings biased toward least depths, but in modern practice hydrographic surveys typically attempt to best measure the depths observed, with the adjustments for navigational safety being applied after the fact.

Hydrography of streams will include information on the stream bed, flows , water quality and surrounding land.

Basin or interior hydrography pays special attention to rivers and potable water although if collected data is not for ship navigational uses, and is intended for scientific usage, it is more commonly called hydrometry or hydrology .

Hydrography of rivers and streams is also an integral part of water management. Most reservoirs in the United States use dedicated stream gauging and rating tables to determine inflows into the reservoir and outflows to irrigation districts, water municipalities and other users of captured water. River/stream hydrographers use handheld and bank mounted devices, to capture a sectional flow rate of moving water through a section and or current.

Equipment [ edit ] Uncrewed Surface Vessels (USVs) and are commonly used for hydrographic surveys - they are often equipped with some sort of sonar. Single-beam echosounders, multibeam echosounders , and side scan sonars are all frequently used in hydrographic applications. The knowledge gained from these surveys aid in disaster planning, port and harbor maintenance, and various other coastal planning activities.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Organizations [ edit ] Main article: Hydrography organizations Hydrographic services in most countries are carried out by specialized hydrographic offices . The international coordination of hydrographic efforts lies with the International Hydrographic Organization .

The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office is one of the oldest, supplying a wide range of charts covering the globe to other countries, allied military organizations and the public.

In the United States, the hydrographic charting function has been carried out since 1807 by the Office of Coast Survey of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the U.S. Department of Commerce and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Bathymetric chart – Map depicting the submerged terrain of bodies of water Coastal geography – Study of the region between the ocean and the land Challenger expedition – Oceanographic research expedition (1872–1876) Hydrology – Science of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth Hydrometry – Monitoring the components of the hydrological cycle World Hydrography Day – Publicate the importance of hydrographer Associations focussing on ocean hydrography International Federation of Hydrographic Societies (formerly The Hydrographic Society) State Hydrography Service of Georgia The Hydrographic Society of America Australasian Hydrographic Society Associations focussing on river stream and lake hydrography Australian Hydrographic Association New Zealand Hydrological Society American Institute of Hydrology References [ edit ] ^ "International Hydrographic Organization" . Archived from the original on 2014-07-24 . Retrieved 2013-10-20 .

^ "The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office timeline" (PDF) . UKHO. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-21 . Retrieved 2011-01-23 .

^ "Charting the world for over 200 years" .

www.ukho.gov.uk . UKHO. Archived from the original on 2006-09-25 . Retrieved 2006-11-15 .

^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"Hydrographic Surveying" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2024-01-12 .

^ "A Smooth Operator's Guide to Underwater Sonars and Acoustic Devices" .

Blue Robotics . Retrieved 2024-01-12 .

^ "About Inland Survey" . Archived from the original on October 28, 2016.

^ "About Coast Survey" .

External links [ edit ] Hydro International Lemmer , the Netherlands: Hydrographic Information ISSN 1385-4569 ] What is hydrography?

National Ocean Service v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Physical geography Atmospheric science / Meteorology Biogeography / Phytogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Soil science / Pedology / Edaphology Geobiology Geology Geomorphology Geostatistics Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Landscape ecology Quaternary science Category Portal Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐c4s52
Cached time: 20250816063623
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.474 seconds
Real time usage: 0.621 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2289/1000000
Revision size: 13947/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 64150/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1321/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50734/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.325/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17318506/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  513.352      1 -total
 22.72%  116.657      6 Template:Annotated_link
 20.71%  106.316      1 Template:Reflist
 19.63%  100.754      2 Template:Navbox
 19.19%   98.525      1 Template:Physical_oceanography
 18.01%   92.431      7 Template:Cite_web
  9.09%   46.641      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.57%   44.004      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.31%   42.664      1 Template:Ambox
  8.20%   42.089      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:164974:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816063623 and revision id 1285526092. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hydrography&oldid=1285526092 " Categories : Hydrography Oceanography Hydrology Physical geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 06:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hydrography 73 languages Add topic

