Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 1.1 Use of phrase and its development 1.2 Decline of phrase's usage by U.S. government 1.2.1 Abandonment of phrase 2 Background Toggle Background subsection 2.1 Precursor to 11 September attacks 2.2 11 September attacks 3 U.S. objectives 4 Timeline 5 Operation Enduring Freedom Toggle Operation Enduring Freedom subsection 5.1 Afghanistan 5.1.1 International Security Assistance Force 5.2 Philippines 5.3 Trans-Sahara (Northern Africa) 5.4 Horn of Africa and the Red Sea 6 Military operations by country Toggle Military operations by country subsection 6.1 Iraq War 6.1.1 2002 State of the Union Address 6.1.2 Prelude 6.1.3 Invasion of Iraq 6.1.4 Iraqi Insurgency (2003–11) 6.1.5 War in Iraq (2013–17) 6.2 Pakistan 6.3 Yemen 7 Other military operations Toggle Other military operations subsection 7.1 Operation Inherent Resolve (Syria and Iraq) 7.2 Islamic State of Lanao and the Battle of Marawi 7.3 Libyan War 7.4 American military intervention in Cameroon 7.5 Operation Active Endeavour 7.6 Fighting in Kashmir 7.7 Anti-terror campaigns by other powers 8 International military support 9 Post–9/11 events inside the United States 10 Transnational actions Toggle Transnational actions subsection 10.1 "Extraordinary rendition" 10.2 Rendition to "Black Sites" 10.2.1 Criticism of U.S. media's withholding of coverage 10.2.2 Prison ships 10.3 Guantanamo Bay detention camp 11 Major terrorist attacks and plots since 9/11 Toggle Major terrorist attacks and plots since 9/11 subsection 11.1 Attacks by Al-Qaeda 11.2 Islamic State 11.3 Attacks by other Islamist militant groups and individuals 11.4 Alleged plots and unsuccessful attacks 12 Casualties Toggle Casualties subsection 12.1 Iraq 12.2 Afghanistan 12.3 Pakistan 12.4 Somalia 12.5 Yemen 12.6 Philippines and North Caucasus 12.7 United States 12.8 Total civilian estimates 13 Costs 14 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 14.1 Forced displacement 15 See also 16 Notes 17 References 18 Further reading 19 External links Toggle the table of contents War on terror 68 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Military campaign following September 11 attacks This article is about the international military campaign. For other uses, see War on terror (disambiguation) .

War on terror Part of the post-Cold War and post-9/11 eras Photographs, clockwise from top left: U.S. servicemen boarding an aircraft at Bagram Air Base , Afghanistan ; explosion of an Iraqi car bomb in Baghdad ; a U.S. soldier and Afghan interpreter in Zabul Province , Afghanistan; Tomahawk missiles being fired from the warships at ISIL targets in the city of Raqqa , Syria Map : Countries with major military operations of the war on terror.

Date Main phase: 14 September 2001 [ 1 ] – 30 August 2021 [ 2 ] [ note 4 ] (19 years, 11 months, 2 weeks and 2 days) [ note 5 ] Location Globally, but mainly in the Greater Middle East [ note 6 ] Status Major wars ended, ongoing in small operations [ 3 ] Belligerents Main countries: United States United Kingdom Germany Italy Canada France Australia New Zealand Netherlands Poland Turkey Main opponents: Al-Qaeda Islamic State [ note 1 ] Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan ( Taliban ) [ note 2 ] Ba'athist Iraq [ note 3 ] Iraqi Ba'athist insurgents Commanders and leaders George W. Bush Barack Obama Joe Biden Donald Trump Osama bin Laden X Ayman al-Zawahiri X Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi X Saddam Hussein Casualties and losses 4.5–4.6 million+ people killed [ note 7 ] [ a ] (937,000+ direct deaths including 387,000+ civilians, 3.6–3.7 million indirect deaths) [ note 8 ] [ b ] At least 38 million people displaced [ c ] The war on terror , officially the Global War on Terrorism ( GWOT ), [ 5 ] is a global military campaign initiated by the United States following the September 11 attacks in 2001, and is one of the most recent global conflicts spanning multiple wars . Some researchers and political scientists have argued that it replaced the Cold War .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The main targets of the campaign were militant Islamist movements such as al-Qaeda , the Taliban and their allies. Other major targets included the Ba'athist regime in Iraq , which was deposed in an invasion in 2003 , and various militant factions that fought during the ensuing insurgency . Following its territorial expansion in 2014, the Islamic State also emerged as a key adversary of the United States.

The term "war on terror" uses war as a metaphor to describe a variety of actions which fall outside the traditional definition of war. U.S. president George W. Bush first used the term "war on terrorism" on 16 September 2001, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and then "war on terror" a few days later in a formal speech to Congress .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Bush indicated the enemy of the war on terror as "a radical network of terrorists and every government that supports them".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The initial conflict was aimed at al-Qaeda, with the main theater in Afghanistan and Pakistan , a region that would later be referred to as " AfPak ".

[ 13 ] The term "war on terror" was immediately criticized by individuals including Richard Myers , then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , and eventually more nuanced terms came to be used by the Bush administration to define the campaign.

[ 14 ] While "war on terror" was never used as a formal designation of U.S. operations, [ 15 ] a Global War on Terrorism Service Medal was and is issued by the U.S. Armed Forces .

With the major wars over and only low-level combat operations in some places, the end of the war in Afghanistan in August 2021 symbolizes the visible ending of the war, or at least its main phase, for many in the West. The American military ceased issuing its National Defense Service Medal on 31 December 2022. As of 2025, various global operations in the campaign are ongoing, including a U.S. military intervention in Somalia .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] According to the Costs of War Project , the post-9/11 wars of the campaign have displaced 38 million people, the second largest number of forced displacements of any conflict since 1900, [ 18 ] and caused more than 4.5 million deaths (direct and indirect) in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, the Philippines, Pakistan, Somalia, Syria and Yemen. They also estimate that it has cost the U.S. Treasury over $8 trillion.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 4 ] While support for the "war on terror" was high among the American public during its initial years, it had become deeply unpopular by the late 2000s.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Controversy over the war has focused on its morality, casualties, and continuity, with critics questioning government measures that infringed civil liberties and human rights.

[ 24 ] Critics have notably described the Patriot Act as " Orwellian " due to its substantial expansion of the federal government's surveillance powers.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Controversial practices of coalition forces have been condemned, including drone warfare , surveillance, torture, extraordinary rendition and various war crimes.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The participating governments have been criticized for implementing authoritarian measures, repressing minorities, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] fomenting Islamophobia globally, [ 32 ] and causing negative impacts to health and environment.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Security analysts assert that there is no military solution to the conflict, pointing out that terrorism is not an identifiable enemy, and have emphasized the importance of negotiations and political solutions to resolve the underlying roots of the crises.

[ 36 ] Etymology The phrase war on terror was used to refer specifically to the military campaign led by the United States, the United Kingdom, and allied countries against organizations and regimes identified by them as terrorist, and usually excludes other independent counter-terrorist operations and campaigns such as those by Russia and India. The conflict has also been referred to by other names, such as " World War IV ", [ 37 ] " World War III ", [ 38 ] "Bush's War on Terror", [ 39 ] "The Long War", [ 40 ] [ 41 ] "The Forever War", [ 42 ] "The Global War on Terror", [ 43 ] "The War Against al-Qaeda", [ 44 ] or "The War of Terror".

[ 45 ] Use of phrase and its development The phrase "war against terrorism" existed in North American popular culture and U.S. political parlance prior to the war on terror.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] But it was not until the 11 September attacks that it emerged as a globally recognizable phrase and part of everyday lexicon.

Tom Brokaw , having just witnessed the collapse of one of the towers of the World Trade Center , declared "Terrorists have declared war on [America]." [ 48 ] On 16 September 2001, at Camp David , U.S. president George W. Bush used the phrase war on terrorism in an ostensibly unscripted comment when answering a journalist's question about the impact of enhanced law enforcement authority given to the U.S. surveillance agencies on Americans' civil liberties: "This is a new kind of—a new kind of evil. And we understand. And the American people are beginning to understand. This crusade , this war on terrorism is going to take a while. And the American people must be patient. I'm going to be patient." [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The reference to Crusades became subject to heavy criticism due to its controversial connotations in the Muslim world and historical Muslim-Christian relations .

[ 49 ] On 20 September 2001, during a televised address to a joint session of Congress, George Bush said, "Our war on terror begins with al Qaeda, but it does not end there. It will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped and defeated." [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Both the term and the policies it denotes have been a source of ongoing controversy, as various critics and organizations like Amnesty International have argued that it has been used to justify unilateral preventive war , human rights abuses and other violations of international law.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The political theorist Richard Jackson has argued that "the 'war on terrorism' [...] is simultaneously a set of actual practices—wars, covert operations, agencies, and institutions—and an accompanying series of assumptions, beliefs, justifications, and narratives—it is an entire language or discourse".

[ 52 ] Jackson cites, among many examples, a statement by John Ashcroft that "the attacks of September 11 drew a bright line of demarcation between the civil and the savage ".

[ 53 ] Administration officials also described "terrorists" as hateful, treacherous, barbarous, mad, twisted, perverted, without faith, parasitical , inhuman, and, most commonly, evil.

[ 54 ] Americans, in contrast, were described as brave, loving, generous, strong, resourceful, heroic, and respectful of human rights.

[ 55 ] Denouncing the remarks of George W. Bush , Osama Bin Laden stated during an interview in 21 October 2001: "The events proved the extent of terrorism that America exercises in the world.

Bush stated that the world has to be divided in two: Bush and his supporters, and any country that doesn't get into the global crusade is with the terrorists. What terrorism is clearer than this? Many governments were forced to support this "new terrorism." [ 56 ] Decline of phrase's usage by U.S. government In April 2007, the British government announced publicly that it was abandoning the use of the phrase "war on terror" as they found it to be less than helpful.

[ 57 ] This was explained later by Lady Eliza Manningham-Buller . In her 2011 Reith lecture , the former head of MI5 said that the 9/11 attacks were "a crime, not an act of war. So I never felt it helpful to refer to a war on terror." [ 58 ] Letter from Barack Obama indicating appropriation of congressional funds for "Overseas Contingency Operations/Global War on Terrorism" U.S. president Barack Obama rarely used the term, but in his inaugural address on 20 January 2009, he stated: "Our nation is at war, against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred." [ 59 ] In March 2009 the Defense Department officially changed the name of operations from "Global War on Terror" to "Overseas Contingency Operation" (OCO).

[ 60 ] In March 2009, the Obama administration requested that Pentagon staff members avoid the use of the term and instead to use "Overseas Contingency Operation".

[ 60 ] Basic objectives of the Bush administration "war on terror", such as targeting al Qaeda and building international counterterrorism alliances, remained in place.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Abandonment of phrase In May 2010, the Obama administration published a report outlining its National Security Strategy . The document dropped the Bush-era phrase "global war on terror" and reference to "Islamic extremism," and stated, "This is not a global war against a tactic—terrorism, or a religion—Islam. We are at war with a specific network, al-Qaeda, and its terrorist affiliates who support efforts to attack the United States, our allies, and partners." [ 63 ] Usage of the term "war on terror" was initially discontinued in May 2010 [ 63 ] and again in May 2013.

[ 64 ] On 23 May 2013, U.S. President Barack Obama announced that the "war on terrorism" was over, [ 65 ] [ 63 ] saying that the U.S. would not wage war against a tactic but would instead focus on a specific group of terrorist networks.

[ 66 ] [ 64 ] Other American military campaigns during the 2010s have also been considered part of the "war on terror" by individuals and the media.

[ 67 ] The rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria during 2014–2015 led to the global Operation Inherent Resolve , and an international campaign to destroy the terrorist organization. This was considered to be another campaign of the "war on terror".

[ 67 ] In December 2012, Jeh Johnson , the General Counsel of the Department of Defense , speaking at Oxford University , stated that the war against al-Qaeda would end when the terrorist group had been weakened so that it was no longer capable of "strategic attacks" and had been "effectively destroyed." At that point, the war would no longer be an armed conflict under international law , [ 68 ] and the military fight could be replaced by a law enforcement operation.

[ 69 ] In May 2013, two years after the assassination of Osama bin Laden , Barack Obama delivered a speech that employed the term global war on terror put in quotation marks (as officially transcribed by the White House): "Now, make no mistake, terrorists still threaten our nation. ... In Afghanistan, we will complete our transition to Afghan responsibility for that country's security. ... Beyond Afghanistan, we must define our effort not as a boundless 'global war on terror,' but rather as a series of persistent, targeted efforts to dismantle specific networks of violent extremists that threaten America. In many cases, this will involve partnerships with other countries." Nevertheless, in the same speech, in a bid to emphasize the legality of military actions undertaken by the U.S., noting that Congress had authorised the use of force, he went on to say, "Under domestic law, and international law, the United States is at war with al Qaeda, the Taliban, and their associated forces. We are at war with an organization that right now would kill as many Americans as they could if we did not stop them first. So this is a just war—a war waged proportionally, in last resort, and in self-defense." [ 64 ] [ 70 ] Nonetheless, the use of the phrase "war on terror" persists in U.S. politics. In 2017, for example, U.S. Vice President Mike Pence called the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing "the opening salvo in a war that we have waged ever since—the global war on terror." [ 71 ] Background Precursor to 11 September attacks See also: Islamic terrorism and List of Islamist terrorist attacks In May 1996, the group World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders (WIFJAJC), sponsored by Osama bin Laden (and later re-formed as al-Qaeda ), [ 72 ] [ 73 ] started forming a large base of operations in Afghanistan , where the Islamist extremist regime of the Taliban had seized power earlier in the year.

[ 74 ] In August 1996, Bin Laden declared jihad against the United States.

[ 75 ] In February 1998, Osama bin Laden signed a fatwa , as head of al-Qaeda, declaring war on the West and Israel; [ 76 ] [ 77 ] in May al-Qaeda released a video declaring war on the U.S. and the West.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] On 7 August 1998, al-Qaeda struck the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania , killing 224 people, including 12 Americans.

[ 80 ] In retaliation, U.S. President Bill Clinton launched Operation Infinite Reach , a bombing campaign in Sudan and Afghanistan against targets the U.S. asserted were associated with WIFJAJC, [ 81 ] [ 82 ] although others have questioned whether a pharmaceutical plant in Sudan was used as a chemical warfare facility. The plant produced much of the region's antimalarial drugs [ 83 ] and around 50% of Sudan's pharmaceutical needs.

[ 84 ] The strikes failed to kill any leaders of WIFJAJC or the Taliban.

[ 83 ] Next came the 2000 millennium attack plots , which included an attempted bombing of Los Angeles International Airport . On 12 October 2000, the USS Cole bombing occurred near the port of Yemen, and 17 U.S. Navy sailors were killed.

[ 85 ] 11 September attacks Main article: September 11 attacks On the morning of 11 September 2001, nineteen men hijacked four jet airliners , all of them bound for California. Once the hijackers assumed control of the jet airliners, they told the passengers that they had a bomb on board and would spare the lives of passengers and crew once their demands were met—no passenger and crew actually suspected that they would use the jet airliners as suicide weapons since it had never happened before in history, and many previous hijacking attempts had been resolved with the passengers and crew escaping unharmed after obeying the hijackers.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] The hijackers—members of al-Qaeda's Hamburg cell [ 88 ] —intentionally crashed two jet airliners into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City. Both buildings collapsed within two hours from fire damage related to the crashes, destroying nearby buildings and damaging others. The hijackers crashed a third jet airliner into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia , just outside Washington, D.C. The fourth jet airliner crashed into a field near Shanksville , Pennsylvania, after some of its passengers and flight crew attempted to retake control of the jet airliners, which the hijackers had redirected toward Washington, D.C., to target the White House or the U.S. Capitol . None of the flights had any survivors. A total of 2,977 victims and the 19 hijackers perished in the attacks.

[ 89 ] Fifteen of the nineteen were citizens of Saudi Arabia , and the others were from the United Arab Emirates (2), Egypt , and Lebanon .

[ 90 ] On 13 September, for the first time ever, NATO invoked Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty , which commits each member state to consider an armed attack against one member state to be an armed attack against them all.

[ 91 ] The invocation of Article 5 led to Operation Eagle Assist and Operation Active Endeavour . On 18 September 2001, President Bush signed the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists passed by Congress a few days prior; the authorization is still active to this day and has been used to justify numerous military actions.

U.S. objectives NATO Trans-Sahara initiative Major military operations (as of 2011) ( Afghanistan • Pakistan • Iraq • Somalia • Yemen ) Other allies involved in major operations Major terrorist attacks by al-Qaeda and affiliated groups: (as of 2011) 1.

1998 United States embassy bombings • 2.

September 11 attacks • 3.

2002 Bali bombings • 4.

2004 Madrid bombings • 5.

2005 London bombings • 6.

2008 Mumbai attacks The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists or "AUMF" was made law on 14 September 2001, to authorize the use of United States Armed Forces against those responsible for 11 September attacks. It authorized the President to use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations, organizations, or persons he determines planned, authorized, committed, or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on 11 September 2001, or harbored such organizations or persons, to prevent any future acts of international terrorism against the United States by such nations, organizations or individuals. Congress declares this is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of section 5(b) of the War Powers Resolution of 1973.

The George W. Bush administration defined the following objectives in the war on terror: [ 92 ] Defeat terrorists such as Osama bin Laden , Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and destroy their organizations Identify, locate and demolish terrorists along with their organizations Reject sponsorship, support and sanctuary to terrorists End the state sponsorship of terrorism Establish and maintain an international standard of responsibility concerning combating terrorism Strengthen and maintain the international effort to combat terrorism Function with willing and able states Enable weak states Persuade reluctant states Compel unwilling states Intervene and dismantle material support for terrorists Abolish terrorist sanctuaries and havens Reduce the underlying conditions that terrorists seek to exploit Establish partnerships with the international community to strengthen weak states and prevent (re)emergence of terrorism Win the war of ideals Protect U.S. citizens and interests at home and abroad Integrate the National Strategy for Homeland Security Attain domain awareness Enhance measures to ensure the integrity, reliability, and availability of critical, physical, and information-based infrastructures at home and abroad Implement measures to protect U.S. citizens abroad Ensure an integrated incident management capacity The 2001 AUMF has authorized US President to launch military operations across the world without any congressional oversight or transparency. Between 2018 and 2020 alone, US forces initiated what it labelled "counter-terror" activities in 85 countries. Of these, the 2001 AUMF has been used to launch classified military campaigns in at least 22 countries.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The 2001 AUMF has been widely perceived as a bill that grants the President powers to unilaterally wage perpetual "world wide wars".

[ 95 ] Timeline For a chronological guide, see timeline of the War on Terror .

Operation Enduring Freedom Main article: Operation Enduring Freedom Campaign streamer awarded to units who have participated in Operation Enduring Freedom Operation Enduring Freedom is the official name used by the Bush administration for the War in Afghanistan , together with three smaller military actions, under the umbrella of the global war on terror.

These global operations are intended to seek out and destroy any al-Qaeda fighters or affiliates. Originally, the campaign was named "Eternal Justice" but due to widespread controversy and condemnation in the Muslim world , the phrasing was changed to "Enduring Freedom".

[ 49 ] Afghanistan Main article: War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) See also: List of military operations in the war in Afghanistan (2001–2021) On 20 September 2001, in the wake of the September 11 attacks , George W. Bush delivered an ultimatum to the Taliban government of Afghanistan, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan , to turn over Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda leaders operating in the country or face attack.

[ 11 ] The Taliban demanded evidence of bin Laden's link to 11 September attacks and, if such evidence warranted a trial, they offered to handle such a trial in an Islamic Court.

[ 96 ] U.S. Army soldier of the 10th Mountain Division in Nuristan Province, June 2007 An American soldier in Afghanistan's Khost Province Subsequently, in October 2001, U.S. forces (with UK and coalition allies) invaded Afghanistan to oust the Taliban regime. On 7 October 2001, the official invasion began with British and U.S. forces conducting airstrike campaigns over enemy targets. Shortly after, Bush rejected a Taliban offer to hand over bin Laden on the condition the bombing campaign was halted, [ 97 ] and by mid-November, Kabul, the capital city of Afghanistan, fell . The remaining al-Qaeda and Taliban remnants fell back to the rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan, mainly Tora Bora. In December, Coalition forces (the U.S. and its allies) fought within that region . It is believed that Osama bin Laden escaped into Pakistan during the battle.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] In March 2002, the U.S. and other NATO and non-NATO forces launched Operation Anaconda with the goal of destroying any remaining al-Qaeda and Taliban forces in the Shah-i-Kot Valley and Arma Mountains of Afghanistan. The Taliban suffered heavy casualties and evacuated the region.

[ 100 ] The Taliban regrouped in western Pakistan and began to unleash an insurgent-style offensive against Coalition forces in late 2002.

[ 101 ] Throughout southern and eastern Afghanistan, firefights broke out between the surging Taliban and Coalition forces. Coalition forces responded with a series of military offensives and an increase of troops in Afghanistan. In February 2010, Coalition forces launched Operation Moshtarak in southern Afghanistan along with other military offensives in the hopes that they would destroy the Taliban insurgency once and for all.

[ 102 ] Peace talks were also underway between Taliban affiliated fighters and Coalition forces.

[ 103 ] In September 2014, Afghanistan and the United States signed a security agreement, which allowed the United States and NATO forces to remain in Afghanistan until at least 2024.

[ 104 ] However, on 29 February 2020, the United States and the Taliban signed a conditional peace deal in Doha which required that US troops withdraw from Afghanistan within 14 months so long as the Taliban cooperated with the terms of the agreement not to "allow any of its members, other individuals or groups, including Al Qaeda, to use the soil of Afghanistan to threaten the security of the United States and its allies".

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] The Afghan government was not a party to the deal and rejected its terms regarding release of prisoners.

[ 107 ] After Joe Biden became president, he moved back the target withdrawal date to 31 August 2021.

[ 108 ] On 15 August 2021, the Afghan capital Kabul fell to a surprisingly effective Taliban offensive , ending the war in Afghanistan . The US military and NATO troops took control of Kabul's Hamid Karzai International Airport for use in Operation Allies Refuge and the large-scale evacuation of foreign citizens and certain vulnerable Afghans , executed in cooperation with the Taliban.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] On 30 August 2021, the United States completed its hasty withdrawal of its military from Afghanistan . The withdrawal was heavily criticized both domestically and abroad for being chaotic and haphazard, [ 114 ] [ 115 ] as well as for lending more momentum to the Taliban offensive .

[ 116 ] However, many European countries followed suit, including Britain, Germany, Italy, and Poland.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Despite evacuating over 120,000 people, the large-scale evacuation has also been criticized for leaving behind hundreds of American citizens, residents, and family members.

[ 119 ] International Security Assistance Force Main article: International Security Assistance Force U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Richard B. Myers and joined by military representatives from 29 countries of the worldwide coalition on the war against terrorism, at The Pentagon , 11 March 2002 Map of countries contributing troops to ISAF as of 5 March 2010. Major contributors (over 1000 troops) in dark green, other contributors in light green, and former contributors in magenta.

The NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was created in December 2001 to assist the Afghan Transitional Administration and the first post-Taliban elected government. With a renewed Taliban insurgency, it was announced in 2006 that ISAF would replace the U.S. troops in the province as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.

The British 16th Air Assault Brigade (later reinforced by Royal Marines ) formed the core of the force in southern Afghanistan, along with troops and helicopters from Australia, Canada and the Netherlands. The initial force consisted of roughly 3,300 British, 2,000 Canadian, 1,400 from the Netherlands and 240 from Australia, along with special forces from Denmark and Estonia and small contingents from other nations. The monthly supply of cargo containers through Pakistani route to ISAF in Afghanistan is over 4,000 costing around 12 billion in Pakistani Rupees.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Philippines Main article: Operation Enduring Freedom – Philippines U.S. Special Forces soldier and infantrymen of the Philippine Army In January 2002, the United States Special Operations Command, Pacific deployed to the Philippines to advise and assist the Armed Forces of the Philippines in combating Filipino Islamist groups.

[ 125 ] The operations were mainly focused on removing the Abu Sayyaf group and Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) from their stronghold on the island of Basilan .

[ citation needed ] The second portion of the operation was conducted as a humanitarian program called "Operation Smiles". The goal of the program was to provide medical care and services to the region of Basilan as part of a "Hearts and Minds" program.

[ 126 ] Joint Special Operations Task Force – Philippines disbanded in June 2014, [ 127 ] ending a successful 12-year mission.

[ 128 ] After JSOTF-P had disbanded, as late as November 2014, American forces continued to operate in the Philippines under the name "PACOM Augmentation Team", until 24 February 2015.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] On 1 September 2017, US Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis designated Operation Pacific Eagle – Philippines (OPE-P) as a contingency operation to support the Philippine government and the military in their efforts to isolate, degrade, and defeat the affiliates of ISIL (collectively referred to as ISIL-Philippines or ISIL-P) and other terrorist organisations in the Philippines.

[ 131 ] By 2018, American operations within the Philippines against terrorist groups involved as many as 300 advisers.

[ 132 ] Trans-Sahara (Northern Africa) Main article: Operation Juniper Shield A map of the conflict in northern Mali Operation Enduring Freedom – Trans Sahara (OEF-TS), now Operation Juniper Shield, is the name of the military operation conducted by the U.S. and partner nations in the Sahara/Sahel region of Africa, consisting of counter-terrorism efforts and policing of arms and drug trafficking across central Africa.

The conflict in northern Mali began in January 2012 with radical Islamists (affiliated to al-Qaeda) advancing into northern Mali. The Malian government had a hard time maintaining full control over their country. The fledgling government requested support from the international community on combating the Islamic militants. In January 2013, France intervened on behalf of the Malian government's request and deployed troops into the region. They launched Operation Serval on 11 January 2013, with the hopes of dislodging the al-Qaeda affiliated groups from northern Mali.

[ 133 ] Horn of Africa and the Red Sea Main article: Operation Enduring Freedom – Horn of Africa Further information: Ethiopian occupation of Somalia (2006–2009) , Somali Civil War (2009–present) , American military intervention in Somalia (2007–present) , and CIA activities in Somalia Operation Enduring Freedom – Horn of Africa is an extension of Operation Enduring Freedom. Unlike other operations contained in Operation Enduring Freedom, OEF-HOA does not have a specific organization as a target. OEF-HOA instead focuses its efforts to disrupt and detect militant activities in the region and to work with willing governments to prevent the reemergence of militant cells and activities.

[ 134 ] In October 2002, the Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA) was established in Djibouti at Camp Lemonnier .

[ 135 ] It contains approximately 2,000 personnel including U.S. military and special operations forces (SOF) and coalition force members, Combined Task Force 150 (CTF-150).

Task Force 150 consists of ships from a shifting group of nations, including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Pakistan, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. The primary goal of the coalition forces is to monitor, inspect, board and stop suspected shipments from entering the Horn of Africa region and affecting the United States' Operation Iraqi Freedom .

Included in the operation is the training of selected armed forces units of the countries of Djibouti, Kenya and Ethiopia in counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency tactics. Humanitarian efforts conducted by CJTF-HOA include rebuilding of schools and medical clinics and providing medical services to those countries whose forces are being trained.

The program expands as part of the Trans-Saharan Counterterrorism Initiative as CJTF personnel also assist in training the armed forces of Chad , Niger, Mauritania and Mali . However, the war on terror does not include Sudan, where over 400,000 have died in an ongoing civil war.

On 1 July 2006, a Web-posted message purportedly written by Osama bin Laden urged Somalis to build an Islamic state in the country and warned western governments that the al-Qaeda network would fight against them if they intervened there.

[ 136 ] The Prime Minister of Somalia claimed that three "terror suspects" from the 1998 United States embassy bombings are being sheltered in Kismayo.

[ 137 ] On 30 December 2006, al-Qaeda deputy leader Ayman al-Zawahiri called upon Muslims worldwide to fight against Ethiopia and the TFG in Somalia.

[ 138 ] On 8 January 2007, the U.S. launched the Battle of Ras Kamboni by bombing Ras Kamboni using AC-130 gunships.

[ 139 ] On 14 September 2009, U.S. Special Forces killed two men and wounded and captured two others near the Somali village of Baarawe . Witnesses claim that helicopters used for the operation launched from French-flagged warships, but that could not be confirmed. A Somali-based al-Qaida affiliated group, the Al-Shabaab , has verified the death of "sheik commander" Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan along with an unspecified number of militants.

[ 140 ] Nabhan, a Kenyan, was wanted in connection with the 2002 Mombasa attacks .

[ 141 ] Military operations by country Iraq War Main article: Iraq War Further information: Iraq War and the War on Terror 2002 State of the Union Address Main article: Axis of evil During his 2002 State of the Union Address , George W. Bush accused North Korea , Iran and Iraq of propping up state-sponsored terrorism and pursuing Weapons of Mass Destruction. These countries were portrayed as a global threat and categorised under the terminology referred to as " Axis of evil ".

[ 142 ] Regarding Iraq , Bush alleged: "Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror. The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade. This is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens, leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children. This is a regime that agreed to international inspections, then kicked out the inspectors. This is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world." [ 143 ] Prelude Further information: Preparations for 2003 invasion of Iraq and Saddam–al-Qaeda conspiracy theory In October 2002, United States Congress passed the " Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 ", which empowered the U.S. president to order military attack against Iraq.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] On 5 February 2003, Secretary of State Colin Powell made a presentation before the UN Security Council which claimed to implicate Iraq in building a secret WMD program and having ties to Al-Qaeda .

[ 146 ] On 17 March 2003, Bush issued an ultimatum to Saddam Hussein and his two sons to flee Iraq within a 48-hour deadline or else face "military conflict".

[ 147 ] Justifying his policy Bush declared: "Terrorists and terror states do not reveal these threats with fair notice, in formal declarations—and responding to such enemies only after they have struck first is not self-defense, it is suicide. The security of the world requires disarming Saddam Hussein now." [ 147 ] Invasion of Iraq Main article: 2003 invasion of Iraq A British C-130J Hercules aircraft launches flare countermeasures before being the first coalition aircraft to land on the newly reopened military runway at Baghdad International Airport .

The Iraq War began in March 2003 with an air campaign, which was immediately followed by a U.S.-led ground invasion .

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] The Bush administration cited UNSC Resolution 1441, which warned of "serious consequences" for violations such as Iraq possessing weapons of mass destruction . The Bush administration also stated the Iraq War was part of the war on terror, a claim later questioned and contested . Iraq had been listed as a state sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. since 1990, [ 150 ] when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait .

The first ground attack came at the Battle of Umm Qasr on 21 March 2003, when a combined force of British, U.S. and Polish forces seized control of the port city of Umm Qasr .

[ 151 ] Baghdad , Iraq's capital city, fell to U.S. troops in April 2003 and Saddam Hussein's government quickly dissolved.

[ 152 ] On 1 May 2003, Bush announced that major combat operations in Iraq had ended.

[ 153 ] Iraqi Insurgency (2003–11) Main article: Iraqi Insurgency However, an insurgency arose against the U.S.-led coalition and the newly developing Iraqi military and post-Saddam government. The rebellion, which included al-Qaeda-affiliated groups , led to many coalition casualties. Other elements of the insurgency were led by fugitive members of President Hussein's Ba'ath regime, which included Iraqi nationalists and pan-Arabists . Many insurgency leaders were Islamists and claimed to be fighting a religious war to reestablish the Islamic Caliphate of centuries past.

[ 154 ] Saddam Hussein was captured by U.S. forces in December 2003 and was executed in 2006.

In 2004, the insurgent forces grew stronger. The U.S. launched offensives on insurgent strongholds in cities like Najaf and Fallujah .

In January 2007, President Bush presented a new strategy for Operation Iraqi Freedom based upon counter-insurgency theories and tactics developed by General David Petraeus . The Iraq War troop surge of 2007 was part of this "new way forward", which along with U.S. backing of Sunni groups it had previously sought to defeat has been credited with a widely recognized dramatic decrease in violence by up to 80%.

[ citation needed ] The war entered a new phase on 1 September 2010, [ 155 ] with the official end of U.S. combat operations.

War in Iraq (2013–17) Main article: War in Iraq (2013–2017) President Obama ordered the withdrawal of most troops in 2011, but began redeploying forces in 2014 to fight the Islamic State group.

[ 156 ] As of July 2021, there were approximately 2,500 U.S. troops in Iraq, who continue to assist in the mission to combat the remnants of IS.

[ 157 ] Pakistan Main articles: Pakistan's role in the War on Terror , Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , and Pakistan and state-sponsored terrorism See also: Drone strikes in Pakistan , List of drone strikes in Pakistan , Killing of Osama bin Laden , and Pakistan–United States relations Following 11 September attacks, former President of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf sided with the U.S. against the Taliban government in Afghanistan after an ultimatum by then U.S. President George W. Bush. Musharraf agreed to give the U.S. the use of three airbases for Operation Enduring Freedom.

United States Secretary of State Colin Powell and other U.S. administration officials met with Musharraf. On 19 September 2001, Musharraf addressed the people of Pakistan and stated that, while he opposed military tactics against the Taliban, Pakistan risked being endangered by an alliance of India and the U.S. if it did not cooperate. In 2006, Musharraf testified that this stance was pressured by threats from the U.S., and revealed in his memoirs that he had "war-gamed" the United States as an adversary and decided that it would end in a loss for Pakistan.

[ 158 ] On 12 January 2002, Musharraf gave a speech against Islamic extremism. He unequivocally condemned all acts of terrorism and pledged to combat Islamic extremism and lawlessness within Pakistan itself. He stated that his government was committed to rooting out extremism and made it clear that the banned militant organizations would not be allowed to resurface under any new name. He said, "the recent decision to ban extremist groups promoting militancy was taken in the national interest after thorough consultations. It was not taken under any foreign influence".

[ 159 ] In 2002, the Musharraf-led government took a firm stand against the jihadi organizations and groups promoting extremism, and arrested Maulana Masood Azhar , head of the Jaish-e-Mohammed , and Hafiz Muhammad Saeed , chief of the Lashkar-e-Taiba , and took dozens of activists into custody. An official ban was imposed on the groups on 12 January.

[ 160 ] Later that year, the Saudi born Zayn al-Abidn Muhammed Hasayn Abu Zubaydah was arrested by Pakistani officials during a series of joint U.S.–Pakistan raids. Zubaydah is said to have been a high-ranking al-Qaeda official with the title of operations chief and in charge of running al-Qaeda training camps.

[ 161 ] Other prominent al-Qaeda members were arrested in the following two years, namely Ramzi bin al-Shibh , who is known to have been a financial backer of al-Qaeda operations, and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , who at the time of his capture was the third highest-ranking official in al-Qaeda and had been directly in charge of the planning for 11 September attacks.

In 2004, the Pakistan Army launched a campaign in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan's Waziristan region, sending in 80,000 troops. The goal of the conflict was to remove the al-Qaeda and Taliban forces in the area.

After the fall of the Taliban regime, many members of the Taliban resistance fled to the Northern border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan where the Pakistani army had previously little control. With the logistics and air support of the United States, the Pakistani Army captured or killed numerous al-Qaeda operatives such as Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, wanted for his involvement in the USS Cole bombing, the Bojinka plot , and the killing of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl .

The United States has carried out a campaign of drone attacks on targets all over the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. However, the Pakistani Taliban still operates there. To this day it is estimated that 15 U.S. soldiers were killed while fighting al-Qaeda and Taliban remnants in Pakistan since the war on terror began.

[ 162 ] Osama bin Laden, his wife, and son, were all killed on 2 May 2011, during a raid conducted by the United States special operations forces in Abbottabad , Pakistan.

[ 163 ] The use of drones by the Central Intelligence Agency in Pakistan to carry out operations associated with the global war on terror sparks debate over sovereignty and the laws of war. The U.S. Government uses the CIA rather than the U.S. Air Force for strikes in Pakistan to avoid breaching sovereignty through military invasion. The United States was criticized by [ according to whom?

] a report on drone warfare and aerial sovereignty for abusing the term 'global war on terror' to carry out military operations through government agencies without formally declaring war.

After 11 September attacks, U.S. economic and security aid to Pakistan spiked considerably. With the authorization of the Enhanced Partnership for Pakistan Act, Pakistan was granted US$7.5 billion over five years from FY2010–FY2014.

[ 164 ] Yemen Main articles: Al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen , Drone strikes in Yemen , Yemeni civil war (2014-present) , Red Sea crisis , Operation Prosperity Guardian , and 2024 missile strikes in Yemen This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( March 2025 ) The United States has conducted a series of military strikes on al-Qaeda militants in Yemen since the war on terror began.

[ 165 ] Yemen has a weak central government and a powerful tribal system that leaves large lawless areas open for militant training and operations.

Al-Qaeda has a strong presence in the country.

[ 166 ] On 31 March 2011, AQAP declared the Al-Qaeda Emirate in Yemen after its captured most of Abyan Governorate .

[ 167 ] The U.S., in an effort to support Yemeni counter-terrorism efforts, increased their military aid package to Yemen from less than $11 million in 2006 to more than $70 million in 2009, as well as providing up to $121 million for development over the next three years.

[ 168 ] In 2024, the U.S. re-designated the Houthis as Specially Designated Global Terrorists in the context of the Red Sea crisis , Operation Prosperity Guardian and Operation Poseidon Archer . The military campaign is still ongoing as of January 2024 [update] .

[ 169 ] The Houthis have admitted to teaming up with Al-Qaeda since 2023.

[ 170 ] Since then, the alliance remains ongoing under the context of the Red Sea crisis.

[ 171 ] Other military operations Operation Inherent Resolve (Syria and Iraq) Main articles: Operation Inherent Resolve , Military intervention against ISIL , and List of wars and battles involving ISIL Further information: American-led intervention in Iraq (2014–2021) , Spillover of the Syrian Civil War , and American-led intervention in Syria U.S. soldiers in Syria during Operation Inherent Resolve This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( February 2025 ) The Obama administration began to re-engage in Iraq with a series of airstrikes aimed at ISIL starting on 10 August 2014.

[ 172 ] On 9 September 2014, President Obama said that he had the authority he needed to take action to destroy the militant group known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant , citing the 2001 Authorization for the Use of Military Force Against Terrorists, and thus did not require additional approval from Congress.

[ 173 ] The following day on 10 September 2014 President Barack Obama made a televised speech about ISIL, which he stated: "Our objective is clear: We will degrade, and ultimately destroy, ISIL through a comprehensive and sustained counter-terrorism strategy".

[ 174 ] Obama has authorized the deployment of additional U.S. Forces into Iraq, as well as authorizing direct military operations against ISIL within Syria.

[ 174 ] On the night of 21/22 September the United States, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the UAE, Jordan and Qatar started air attacks against ISIL in Syria.

[ 175 ] In October 2014, it was reported that the U.S. Department of Defense considers military operations against ISIL as being under Operation Enduring Freedom in regards to campaign medal awarding.

[ 176 ] On 15 October, the military intervention became known as "Operation Inherent Resolve".

[ 177 ] Islamic State of Lanao and the Battle of Marawi With the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), jihadist offshoots sprung up in regions around the world , including the Philippines. The Maute group , composed of former Moro Islamic Liberation Front guerrillas and foreign fighters led by Omar Maute , the alleged founder of a Dawlah Islamiya , declared loyalty to ISIL and began clashing with Philippine security forces and staging bombings . On 23 May 2017, the group attacked the city of Marawi , resulting in the bloody Battle of Marawi that lasted 5 months. After the decisive battle, remnants of the group were reportedly still recruiting in 2017 and 2018.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] Libyan War Main articles: Factional violence in Libya (2011–2014) , Libyan Civil War (2014–2020) , and American intervention in Libya (2015–2019) An AV-8B Harrier takes off from the flight deck of USS Wasp during Operation Odyssey Lightning , 8 August 2016.

NBC News reported that in mid-2014, ISIL had about 1,000 fighters in Libya . Taking advantage of a power vacuum in the center of the country, far from the major cities of Tripoli and Benghazi , ISIL expanded rapidly over the next 18 months. Local militants were joined by jihadists from the rest of North Africa, the Middle East, Europe and the Caucasus . The force absorbed or defeated other Islamist groups inside Libya and the central ISIL leadership in Raqqa , Syria , began urging foreign recruits to head for Libya instead of Syria .

ISIL seized control of the coastal city of Sirte in early 2015 and then began to expand to the east and south. By the beginning of 2016, it had effective control of 120 to 150 miles of coastline and portions of the interior and had reached Eastern Libya's major population center, Benghazi . In spring 2016, AFRICOM estimated that ISIL had about 5,000 fighters in its stronghold of Sirte.

[ 180 ] However, the indigenous rebel groups who had staked their claims to Libya and turned their weapons on ISIL—with the help of airstrikes by Western forces, including U.S. drones, the Libyan population resented the outsiders who wanted to establish a fundamentalist regime on their soil. Militias loyal to the new Libyan unity government , plus a separate and rival force loyal to a former officer in the Gaddafi regime , launched an assault on ISIL outposts in Sirte and the surrounding areas that lasted for months. According to U.S. military estimates, ISIL ranks shrank to somewhere between a few hundred and 2,000 fighters. In August 2016, the U.S. military began airstrikes that, along with continued pressure on the ground from the Libyan militias, pushed the remaining ISIL fighters back into Sirte. In all, U.S. drones and planes hit ISIL nearly 590 times, the Libyan militias reclaimed the city in mid-December.

[ 180 ] On 18 January 2017, ABC News reported that two USAF B-2 bombers struck two ISIL camps 28 miles (45 km) south of Sirte, the airstrikes targeted between 80 and 100 ISIL fighters in multiple camps, an unmanned aircraft also participated in the airstrikes. NBC News reported that as many as 90 ISIL fighters were killed in the strike, a U.S. defense official said that "This was the largest remaining ISIL presence in Libya ," and that "They have been largely marginalized, but I am hesitant to say they have been eliminated in Libya." [ 180 ] American military intervention in Cameroon In October 2015, the U.S. began deploying 300 soldiers [ 181 ] to Cameroon , with the invitation of the Cameroonian government, to support African forces in a non-combat role in their fight against ISIL insurgency in that country. The troops' primary missions will revolve around providing intelligence support to local forces as well as conducting reconnaissance flights.

[ 182 ] Operation Active Endeavour Main article: Operation Active Endeavour Operation Active Endeavour was a naval operation of NATO started in October 2001 in response to 11 September attacks. It operated in the Mediterranean and was designed to prevent the movement of militants or weapons of mass destruction and to enhance the security of shipping in general.

[ 183 ] Fighting in Kashmir Main article: Kashmir conflict Political map: the Kashmir region districts In a 'Letter to American People' written by Osama bin Laden in 2002, he stated that one of the reasons he was fighting America is because of its support of India on the Kashmir issue.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] Indian sources claimed that in 2006, al-Qaeda claimed they had established a wing in Kashmir; this worried the Indian government.

[ 186 ] India also argued that al-Qaeda has strong ties with the Kashmir militant groups Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pakistan.

[ 187 ] While on a visit to Pakistan in January 2010, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates stated that al-Qaeda was seeking to destabilize the region and planning to provoke a nuclear war between India and Pakistan.

[ 188 ] In September 2009, a U.S.

drone strike reportedly killed Ilyas Kashmiri , who was the chief of Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami , a Kashmiri militant group associated with al-Qaeda.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Kashmiri was described by Bruce Riedel as a 'prominent' al-Qaeda member, [ 191 ] while others described him as the head of military operations for al-Qaeda.

[ 192 ] Waziristan had now become the new battlefield for Kashmiri militants, who were now fighting NATO in support of al-Qaeda.

[ 193 ] On 8 July 2012, Al-Badar Mujahideen, a breakaway faction of Kashmir centric terror group Hizbul Mujahideen, on the conclusion of their two-day Shuhada Conference called for a mobilization of resources for continuation of jihad in Kashmir.

[ 194 ] In June 2021, an air force station in Jammu (in India-administered Kashmir) was attacked by drone. Investigators were uncertain whether a state or non-state actor initiated the attack.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] Anti-terror campaigns by other powers As part of the Iran–Israel proxy conflict and the Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict , both Israel and Saudi Arabia has engaged in its own war on terror against Iranian -backed insurgent groups, and against Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) and Islamic State in Saudi Arabia's case.

[ 197 ] Although Israel did not directly participate in the 2003 invasion of Iraq , it reportedly urged the U.S. not to delay an attack on Saddam Hussein .

[ 198 ] Before the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, Israeli intelligence reportedly provided information to Washington.

[ 199 ] Israel launched a 34-day military conflict against Hezbollah in Lebanon, northern Israel and the Golan Heights during mid-2006 .

[ 200 ] In Saudi Arabia's case, its own war on terror has been heightened by its intervention in the Yemeni civil war since March 26, 2015. Both Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) and Islamic State had a presence in Yemen before the Saudi-led intervention.

[ 201 ] Colombia has also engaged on its own War on Terror, [ 202 ] [ 203 ] as terrorism by both guerrillas and paramilitaries remains a major concern in the country since the escalation of armed violence in the 2000s in the context of the Colombian conflict .

[ 204 ] Álvaro Uribe 's Presidency, in particular, was marked by a significant focus on counter-terrorism and counterinsurgency. The counterterrorism measures of Plan Colombia acquired further expansion during the presidency of George W. Bush and an important focus on national security after the events of 9/11 , as the threat of global terrorism received greater attention.

[ 205 ] In the 2010s, China has also been engaged in its own war on terror, predominantly a domestic campaign in response to violent actions by Uyghur separatist movements in the Xinjiang conflict .

[ 206 ] This campaign was widely criticized in international media due to the perception that it unfairly targets and persecutes Chinese Muslims , [ 207 ] potentially resulting in a negative backlash from China's predominantly Muslim Uighur population.

Xi Jinping 's government has imprisoned up to two million Uyghurs and other Muslim ethnic minorities in Xinjiang internment camps , where they are reportedly subject to abuse and torture.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] Russia has also been engaged on its own, also largely internally focused, counter-terrorism campaign often termed a war on terror, during the Second Chechen War , the Insurgency in the North Caucasus , and the Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War .

[ 210 ] Like China's war on terror, Russia has also been focused on separatist and Islamist movements that use political violence to achieve their ends.

[ 211 ] However, Putin 's Russia's disinformation and actions, as well as its inaction towards groups like Hamas, Hezbollah and the Taliban , have raised doubts about its commitment to the war on terror.

[ 212 ] International military support Main articles: Participants in Operation Enduring Freedom and Multi-National Force – Iraq See also: Coalition combat operations in Afghanistan in 2008 and Afghan War order of battle 2012 The United Kingdom was the second-largest contributor of troops in Afghanistan .

The invasion of Afghanistan is seen to have been the first action of this war, and initially involved forces from the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Afghan Northern Alliance . Since the initial invasion period, these forces were augmented by troops and aircraft from Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand and Norway among others. In 2006, there were about 33,000 troops in Afghanistan.

On 12 September 2001, less than 24 hours after 11 September attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C., NATO invoked Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty and declared the attacks to be an attack against all 19 NATO member countries. Australian Prime Minister John Howard also stated that Australia would invoke the ANZUS Treaty along similar lines.

[ 213 ] In the following months, NATO took a broad range of measures to respond to the threat of terrorism. On 22 November 2002, the member states of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) decided on a Partnership Action Plan against Terrorism, which explicitly states, "[The] EAPC States are committed to the protection and promotion of fundamental freedoms and human rights, as well as the rule of law, in combating terrorism." [ 214 ] NATO started naval operations in the Mediterranean Sea designed to prevent the movement of terrorists or weapons of mass destruction as well as to enhance the security of shipping in general called Operation Active Endeavour.

Support for the U.S. cooled when America made clear its determination to invade Iraq in late 2002. Still, many of the "coalition of the willing" countries that unconditionally supported the U.S.-led military action have sent troops to Afghanistan, particular neighboring Pakistan, which has disowned its earlier support for the Taliban and contributed tens of thousands of soldiers to the conflict. Pakistan was also engaged in the Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (a.k.a. Waziristan War or North-West Pakistan War). Supported by U.S. intelligence, Pakistan attempted to remove the Taliban insurgency and al-Qaeda element from the northern tribal areas.

[ 215 ] Post–9/11 events inside the United States Main article: Patriot Act Further information: NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–2007) See also: Global surveillance disclosures (1970–2013) § 2000s , and Global surveillance disclosures (2013–present) A U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement helicopter patrols the airspace over New York City.

In addition to military efforts abroad, in the aftermath of 9/11, the Bush Administration increased domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. Various government bureaucracies that handled security and military functions were reorganized. A new cabinet-level agency called the United States Department of Homeland Security was created in November 2002 to lead and coordinate the largest reorganization of the U.S. federal government since the consolidation of the armed forces into the Department of Defense.

[ citation needed ] The Justice Department launched the National Security Entry-Exit Registration System for certain male non-citizens in the U.S., requiring them to register in person at offices of the Immigration and Naturalization Service .

The USA PATRIOT Act of October 2001 dramatically reduces restrictions on law enforcement agencies' ability to search telephone, e-mail communications, medical, financial, and other records; eases restrictions on foreign intelligence gathering within the United States; expands the Secretary of the Treasury 's authority to regulate financial transactions, particularly those involving foreign individuals and entities; and broadens the discretion of law enforcement and immigration authorities in detaining and deporting immigrants suspected of terrorism-related acts. The act also expanded the definition of terrorism to include domestic terrorism, thus enlarging the number of activities to which the USA PATRIOT Act's expanded law enforcement powers could be applied. A new Terrorist Finance Tracking Program monitored the movements of terrorists' financial resources (discontinued after being revealed by The New York Times ). Global telecommunication usage, including those with no links to terrorism, [ 216 ] is being collected and monitored through the NSA electronic surveillance program . The Patriot Act is still in effect.

Political interest groups have stated that these laws remove important restrictions on governmental authority, and are a dangerous encroachment on civil liberties, possible unconstitutional violations of the Fourth Amendment . On 30 July 2003, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) filed the first legal challenge against Section 215 of the Patriot Act, claiming that it allows the FBI to violate a citizen's First Amendment rights, Fourth Amendment rights, and right to due process , by granting the government the right to search a person's business, bookstore, and library records in a terrorist investigation, without disclosing to the individual that records were being searched.

[ 217 ] Also, governing bodies in many communities have passed symbolic resolutions against the act.

John Walker Lindh was captured as an enemy combatant during the United States' 2001 invasion of Afghanistan .

In a speech on 9 June 2005, Bush said that the USA PATRIOT Act had been used to bring charges against more than 400 suspects, more than half of whom had been convicted. Meanwhile, the ACLU quoted Justice Department figures showing that 7,000 people have complained of abuse of the Act.

[ citation needed ] The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) began an initiative in early 2002 with the creation of the Total Information Awareness program, designed to promote information technologies that could be used in counter-terrorism. This program, facing criticism, has since been defunded by Congress.

[ citation needed ] By 2003, 12 major conventions and protocols were designed to combat terrorism. These were adopted and ratified by many states. These conventions require states to co-operate on principal issues regarding unlawful seizure of aircraft, the physical protection of nuclear materials, and the freezing of assets of militant networks.

[ 218 ] In 2005, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1624 concerning incitement to commit acts of terrorism and the obligations of countries to comply with international human rights laws.

[ 219 ] Although both resolutions require mandatory annual reports on counter-terrorism activities by adopting nations, the United States and Israel have both declined to submit reports. In the same year, the United States Department of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a planning document, by the name "National Military Strategic Plan for the War on Terrorism", which stated that it constituted the "comprehensive military plan to prosecute the Global War on Terror for the Armed Forces of the United States ...including the findings and recommendations of the 9/11 Commission and a rigorous examination with the Department of Defense".

On 9 January 2007, the House of Representatives passed a bill, by a vote of 299–128, enacting many of the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission The bill passed in the U.S. Senate, [ 220 ] by a vote of 60–38, on 13 March 2007 and it was signed into law on 3 August 2007 by President Bush. It became Public Law 110–53. In July 2012, U.S. Senate passed a resolution urging that the Haqqani Network be designated a foreign terrorist organization .

[ 221 ] The Office of Strategic Influence was secretly created after 9/11 for the purpose of coordinating propaganda efforts but was closed soon after being discovered. The Bush administration implemented the Continuity of Operations Plan (or Continuity of Government) to ensure that U.S. government would be able to continue in catastrophic circumstances.

Since 9/11, extremists made various attempts to attack the United States, with varying levels of organization and skill. For example, vigilant passengers aboard a transatlantic flight prevented Richard Reid , in 2001, and Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab , in 2009, from detonating an explosive device.

Other terrorist plots have been stopped by federal agencies using new legal powers and investigative tools, sometimes in cooperation with foreign governments.

[ citation needed ] Such thwarted attacks include: The 2001 shoe bomb plot A plan to crash airplanes into the U.S. Bank Tower (aka Library Tower) in Los Angeles The 2003 plot by Iyman Faris to blow up the Brooklyn Bridge in New York City The 2004 Financial buildings plot , which targeted the International Monetary Fund and World Bank buildings in Washington, D.C., the New York Stock Exchange and other financial institutions The 2004 Columbus Shopping Mall Bombing Plot The 2006 Sears Tower plot The 2007 Fort Dix attack plot The 2007 John F. Kennedy International Airport attack plot The New York Subway Bombing Plot and 2010 Times Square car bombing attempt The Obama administration promised the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp (GITMO), increased the number of troops in Afghanistan , and promised the withdrawal of its forces from Iraq . Due to congressional opposition, the Obama Administration was unable to close GITMO but brought down its prison population from 242 detainees to 40 detainees.

[ 222 ] President Trump, during his first administration , signed an executive order keeping Guantanamo Bay's detention camp opened indefinitely, bringing an end to efforts to close it.

[ 223 ] During his first term, only one detainee was transferred. The Biden Administration, like the former Obama Administration, pledged to close GITMO, but proved unsuccessful too and added million-dollar expansions [ 224 ] A total of 25 detainees were transferred during the Biden presidency. After being inaugurated for his second term, President Trump signed a Presidential memorandum to begin expansion of the Guantanamo Migrant Operations Center to allow for detainment of up to 30,000 migrants.

[ 225 ] Transnational actions "Extraordinary rendition" Alleged "extraordinary rendition" illegal flights of the CIA , as reported by Rzeczpospolita [ 226 ] CIA's Extraordinary Rendition and Detention Program – countries involved in the Program, according to the 2013 Open Society Foundations ' report on torture [ 227 ] [ 228 ] After 11 September attacks, the United States government commenced a program of illegal " extraordinary rendition ", sometimes referred to as "irregular rendition" or "forced rendition", the government-sponsored abduction and extrajudicial transfer of a person from one country to transferee countries, with the consent of transferee countries.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] [ 28 ] The aim of extraordinary rendition is often conducting torture on the detainee that would be difficult to conduct in the U.S. legal environment, a practice known as torture by proxy . Starting in 2002, U.S. government rendered hundreds of illegal combatants for U.S. detention, and transported detainees to U.S. controlled sites as part of an extensive interrogation program that included torture .

[ 231 ] Extraordinary rendition continued under the Obama administration, with targets being interrogated and subsequently taken to the US for trial.

[ 232 ] The United Nations considers one nation abducting the citizens of another a crime against humanity .

[ 233 ] In July 2014 the European Court of Human Rights condemned the government of Poland for participating in CIA extraordinary rendition, ordering Poland to pay restitution to men who had been abducted, taken to a CIA black site in Poland, and tortured.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] [ 236 ] Rendition to "Black Sites" See also: CIA black sites and Ghost detainee In 2005, The Washington Post and Human Rights Watch (HRW) published revelations concerning kidnapping of detainees by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and their transport to " black sites ", covert prisons operated by the CIA whose existence is denied by the US government. The European Parliament published a report connecting use of such secret detention Black Sites for detainees kidnapped as part of extraordinary rendition ( See the European Parliament's investigation and report ). Although some Black Sites have been known to exist inside European Union states, these detention centers violate the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and the UN Convention Against Torture , treaties that all EU member states are bound to follow.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] [ 239 ] The U.S. had ratified the United Nations Convention Against Torture in 1994.

[ 240 ] According to ABC News two such facilities, in countries mentioned by Human Rights Watch, have been closed following the recent publicity with the CIA relocating the detainees. Almost all of these detainees were tortured as part of the " enhanced interrogation techniques " of the CIA.

[ 241 ] Despite the closure of these sites, their legacies in certain countries continue to live on and haunt domestic politics.

[ 242 ] Criticism of U.S. media's withholding of coverage Major American newspapers, such as The Washington Post , have been criticized for deliberately withholding publication of articles reporting locations of Black Sites. The Post defended its decision to suppress this news on the ground that such revelations "could open the U.S. government to legal challenges, particularly in foreign courts, and increase the risk of political condemnation at home and abroad." However, according to Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting "the possibility that illegal, unpopular government actions might be disrupted is not a consequence to be feared, however—it's the whole point of the U.S. First Amendment . ... Without the basic fact of where these prisons are, it's difficult if not impossible for 'legal challenges' or 'political condemnation' to force them to close." FAIR argued that the damage done to the global reputation of the United States by the continued existence of black-site prisons was more dangerous than any threat caused by the exposure of their locations.

[ 243 ] The complex at Stare Kiejkuty, a Soviet-era compound once used by German intelligence in World War II, is best known as having been the only Russian intelligence training school to operate outside the Soviet Union. Its prominence in the Soviet era suggests that it may have been the facility first identified—but never named—when the Washington Post 's Dana Priest revealed the existence of the CIA's secret prison network in November 2005.

[ 244 ] The journalists who exposed this provided their sources and this information and documents were provided to The Washington Post in 2005. In addition, they also identified such Black Sites are concealed: Former European and US intelligence officials indicate that the secret prisons across the European Union, first identified by the Washington Post, are likely not permanent locations, making them difficult to identify and locate.
What some believe was a network of secret prisons was most probably a series of facilities used temporarily by the United States when needed, officials say. Interim "black sites"—secret facilities used for covert activities—can be as small as a room in a government building, which only becomes a black site when a prisoner is brought in for short-term detainment and interrogation.

The journalists went on to explain that "Such a site, sources say, would have to be near an airport." The airport in question is the Szczytno-Szymany International Airport .

In response to these allegations, former Polish intelligence chief, Zbigniew Siemiatkowski , embarked on a media blitz and claimed that the allegations were "... part of the domestic political battle in the US over who is to succeed current Republican President George W Bush," according to the German news agency Deutsche Presse Agentur.

[ 245 ] Prison ships The United States has also been accused of operating " floating prisons " to house and transport those arrested in its war on terror, according to human rights lawyers. They have claimed that the US has tried to conceal the numbers and whereabouts of detainees. Although no credible information to support these assertions has ever come to light, the alleged justification for prison ships is primarily to remove the ability for jihadists to target a fixed location to facilitate the escape of high value targets, commanders, operations chiefs etc.

[ 246 ] Guantanamo Bay detention camp Detainees upon arrival at Camp X-Ray , January 2002 The U.S. government set up the Guantanamo Bay detention camp in 2002, a United States military prison located in Guantanamo Bay Naval Base .

[ 247 ] President Bush declared that the Geneva Convention , which protects prisoners of war , would not apply to Taliban and al-Qaeda detainees captured in Afghanistan.

[ 248 ] Since inmates were detained indefinitely without trial and several detainees have allegedly been tortured , this camp is considered to be a major breach of human rights by Amnesty International .

[ 249 ] The detention camp was set up by the U.S. government on Guantanamo Bay since the military base is not legally domestic US territory and thus was a "legal black hole." [ 250 ] [ 251 ] Most prisoners of Guantanamo were eventually freed without ever being charged with any crime, and were transferred to other countries.

[ 252 ] By July of 2021, 40 men remain in the prison and almost three-quarters of them have never been criminally charged. They're known as "forever prisoners" and are being detained indefinitely.

[ 253 ] As of 2025, 15 detainees remain, with three awaiting transfer, nine who have been charged or convicted of war crimes , and three who are held in indefinite law-of-war detention without facing tribunal charges nor being recommended for release.

Major terrorist attacks and plots since 9/11 Following the launch of "war on terror" by the United States, several Islamist militant groups as well as militant individuals have launched attacks against the assets of US-led coalition, including in Western countries where active warfare is not taking place.

Attacks by Al-Qaeda Main articles: al-Qaeda and Timeline of al-Qaeda attacks The 2002 Bali bombings in Indonesia were committed by various members of Jemaah Islamiyah , an organization linked to Al-Qaeda.

Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility for the 11 April 2007 Algiers bombings , which targeted the office of Algerian Prime Minister and a police station.

Morocco blamed Al-Qaeda for the 2011 Marrakech bombing which targeted French nationals. However, al-Qaeda denies involvement in the attack.

To date, no one has claimed responsibility for the 2012 U.S. Consulate attack in Benghazi in Libya, and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb , pro-al-Qaeda militias and individuals "sympathetic to al-Qaeda" are considered to be the orchestrators of the attack. The attacks were launched 18 hours after al-Qaeda Emir Ayman al-Zawahiri released a video urging Muslims to attack on American targets in Libya to avenge the killing of al-Qaeda leader Abu Yahya al-Libi . The release of the video as well as the launching of the attacks coincided with the 11th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks.

The gunmen in the Charlie Hebdo shooting in Paris identified themselves as belonging to al-Qaeda's Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula .

Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula claimed responsibility for the Naval Air Station Pensacola shooting in the United States.

Islamic State Main articles: Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and List of terrorist incidents linked to ISIL See also: List of wars and battles involving ISIL 2013 Reyhanlı bombings in Turkey that led to 52 deaths and the injury of 140 people.

2014 Canadian parliament shootings , an ISIL-inspired attack on Canada's Parliament, resulting in the death of a Canadian soldier and that of the perpetrator.

2015 Porte de Vincennes siege perpetrated by Amedy Coulibaly in Paris, which led to four deaths and the injury of nine others.

2015 Corinthia Hotel attack on 27 January in Libya that resulted in 10 deaths.

2015 Sana'a mosque bombings on 20 March that led to the death of 142 and injury of 351 people.

[ 254 ] 2015 Curtis Culwell Center attack on 3 May 2015 that resulted in the injury of one security officer .

November 2015 Paris attacks on the 13th that left at least 137 dead and injured at least 352 civilians caused France to be put under a state of emergency, close its borders and deploy three French contingency plans.

[ 255 ] Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks, [ 256 ] with French President François Hollande later stated the attacks were carried out "by the Islamic state with internal help".

[ 257 ] 2015 San Bernardino attack on 2 December 2015, two gunmen attacked a county building in San Bernardino, California killing 16 people and injuring 24 others.

[ 258 ] 2016 Brussels bombings on 22 March 2016 two bombing attacks, first at Brussels Airport and the second at the Maalbeek/Maelbeek metro station , killed 35 people and injured more than 300.

[ 259 ] 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting on 12 June 2016 a gunman opened fire at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida killing 50 people and wounding 53 others. It was the second worst mass shooting in U.S. history.

[ 260 ] 2024 Crocus City Hall attack , ISIS–K gunmen launched an attack on a concert hall in Krasnogorsk , Russia, killing 145 people and wounding 551 others. It was the deadliest terrorist attack on Russian soil since the Beslan school siege in 2004.

Attacks by other Islamist militant groups and individuals The 2003 Casablanca bombings were carried out by Salafia Jihadia militant group.

After the 2003 Istanbul bombings which attacked British and Jewish targets, Turkey charged 74 people with involvement, including Syrian al-Qaeda member Loai al-Saqa . Islamist group Great Eastern Islamic Raiders' Front claimed responsibility for the attacks The 2004 Madrid train bombings in Spain were carried out by Moroccan-born Jamal Zougam and five other individuals in opposition to Spanish participation in the 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq .

The 7 July 2005 London bombings in the United Kingdom, which targeting London's public transport system , were perpetrated by four Islamist militants.

The 2009 Fort Hood shooting in the United States was committed by Nidal Hasan , who had been in communication with Anwar al-Awlaki . The U.S. Department of Defense classified the shooting as an incidence of workplace violence .

The 2007 Glasgow International Airport attack in the United Kingdom was carried out by Bilal Abdullah and Kafeel Ahmed .

The 2012 Toulouse and Montauban shootings which targeted French soldiers and a Jewish school, were committed by Mohammed Merah . Although Merah claimed ties to al-Qaeda, French authorities have denied any connection.

The 2023 7th October Attack which targeted Israeli soldiers and civilians, were committed by Hamas and its allies . With a barrage of at least 3,000 rockets launched against Israel and vehicle-transported and powered paraglider and infantry incursions into Israel, it was the deadliest terrorist attack in Israel's history and the third-deadliest terrorist attack in the 21st century.

[ 261 ] Alleged plots and unsuccessful attacks There have also been reports of alleged plots and other planned attacks that were not successful.

2001 threat against West Coast suspension bridges (United States), though this was not corroborated 2004 financial buildings plot (The United States and the United Kingdom) 21 July 2005 London bombings (United Kingdom) 2006 Toronto terrorism plot (Canada) 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot involving liquid explosives carried onto commercial airplanes 2006 Hudson River bomb plot (United States) 2007 Fort Dix attack plot (United States) 2007 London car bombs (United Kingdom) 2007 John F. Kennedy International Airport attack plot (United States) 2009 Bronx terrorism plot (United States) 2009 New York City Subway and United Kingdom plot (The United States and the United Kingdom) 2009 Northwest Airlines Flight 253 bombing plot (United States) 2010 Stockholm bombings (Sweden) 2010 Times Square car bombing attempt (United States) 2010 cargo plane bomb plot (United States) 2010 Portland car bomb plot (United States) 2011 Manhattan terrorism plot (United States) 2013 Via Rail Canada terrorism plot (Canada) 2014 mass-beheading plot (Australia) Casualties There is no widely agreed on figure for the number of people that have been killed so far in the war on terror as the Bush Administration has defined it to include the war in Afghanistan, the war in Iraq, and operations elsewhere. According to Joshua Goldstein , an international relations professor at the American University , the global war on terror has seen fewer war deaths than any other decade in the past century.

[ 262 ] A 2015 report by the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War and the Physicians for Social Responsibility and Physicians for Global Survival estimated between 1.3 million to 2 million casualties from the war on terror.

[ 263 ] A report from September 2021 by Brown University's Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs "Costs of War" project puts the total number of casualties of the war on terror in Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan at between 518,000 and 549,000. This number increases to between 897,000 and 929,000 when the wars in Syria, Yemen, and other countries are included. The report estimated that many more may have died from indirect effects of war such as water loss and disease.

[ 264 ] [ 19 ] They also estimated that over 38 million people have been displaced by the post-9/11 wars participated in by the United States in Afghanistan , Pakistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria, Yemen , Somalia, and the Philippines ; 26.7 million people have returned home following displacement.

[ 18 ] [ 20 ] The conflict has caused the largest number of forced displacements by any single war since 1900, with the exception of World War II .

[ 18 ] In a 2023 report, the "Costs of War" project estimated that, as the result of the destruction of infrastructure, economies, public services and the environment, there have been between 3.6 and 3.7 million indirect deaths in the post-9/11 war zones, with the total death toll being 4.5 to 4.6 million and rising.

[ 265 ] The report defined post-9/11 war zones as conflicts that included significant United States counter-terrorism operations since 9/11, which in addition to the wars in Iraq , Afghanistan and Pakistan , also includes the civil wars in Syria , Yemen , Libya and Somalia . The report derived its estimate of indirect deaths using a calculation from the Geneva Declaration of Secretariat which estimates that for every person directly killed by war, four more die from the indirect consequences of war. The report's author Stephanie Savell stated that in an ideal scenario, the preferable way of quantifying the total death toll would have been by studying excess mortality, or by using on-the-ground researchers in the affected countries.

[ 4 ] An estimated 7,052 US military combatants, over 8,100 US military contractors and more than 14,800 US-allied coalition troops are estimated to have been killed in the wars as of 2023.

[ 19 ] The total number of insurgent deaths since the commencement of the war on terror in 2001 is generally estimated as being well into the hundreds of thousands, with hundreds of thousands of others captured or arrested. Some estimates for regional conflicts include the following: Iraq Main article: Casualties of the Iraq War Footage of leaked Apache gunship strike in Baghdad, July 2007 In Iraq, some 26,544 insurgents were killed by the American-led coalition and the Iraqi Security Forces from 2003 to 2011.

[ 266 ] 119,752 suspected insurgents were arrested in Iraq from 2003 to 2007 alone, at which point 18,832 suspected insurgents had been reported killed; [ 267 ] applying this same arrested-to-captured ratio to the total number of insurgents killed would equate to approximately 26,500 insurgents killed and 168,000 arrested from 2003 to 2011. At least 4,000 foreign fighters ( generally estimated at 10–20% of the insurgency at that point) had been killed by September 2006, according to an official statement from al-Qaeda in Iraq .

[ 268 ] Insurgent casualties in the 2011–2013 phase of the Iraqi conflict numbered 916 killed, with 3,504 more arrested.

From 2014 to the end of 2017, the United States government stated that over 80,000 Islamic State insurgents had been killed by American and allied airstrikes from 2014 to the end of 2017, in both Iraq and Syria. The majority of these strikes occurred within Iraq.

[ 269 ] ISIL deaths caused by the Iraqi Security Forces in this time are uncertain, but were probably significant. Over 26,000 ISF members were killed fighting ISIL from 2013 to the end of 2017, [ 270 ] with ISIL losses likely being of a similar scale.

Total casualties in Iraq range from 62,570 to 1,124,000: Iraq Body Count project documented 185,044 to 207,979 dead from 2003 to 2020 with 288,000 violent deaths including combatants in total.

110,600 deaths in total according to the Associated Press from March 2003 to April 2009.

[ 271 ] 151,000 deaths in total according to the Iraq Family Health Survey .

[ 272 ] Opinion Research Business (ORB) poll conducted 12–19 August 2007 estimated 1,033,000 violent deaths due to the Iraq War. The range given was 946,000 to 1,120,000 deaths. A nationally representative sample of approximately 2,000 Iraqi adults answered whether any members of their household (living under their roof) were killed due to the Iraq War. 22% of the respondents had lost one or more household members. ORB reported that "48% died from a gunshot wound, 20% from the impact of a car bomb, 9% from aerial bombardment, 6% as a result of an accident and 6% from another blast/ordnance." [ 273 ] [ 274 ] [ 275 ] Between 392,979 and 942,636 estimated Iraqi (655,000 with a confidence interval of 95%), civilian and combatant, according to the second Lancet survey of mortality .

A minimum of 62,570 civilian deaths reported in the mass media up to 28 April 2007 according to Iraq Body Count project .

[ 276 ] 4,431 U.S. Department of Defense dead (941 non-hostile deaths), and 31,994 wounded in action during Operation Iraqi Freedom. 74 U.S. Military Dead (36 non-hostile deaths), and 298 wounded in action during Operation New Dawn as of 4 May 2020 [ 277 ] Afghanistan Main articles: Coalition casualties in Afghanistan and Civilian casualties in the war in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Insurgent and terrorist deaths in Afghanistan are hard to estimate.

Afghan Taliban losses are most likely of a similar scale to Afghan National Army and Police losses; that is around 62,000 from 2001 to the end of 2018.

[ 278 ] In addition, al-Qaeda's main branch and ISIL's Afghanistan branch are each thought to have lost several thousand killed there since 2001.

[ 279 ] [ 280 ] Total casualties in Afghanistan range from 10,960 and 249,000: [ 281 ] 16,725–19,013 civilians killed according to Cost of War project from 2001 to 2013 [ 282 ] According to Marc W. Herold's extensive database, [ 283 ] between 3,100 and 3,600 civilians were directly killed by U.S.

Operation Enduring Freedom bombing and Special Forces attacks between 7 October 2001 and 3 June 2003. This estimate counts only "impact deaths"—deaths that occurred in the immediate aftermath of an explosion or shooting—and does not count deaths that occurred later as a result of injuries sustained, or deaths that occurred as an indirect consequence of the U.S. airstrikes and invasion.

In an opinion article published in August 2002 in the magazine The Weekly Standard , Joshua Muravchik of the American Enterprise Institute , [ 284 ] questioned Professor Herold's study entirely by one single incident that involved 25–93 deaths. He did not provide any estimate his own.

[ 285 ] In a pair of January 2002 studies, Carl Conetta of the Project on Defense Alternatives estimates that "at least" 4,200–4,500 civilians were killed by mid-January 2002 as a result of the war and Coalition airstrikes, both directly as casualties of the aerial bombing campaign, and indirectly in the resulting humanitarian crisis.

His first study, "Operation Enduring Freedom: Why a Higher Rate of Civilian Bombing Casualties?", [ 286 ] released 18 January 2002, estimates that, at the low end, "at least" 1,000–1,300 civilians were directly killed in the aerial bombing campaign in just the three months between 7 October 2001 to 1 January 2002. The author found it impossible to provide an upper-end estimate to direct civilian casualties from the Operation Enduring Freedom bombing campaign that he noted as having an increased use of cluster bombs .

[ 287 ] In this lower-end estimate, only Western press sources were used for hard numbers, while heavy "reduction factors" were applied to Afghan government reports so that their estimates were reduced by as much as 75%.

[ 288 ] In his companion study, "Strange Victory: A critical appraisal of Operation Enduring Freedom and the Afghanistan war", [ 289 ] released 30 January 2002, Conetta estimates that "at least" 3,200 more Afghans died by mid-January 2002, of "starvation, exposure, associated illnesses, or injury sustained while in flight from war zones", as a result of the war and Coalition airstrikes.

In similar numbers, a Los Angeles Times review of U.S., British, and Pakistani newspapers and international wire services found that between 1,067 and 1,201 direct civilian deaths were reported by those news organizations during the five months from 7 October 2001 to 28 February 2002. This review excluded all civilian deaths in Afghanistan that did not get reported by U.S., British, or Pakistani news, excluded 497 deaths that did get reported in U.S., British, and Pakistani news but that were not specifically identified as civilian or military, and excluded 754 civilian deaths that were reported by the Taliban but not independently confirmed.

[ 290 ] According to Jonathan Steele of The Guardian between 20,000 and 49,600 people may have died of the consequences of the invasion by the spring of 2002.

[ 291 ] 2,046 U.S. military dead (339 non-hostile deaths), and 18,201 wounded in action.

[ 292 ] A report titled Body Count put together by Physicians for Social Responsibility , Physicians for Global Survival , and International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War (IPPNW) concluded that between 185,000 and 249,000 people had been killed as a result of the fighting in Afghanistan.

[ 281 ] Deaths in Iraq and Afghanistan This table shows a comparison of total casualties between the two main theaters of the war on terror—Iraq (since 2003 ) and Afghanistan (since 2001 )—up until August 2021, as conducted by Brown University .

[ 19 ] Iraq Afghanistan U.S. military deaths 4,598 2,325 U.S. contractor deaths 3,650 3,917 National military and police deaths 45,519–48,719 69,095 Allied troop deaths 323 1,144 Civilian deaths 185,831–208,964 46,319 Opposition fighters deaths 34,806–39,881 52,893 Journalist and media worker deaths 282 74 Humanitarian and NGO worker deaths 63 446 Total deaths (Rounded to nearest 1,000) 275,000–306,000 176,000 Pakistan Main articles: Drone strikes in Pakistan and Terrorism in Pakistan 1,467 and 2,334 people were killed in U.S. drone attacks as of 6 May 2011. Tens of thousands have been killed by terrorist attacks and millions have been displaced.

The War in Northwest Pakistan resulted in the deaths of 28,900+ militants from 2004 to 2018, with an unknown number captured, per the Pakistani government.

[ 293 ] [ 294 ] The majority of these were killed in engagements with the Pakistan Armed Forces . However, thousands were also killed in American drone strikes .

Somalia There have been 7,000+ casualties in Somalia.

The December 2006 to January 2009 Ethiopian-led intervention in Somalia resulted in the deaths of 6,000 to 8,000 Islamist insurgents, according to the Ethiopian government.

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] The Kenyan Defence Forces claimed another 700+ insurgents killed in their own intervention of October 2011 to May 2012.

[ 297 ] American drone strikes, air strikes, and special forces ground raids in Somalia killed between 1,220 and 1,366 militants up to July 2019, according to the New American Foundation.

[ 298 ] In December 2007, The Elman Peace and Human Rights Organization said it had verified 6,500 civilian deaths, 8,516 people wounded, and 1.5 million displaced from homes in Mogadishu alone during the year 2007.

[ 299 ] Yemen American forces (mostly via drone strikes) killed between 846 and 1,609 terrorists in Yemen (mostly AQAP members) up to June 2019, according to a variety of media organizations including the Bureau of Investigative Journalism and the New America Foundation.

[ 300 ] An Emirati spokesman for the Saudi-led coalition intervening in Yemen claimed that they had killed 1,000 al-Qaeda linked militants and captured 1,500 up to August 2018.

[ 301 ] Philippines and North Caucasus Over 1,600 Islamic State fighters ( Abu Sayyaf having sworn allegiance to ISIL in 2014) were killed by government forces in the Philippines from 2014 to 2017 alone.

[ 302 ] From April 2009 to March 2019, Russian military and police (primarily in the North Caucasus ) killed 2,329 and captured 2,744 insurgents of the Caucasus Emirate and related groups.

[ 303 ] United States 1 June 2009, Pvt. William Andrew Long was shot and killed by Abdulhakim Muhammad , while outside a recruiting facility in Little Rock, Arkansas.

[ 304 ] [ 305 ] On 5 November 2009, Nidal Hasan shot and killed 13 people and wounded more than 30 others at Fort Hood, Texas .

[ 306 ] ( this includes fighting throughout the world ): [ 307 ] [ 308 ] [ 309 ] [ 310 ] [ 311 ] Military and civilian Casualties U.S. military killed 7,008 [ 292 ] U.S. military wounded 50,422 [ 292 ] U.S. DoD civilians killed 16 [ 292 ] U.S. civilians killed (includes 9/11 and after) 3,000 + U.S. civilians wounded/injured 6,000 + Total Americans killed (military and civilian) 10,008 + Total Americans wounded/injured 56,422 + During Operation Inherent Resolve , 95 troops were killed and 227 wounded in action as of 6 May 2020 [ 312 ] The United States Department of Veterans Affairs has diagnosed more than 200,000 American veterans with PTSD since 2001.

[ 313 ] Total civilian estimates Children wounded by American airstrikes in Afghanistan's Surkh-Rōd District in 2001 Between 363,939 and 387,072 civilians were killed in post–9/11 wars in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Syria, Yemen, and other war zones, according to a 2021 report by the Costs of War Project at Brown University's Watson Institute . Many more may have died due to related effects, including water loss and disease.

[ 19 ] Costs The war on terror, spanning decades, is a multitrillion-dollar war that cost much more than originally estimated.

According to the Costs of War Project at Brown University's Watson Institute, the war on terror will have cost $8 trillion for operations between 2001 and 2022 plus $2.2 trillion in future costs of veterans' care over the next 30 years.

[ 314 ] Out of this number, $2.313 trillion is for Afghanistan, $2.058 trillion for Iraq and Syria, and $355 billion was spent on other warzones. The remainder was for DHS ($1.1 trillion).

According to the Soufan Group in July 2015, the U.S. government was spending $9.4 million per day in operations against ISIL in Syria and Iraq.

[ 315 ] A March 2011 Congressional report [ 316 ] estimated war spending through the fiscal year 2011 at $1.2 trillion, and future spending through 2021 (assuming a reduction to 45,000 troops) at $1.8 trillion. A June 2011 academic report [ 316 ] covering additional areas of war spending estimated it through 2011 at $2.7 trillion, and long-term spending at $5.4 trillion including interest.

[ note 9 ] In direct spending, the United States Department of Defense reports spending $1.547 trillion from 2001 to February 2020 in war costs in Iraq, Syria, and Afghanistan.

[ 317 ] Adversary groups have taken an interest in agricultural bioterrorism and this is a continuing concern as of 2022 [update] .

[ 318 ] The US government takes steps to prepare for threats from agricultural pathogens.

[ 318 ] The National Plant Disease Diagnostic Network (NPDN) coordinates efforts to combat agrowarfare against the US.

[ 318 ] Expense CRS / CBO (billions US$): [ 319 ] [ 320 ] [ 321 ] Watson (billions constant US$): [ 322 ] FY2001–FY2011 War appropriations to DoD 1208.1 1311.5 War appropriations to DoS / USAID 66.7 74.2 VA Medical 8.4 13.7 VA disability 18.9 Interest paid on DoD war appropriations 185.4 Additions to DoD base spending 362.2–652.4 Additions to Homeland Security base spending 401.2 Social costs to veterans and military families to date 295–400 Subtotal: 1,283.2 2,662.1–3,057.3 FY2012–future FY2012 DoD request 118.4 FY2012 DoS/USAID request 12.1 Projected 2013–2015 war spending 168.6 Projected 2016–2020 war spending 155 Projected obligations for veterans' care to 2051 589–934 Additional interest payments to 2020 1,000 Subtotal: 454.1 2043.1–2388.1 Total: 1737.3 4705.2–5445.4 Criticism Main article: Criticism of the war on terror See also: United States war crimes § War on Terror Participants in a rally, dressed as hooded detainees Criticism of the war on terror addresses the issues, morality, efficiency, economics, and other questions surrounding the war on terror and made against the phrase itself, calling it a misnomer . The notion of a "war" against "terrorism" has proven highly contentious, with critics charging that it has been exploited by participating governments to pursue long-standing policy/military objectives, including structural Islamophobia, [ 323 ] [ 324 ] reduce civil liberties , [ 325 ] and infringe upon human rights. It is argued that the term war is not appropriate in this context (as in the " war on drugs ") since there is no identifiable enemy and that it is unlikely international terrorism can be brought to an end by military means.

[ 36 ] Other critics, such as Francis Fukuyama , state that " terrorism " is not an enemy but a tactic, and calling it a "war on terror" obscures differences between conflicts such as anti-occupation insurgents and international mujahideen . With a military presence in Iraq and Afghanistan and its associated collateral damage, Shirley Williams posits that this increases resentment and terrorist threats against the West.

[ 326 ] There is also perceived U.S. hypocrisy, [ 327 ] [ 328 ] media-induced hysteria, [ 329 ] [ 330 ] and that differences in foreign and security policy have damaged America's reputation internationally .

[ 331 ] The campaign has also been rebuked for being a perpetual war with no end-goal and for normalising permanent violence as the status-quo.

[ 332 ] In addition, Professor Richard Jackson notes how countries like Russia, India, Israel and China adopted the language of the war on terror to describe their own fight against domestic insurgents and dissidents. He argues that "Linking rebels and dissidents at home to the global 'war on terrorism' gives these governments both the freedom to crack down on them without fear of international condemnation, and in some cases, direct military assistance from America".

[ 333 ] Professor of Law Antony Anghie has asserted that "war on terror" is essentially an imperialist project that constitutes a breach of International law and the United Nations Charter.

[ 149 ] There has also been systematic cover-ups of war crimes by military officers participating in campaign operations across the world. A public enquiry in the UK published in July 2023 reported that 3 British SAS units were involved in the summary executions of at least 80 civilians during 2010–2013, accompanied by a decades-long coverup at the highest echelons of British special forces .

[ 334 ] [ 335 ] [ 336 ] US occupations in Afghanistan and Iraq became heavily unpopular among the American public by the late 2000s.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Numerous US military veterans have handed back their service medals—including the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal —in fierce protest rallies denouncing the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, with many condemning the military campaigns as "illegal occupation" of other countries.

[ 337 ] [ 338 ] Criticism of the war on terror has focused on its morality, efficiency, and cost. The notion of a "war on terror" remain contentious, with critics charging that it has been used to reduce civil liberties and infringe upon human rights, [ 24 ] such as controversial actions by the U.S. including surveillance, torture, and extraordinary rendition , and drone strikes that resulted in the deaths of alleged terrorists but also civilians.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Many of the U.S.' actions were supported by other countries, including the 54 countries that were involved with CIA black sites , [ 339 ] or those that assisted with drone strikes.

[ 340 ] Forced displacement According to a 2021 study by the Costs of War Project , the several post-9/11 wars participated in by the United States in its war against terror have caused the displacement, conservatively calculated, of 38 million people in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria, Yemen, Somalia, Philippines and Pakistan; 11.3 million remain displaced. This makes it the war that has caused the largest number of forced displacements since 1900, with the exception of World War II .

[ 18 ] Another report by the Costs of War Project in 2023 estimates that the wars in these countries have caused a total number of 4.5–4.6 million deaths, including 3.6 million indirect deaths and 906,000–937,000 direct killings. Rather than basing this estimate on detailed data of the concerned countries, the Cost of War report simply multiplied the tallied violent death toll of 906,000–937,000 by four, "by applying the Geneva Declaration Secretariat's average ratio of four indirect for every one direct death." [ 341 ] [ 342 ] Of the approximately 925,000 violent deaths estimated by the Cost of War project, 542,000 were combatants and 387,000 were civilians.

[ 343 ] The war costs have risen over $8 trillion for the US Treasury .

[ d ] Critics accuse participating governments of using the "war on terror" to repress minorities or sideline domestic opponents, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] of fomenting Islamophobia globally, [ 32 ] and have criticized negative impacts to health and the environment resulting from it.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Critics assert that the term "war" is not appropriate in this context (much like the term " war on drugs ") since terror is not an identifiable enemy and it is unlikely that international terrorism can be brought to an end by military means.

[ 36 ] See also Islam portal United States portal Modern history portal Politics portal Attacks on U.S. consulate in Karachi Authority for Use of Military Force to Combat Terrorist Activities Within the United States Axis of evil Bush Doctrine Cold War Culture of fear History of homeland security in the United States Iran and state-sponsored terrorism Islamic terrorism in Europe List of military operations in the war in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Nuclear terrorism Pakistan–United States relations Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States Rally 'round the flag effect Specially Designated Global Terrorist Targeted killing Timeline of United States military operations United States and state terrorism War on terror and the media Notes ^ ISIS is sometimes in conflict with and/or fighting against Al-Qaeda and the Taliban, see: Al-Qaeda–Islamic State conflict and ISIS-Taliban conflict .

^ First Islamic Emirate until 2001 and the Taliban insurgency until 2021.

^ The Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations were widely disputed and now largely believed to have been false.

^ The war on terror was also officially declared over in May 2010 and again in May 2013. But small-scale operations ongoing after 2021.

^ Origins date back to the 1980s.

^ The scope is larger than the traditional Middle East , includes AfPak region, Western Asia and northern Africa .

^ The Costs of War Project report defined post-9/11 war zones as conflicts that included significant United States counter-terrorism operations since 9/11, which in addition to the wars in Iraq , Afghanistan and Pakistan , also includes the civil wars in Syria , Yemen , Libya and Somalia . The report derived their estimate of indirect deaths using a calculation from the Geneva Declaration of Secretariat which estimates that for every person directly killed by war, four more die from the indirect consequences of war. The report's author Stephanie Savell stated that in an ideal scenario, the preferable way of quantifying the total death toll would have been by studying excess mortality, or by using on-the-ground researchers in the affected countries.

[ 4 ] ^ The definition of "indirect" is paraphrased by the Washington Post as "caused by the deterioration of economic, environmental, psychological and health conditions". Savell says it includes "mounting poverty, food insecurity, environmental contamination, the ongoing trauma of violence, and the destruction of health and public infrastructure, along with private property and means of livelihood".

[ 4 ] ^ Among costs not covered by these figures are off- DoD spending beyond 2012, economic opportunity costs, state and local expenses not reimbursed by the federal government, nor reimbursements made to foreign coalition allies for their expenses.

^ "Human Cost of Post-9/11 Wars: Direct War Deaths in Major War Zones, Afghanistan & Pakistan (Oct. 2001 – Aug. 2021); Iraq (March 2003 – Aug. 2021); Syria (Sept. 2014 – May 2021); Yemen (Oct. 2002–Aug. 2021) and Other Post-9/11 War Zones" .

The Costs of War . Brown University . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

Berger, Miriam (15 May 2023).

"Post-9/11 wars have contributed to some 4.5 million deaths, report suggests" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023.

Savell, Stephanie (15 May 2023).

"How Death Outlives War: The Reverberating Impact of the Post-9/11 Wars on Human Health" (PDF) .

Costs of War . Watson Institute of International & Public Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2023.

^ "Human Cost of Post-9/11 Wars: Direct War Deaths in Major War Zones, Afghanistan & Pakistan (Oct. 2001 – Aug. 2021); Iraq (March 2003 – Aug. 2021); Syria (Sept. 2014 – May 2021); Yemen (Oct. 2002–Aug. 2021) and Other Post-9/11 War Zones" .

The Costs of War . Brown University . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

Berger, Miriam (15 May 2023).

"Post-9/11 wars have contributed to some 4.5 million deaths, report suggests" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023.

Savell, Stephanie (15 May 2023).

"How Death Outlives War: The Reverberating Impact of the Post-9/11 Wars on Human Health" (PDF) .

Costs of War . Watson Institute of International & Public Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2023.

^ "Human Cost of Post-9/11 Wars: Direct War Deaths in Major War Zones, Afghanistan & Pakistan (Oct. 2001 – Aug. 2021); Iraq (March 2003 – Aug. 2021); Syria (Sept. 2014 – May 2021); Yemen (Oct. 2002–Aug. 2021) and Other Post-9/11 War Zones" .

The Costs of War . Brown University . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

Berger, Miriam (15 May 2023).

"Post-9/11 wars have contributed to some 4.5 million deaths, report suggests" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023.

Savell, Stephanie (15 May 2023).

"How Death Outlives War: The Reverberating Impact of the Post-9/11 Wars on Human Health" (PDF) .

Costs of War . Watson Institute of International & Public Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2023.

^ Sources on the casualties: [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 4 ] References ^ "Video: Pres. Bush Declares War on Terror" .

ABC News archives . 15 September 2001.

^ Bjørn, Ihler.

"20 years after 9/11, the War on Terror failed. Now the world needs a new version" .

Euronews . Retrieved 10 October 2021 .

"Overkill: Reforming the Legal Basis for the U.S. War on Terror" .

International Crisis Group . 17 September 2021.

^ Daniel, DePetris.

"The US war on terror continues. We just don't talk about it" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 9 May 2023 .

John, Haltiwanger (10 December 2023).

"Graphic Truth: The US's 'Global War on Terror' never ended" .

Costs of War . GZERO.

^ a b c d e Berger, Miriam (15 May 2023).

"Post-9/11 wars have contributed to some 4.5 million deaths, report suggests" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023.

^ Feickert, Andrew.

"U.S. Military Operations in the Global War on Terrorism: Afghanistan, Africa, the Philippines, and Colombia" .

Congressional Research Service .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2022 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ Buzan, Barry (November 2006).

"Will the 'Global War on Terrorism' Be the New Cold War?" .

International Affairs .

82 (6): 1101– 18.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2346.2006.00590.x .

ISSN 0020-5850 .

JSTOR 4122087 .

^ Tunander, Ola (May 2004).

"War on Terror and Transformation of World Order" .

Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO) .

^ a b Kenneth R. Bazinet (17 September 2001).

"A Fight vs. Evil, Bush and Cabinet Tell U.S." Daily News . New York. Archived from the original on 5 May 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ a b "President: Today We Mourned, Tomorrow We Work" .

georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ a b "President Declares 'Freedom at War with Fear' " .

georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ a b c d "Transcript of President Bush's address" . CNN. 20 September 2001.

^ "Text: President Bush Addresses the Nation" .

The Washington Post . 20 September 2001.

^ "Stabilising AfPak theatre" . Financialexpress.com. 6 April 2009 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ Schmitt, Eric; Shanker, Thom (26 July 2005).

"U.S. Officials Retool Slogan for Terror War" .

The New York Times .

^ Marc Ambinder (20 May 2010).

"The New Term for the War on Terror" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 24 June 2013 .

^ DePetris, Daniel (9 May 2023).

"The US war on terror continues. We just don't talk about it" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on 11 May 2023.

^ Bridgeman, Tess; Rosen, Brianna (24 March 2022).

"Introduction to Symposium: Still at War – Where and Why the United States is Fighting the 'War on Terror' " .

Just Security . Retrieved 6 February 2023 .

^ a b c d "Millions displaced by U.S. post 9/11 wars" (PDF) .

The Costs of War . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

^ a b c d e f "Human Cost of Post-9/11 Wars: Direct War Deaths in Major War Zones, Afghanistan & Pakistan (Oct. 2001 – Aug. 2021); Iraq (March 2003 – Aug. 2021); Syria (Sept. 2014 – May 2021); Yemen (Oct. 2002 – Aug. 2021) and Other Post-9/11 War Zones" .

The Costs of War . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

^ a b c "Latest Figures" .

The Costs of War . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ a b "Summary" .

Costs of War . Archived from the original on 17 June 2023.

^ a b Ackerman, Spencer (27 March 2012).

"Afghanistan War Is Now More Unpopular Than Iraq War" .

Wired . Archived from the original on 19 October 2015.

^ a b Doherty, Carroll; Kiley, Jocelyn (14 March 2023).

"A Look Back at How Fear and False Beliefs Bolstered U.S. Public Support for War in Iraq" .

Pew Research Center . Archived from the original on 31 March 2023.

^ a b "FBI Tried to Cover Patriot Act Abuses With Flawed, Retroactive Subpoenas, Audit Finds" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ Liptak, Adam (7 September 2011).

"Civil Liberties Today" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .

^ Eddington, Patrick G. (21 October 2021).

"The PATRIOT Act Has Threatened Freedom for 20 Years" .

www.cato.org . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .

^ a b Ball, James (22 May 2013).

"US rendition: every suspected flight mapped" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b c "CIA photographed detainees naked before sending them to be tortured" .

The Guardian . 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b "Drone Warfare" .

The Bureau of Investigative Journalism (en-GB) . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b "9/11 Legacies │ Assimilation or Islamophobia?: Uyghurs and China's Counter–Terrorist Discourse after 2001" .

911legacies.com . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b "9/11 Legacies │ US Pressure for Democratization and Political Opportunity Structures in Egypt since 9/11" .

911legacies.com . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b Abbas, Tahir (24 September 2021).

"Reflection: the "war on terror", Islamophobia and radicalisation twenty years on" .

Critical Studies on Terrorism .

14 (4): 402– 04.

doi : 10.1080/17539153.2021.1980182 .

hdl : 1887/3618299 .

S2CID 244221750 .

^ a b "Birth Defects and the Toxic Legacy of War in Iraq" .

MERIP . 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b "Airborne Hazards and Burn Pit Exposures" .

US Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ a b Lutfi, Ameem; Schwartz, Kevin L. (8 September 2021).

"20 years later, the legacies of 9/11 and the war on terror have just begun" .

The Hill .

^ a b c Richissin, Todd (2 September 2004).

" 'War on terror' difficult to define" .

The Baltimore Sun . Archived from the original on 14 January 2009 . Retrieved 28 January 2009 .

^ Charles Feldman & Stan Wilson (3 April 2003).

"Ex-CIA director: U.S. faces 'World War IV' " . CNN. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021.

Coman, Julian (13 April 2003).

" 'We want them to be nervous' (That means you Ali, Bashar and Kim)" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 9 November 2009 .

Elio A. Cohen (20 November 2001).

"World War IV" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 6 April 2004 . Retrieved 9 November 2009 .

^ "Bush likens 'war on terror' to WW III" . ABC News (Australia). 6 May 2006. Archived from the original on 4 February 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

Thomas L. Friedman (13 September 2009).

"Foreign Affairs; World War III" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 November 2009 .

"World War III Strikes Spain" .

Daily News . New York. 12 March 2004. Archived from the original on 26 October 2012 . Retrieved 10 November 2009 .

^ Thompson, Mark (26 December 2008).

"The $1 Trillion Bill for Bush's War on Terror" .

Time . Archived from the original on 26 December 2008 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

Priest, Dana (23 January 2009).

"Bush's 'War' On Terror Comes to a Sudden End" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

"Bush's War On Terror Shifting Targets" . CBS News. 28 January 2008.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "The Long War Against Terrorism" . 9 September 2005. Archived from the original on 9 September 2005 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

Brownstein, Ronald (6 March 2015).

"The Long War" .

National Journal . Retrieved 10 March 2015 .

^ "Abizaid Credited With Popularizing the Term 'Long War,'" 3 February 2006: The Washington Post traces history of the phrase "Long War" [1] ^ Elizabeth D. Samet, "Literature of the Forever War", The New York Times , 14 August 2016, p. BR29.

^ "Joint Forces Intelligence Command" . 4 February 2005. Archived from the original on 4 February 2005 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

"Eric L. Bradley, Deputy Commander" . 8tharmy.korea.army.mil.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2012 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

"Compensation Package for Bomb Blast Victims" . Bisp.gov.pk. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 29 December 2011 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ Sulmasy, Glenn (20 February 2007).

"A new look for the war on al Qaeda" .

The San Francisco Chronicle .

^ Qureshi, Asim (2020). "Experiencing the war 'of' terror: A call to the critical terrorism studies community".

Critical Studies on Terrorism .

13 (3). tandfonline.com: 485– 99.

doi : 10.1080/17539153.2020.1746564 .

S2CID 216220912 .

^ Korman, Gordon (1980).

Beware the Fish!

. Scholastic. p. 136.

ISBN 0590326465 .

^ Silver, Alexandra (18 March 2010).

"How America Became a Surveillance State" .

Time . Archived from the original on 22 March 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ Matt Lauer ; Katie Couric ; Tom Brokaw (11 September 2001).

"Breaking News on September 11th" .

NBC Learn K-12 . Retrieved 11 September 2012 .

^ a b J. Cull, Nicholas; Culbert, David; Welch, David (2003). "Terrorism, War on (2001– )".

Propaganda and Mass Persuasion: A Historical Encyclopedia, 1500 to the Present . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc. p. 396.

ISBN 1576078205 .

^ Borhan Uddin Khan and Muhammad Mahbubur Rahman, "Combating Terrorism under Human Rights and Humanitarian Law Regime", Mediterranean Journal of Human Rights , Vol. 12 (double issue), 2008, pp. 379–97.

^ "Civil Rights and the 'War on Terror' " . Amnesty International USA . Retrieved 2 May 2010 .

^ Jackson, Writing the War on Terrorism (2005), p. 8.

^ Jackson, Writing the War on Terrorism (2005), p. 62.

^ Jackson, Writing the War on Terrorism (2005), pp. 62–75.

^ Jackson, Writing the War on Terrorism (2005), pp. 77–80.

^ J. Greenberg, Karen (2005). "October 21, 2001 – Interview with Tayseer Alouni".

Al Qaeda Now . New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.

192– 206.

ISBN 978-0-521-85911-0 .

^ Reynolds, Paul (17 April 2007).

"Declining use of 'war on terror' " . BBC.

^ Norton-Taylor, Richard (2 September 2011).

"MI5 former chief decries 'war on terror' " .

The Guardian . London.

^ "Full Transcript: President Barack Obama's Inaugural Address" . ABC News. 20 January 2009 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ a b Scott Wilson & Al Kamen (25 March 2009).

" 'Global War On Terror' Is Given New Name" .

The Washington Post . p. A04 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Jai Singh and Ajay Singh, " The War on Terror – Over Archived 20 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine ?", Small Wars Journal , 28 August 2012.

^ David Kravets, " Former CIA Chief: Obama's War on Terror Same as Bush's, But With More Killing ", Wired , 10 September 2012.

^ a b c Barack Obama declares the 'War on Terror' is over: President Barack Obama has rejected George W. Bush's doctrine that placed the "war on terror" at the center of American foreign policy The Telegraph , 27 May 2010.

^ a b c Remarks by the President at the National Defense University The White House, 23 May 2013.

^ "White House: 'War on terrorism' is over" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ "Obama: 'Global War on Terror' Is Over" .

U.S. News & World Report . 23 May 2013.

^ a b Milne, Seumas (3 June 2015).

"Now the truth emerges: how the US fuelled the rise of Isis in Syria and Iraq" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 6 February 2023 .

^ Julian E. Barnes (30 November 2012).

"Pentagon Lawyer Looks Post-Terror" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ "Pentagon lawyer: War on terror not endless" .

Las Vegas Sun . Associated Press. 1 December 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

[ dead link ] ^ Paul D. Shinkman (23 May 2013).

"Obama: 'Global War on Terror' Is Over" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved 24 June 2013 .

^ "Mike Pence says Hezbollah started the war on terror with a 1983 attack in Beirut" .

Newsweek . 24 October 2017.

^ " 'Countdown bin Laden': Obama's pursuit of the 9/11 mastermind" . CBS. 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ "The Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 18 January 2022 .

^ The group was also responsible for the 1993 World Trade Center bombing .

Megan K. Stack (6 December 2001).

"Fighters Hunt Former Ally" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2 May 2010 .

^ Mikelionis, Lukas (27 April 2018).

"US already fighting Al Qaeda before 9/11, military judge rules in landmark decision" . Fox News . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

N. Shah (2008).

Self-defense in Islamic and International Law: Assessing Al-Qaeda and the Invasion of Iraq . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0230611658 .

Paul Hopper (2006).

Living with Globalization . Berg. p. 72.

ISBN 978-1847886132 .

bin Laden, Usama.

"Declaration of Jihad against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holiest Sites" . Archived from the original on 2 June 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2018 – via Combating Terrorism Center, United States Military Academy.

^ "Al Qaeda's Fatwa" .

PBS Newshour . 23 February 1998. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

^ J.T. Caruso (8 December 2001).

"Al-Qaeda International" . Federal Bureau of Investigation . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

^ Nic Robertson (19 August 2002).

"Previously unseen tape shows bin Laden's declaration of war" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

^ Lisa Myers (17 March 2004).

"Osama bin Laden: missed opportunities" . NBC News. Archived from the original on 24 April 2013 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

^ "Report of the Accountability Review Boards" . U.S. Department of State. 7 August 1998. Archived from the original on 30 May 2000.

^ "U.S. strikes terrorist targets in Afghanistan, Sudan" . CNN. 20 August 1998. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012.

^ "U.S. retaliates for Africa bombings" . CNN. 20 August 1998. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012.

^ a b Malcolm Clark (20 March 2000).

"Bad air and rank hypocrisy" .

New Statesman . Archived from the original on 27 December 2007 . Retrieved 2 May 2010 .

^ Stevel Lee Myers & Tim Weiner (27 August 1998).

"Possible Benign Use Is Seen for Chemical at Factory in Sudan" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 May 2010 .

^ "What proof of bin Laden's involvement" . CNN. 13 September 2001. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012.

^ Holmes, Stephen (2006). "Al Qaeda, 11 September 2001". In Diego Gambetta (ed.).

Making sense of suicide missions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199297979 .

^ Keppel, Gilles; Milelli, Jean-Pierre; Ghazaleh, Pascale (2008).

Al Qaeda in its own words . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674028043 .

^ " Chapter of the 9/11 Commission Report detailing the history of the Hamburg Cell ".

9/11 Commission .

^ Matthew J. Morgan (2009).

The Impact of 9/11 on Politics and War: The Day that Changed Everything?

. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 222.

ISBN 978-0230607637 .

^ "DCI Testimony Before the Joint Inquiry into Terrorist Attacks Against the United States" (PDF) . CIA. 18 June 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2010 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 .

^ Daley, Suzanne (13 September 2001).

"After the Attacks: The Alliance; For First Time, NATO Invokes Joint Defense Pact With U.S" .

The New York Times .

^ "President Bush Releases National Strategy for Combating Terrorism" . The White House. 14 February 2003 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Savell, Stephanie (14 December 2021).

"The 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force: A Comprehensive Look at Where and How it Has Been Used" .

Costs of War . Archived from the original on 3 June 2023.

^ Savell, Stephanie (14 December 2021).

"The 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force: A Comprehensive Look at Where and How it Has Been Used" (PDF) .

Costs of War . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 March 2023.

^ Snow, Jen (12 June 2023).

"GOP Senators Introduce 'End Endless Wars Act' " .

Armed Forces Press . Archived from the original on 12 June 2023.

^ "Taliban rejects president Bush's demands" . PBS. 21 September 2001. Archived from the original on 1 June 2008.

^ "Bush rejects Taliban offer to hand Bin Laden over" . The Guardian. 14 October 2001 . Retrieved 9 February 2024 .

^ Shane, Scott (28 November 2009).

"Senate Report Explores 2001 Escape by bin Laden From Afghan Mountains" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ Pilkington, Ed (29 November 2009).

"Rumsfeld let Bin Laden escape in 2001, says Senate report" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ Shahzad, Syed Saleem (12 March 2002).

"Taliban find unlikely allies" .

Asia Times . Archived from the original on 28 April 2002 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Al Qaeda, Taliban may be regrouping" . CNN. 26 March 2002.

Archived from the original on 16 September 2011 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Operation Moshtarak: At a glance" . Al Jazeera. 13 February 2010 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Karzai: Afghan forces now in driver's seat, and we're restarting peace talks with Taliban" . CBS News. 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Ackerman, Spencer (30 September 2014).

"New Afghanistan pact means America's longest war will last until at least 2024" .

The Guardian . United Kingdom . Retrieved 7 February 2015 .

^ "U.S.–Taliban sign landmark agreement in bid to end America's longest war" . NBC News. 29 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 .

^ Dadouch, Sarah; George, Susannah; Lamothe, Dan (29 February 2020).

"U.S. signs peace deal with Taliban agreeing to full withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

^ Schuknecht, Cat (1 March 2020).

"Afghan President Rejects Timeline For Prisoner Swap Proposed In US–Taliban Peace Deal" . NPR . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

^ Miller, Zeke; Madhani, Aamer (8 July 2021).

" 'Overdue': Biden sets Aug. 31 for US exit from Afghanistan" .

AP News . Retrieved 9 July 2021 .

^ Ahmad Seir, Rahim Faiez, Tameem Akhgar and Jon Gambrell contributed reporting, "Taliban sweep into Afghan capital after government collapses" , The Washington Post , 16 August 2021 ^ Zucchino, David (17 August 2021).

"Kabul's Sudden Fall to Taliban Ends U.S. Era in Afghanistan" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 February 2023 .

^ "Afghanistan conflict: Kabul falls to Taliban as president flees" .

BBC News . 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 15 February 2023 .

^ Neuman, Scott (15 August 2021).

"Afghanistan Falls To The Taliban Again As The U.S.-Backed Government Collapses" .

NPR . Retrieved 15 February 2023 .

^ Seligman, Lara; Ward, Alexander; Desiderio, Andrew (26 August 2021).

"U.S. officials provided Taliban with names of Americans, Afghan allies to evacuate" .

Politico . Retrieved 15 February 2023 .

^ Sprunt, Barbara (17 August 2021).

"There's A Bipartisan Backlash To How Biden Handled The Withdrawal From Afghanistan" . NPR . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Karnitschnig, Matthew (17 August 2021).

"Disbelief and betrayal: Europe reacts to Biden's Afghanistan 'miscalculation' " .

Politico . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ "Afghanistan's Ghani blames 'abrupt' US withdrawal for worsening security" . France 24. 2 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 September 2021 .

^ Hui, Sylvia (8 July 2021).

"Johnson confirms most British troops have left Afghanistan" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Moulson, Geir; Gannon, Kathy (30 June 2021).

"Most European troops exit Afghanistan quietly after 20 years" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Watson, Julie; Condon, Bernard (4 September 2021).

"Rescue groups: US tally misses hundreds left in Afghanistan" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 9 September 2021 .

^ "Afghan war cost rise tests US taxpayers' patience" . Thenewstribe.com. 29 January 2011. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ "UK troops take over Afghan duties" . BBC. 1 June 2006.

^ "Canada set for longer Afghan stay" . BBC. 16 June 2006.

^ "Australia outlines Afghan force" . BBC. 8 May 2006.

^ "More Dutch troops for Afghanistan" . BBC. 3 February 2006.

^ "Guardians of the Pacific" .

Special Operations Command, Pacific . 3 January 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2011 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Improving Lives: Military Humanitarian and Assistance Programs" (PDF) .

American Institute in Taiwan . November 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 December 2011 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "US ends Philippines anti-terror force" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Associated Press. 26 June 2014 . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .

Gomez, Jim (26 June 2014).

"US disbanding Philippines elite anti-terror force" .

The Philippine Star . Associated Press . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .

^ Gordon Arthur; James Hardy (6 October 2014).

"US, Philippines start 'PHIBLEX' drills as special forces mission draws down" .

IHS Janes 360 . Archived from the original on 17 December 2014 . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .

^ Trevithick, Joseph (5 November 2014).

"Yes, American Commandos Are Still in the Philippines" .

War is Boring . Medium.com . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ "U.S. Officially Ends Special Operations Task Force in the Philippines, Some Advisors May Remain" . US Naval Institute. 27 February 2015.

^ "Operation Inherent Resolve Report/Operation Pacific Eagle-Philippines Report to the United States Congress, October 1, 2017 – December 31, 2017" (PDF) . State OIG. 2 February 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 13 June 2019 .

^ "U.S. Military Escalates War Efforts in the Philippines" .

The Wall Street Journal . 19 January 2018 . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

Lead Inspector General for Operation Inherent Resolve and Operation Pacific Eagle-Philippines Quarterly Report to the United States Congress Oct. 1, 2017 – Dec. 31, 2017 (Report). Department of Defense Office of Inspector General. 2 February 2018. Archived from the original on 28 April 2018 . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

Snow, Shawn (30 December 2017).

"New in 2018: Conflict hot spots to watch" .

Military Times . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

McCormick-Cavanagh, Conor (30 December 2017).

"What to Expect in the New American 'War on Terror' in the Philippines" .

Small Wars Journal . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

^ Hopkins, Nick (14 January 2013).

"Mali conflict: militants killed as French air strikes pound rebel camps" .

The Guardian . London.

^ "Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa" . United States Africa Command. Archived from the original on 26 April 2009 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "DOD Needs to Determine the Future of Its Horn of Africa Task Force" (PDF) .

Government Accountability Office . April 2010 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Bin Laden releases Web message on Iraq, Somalia" .

USA Today . 1 July 2006 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ Burke, Jason (13 June 2004).

"Secret world of US jails" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 9 April 2010 .

^ Stephanie Hanson (2 March 2009).

"Backgrounder: Al-Shabaab" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 4 May 2010 .

^ "U.S. Launches Attack on Suspected Al Qaeda Members in Somalia" . Fox News. 9 January 2007. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ Youssef, Maamoun (16 September 2009).

"Somali al-Qaida group confirms death of leader" . Associated Press . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ "Mother demands to see Nabhan's body" . Al Jazerra. 16 September 2009 . Retrieved 17 September 2009 .

^ Frum, David (29 January 2022).

"The Enduring Lessons of the 'Axis of Evil' Speech" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 5 March 2022.

^ "State of the Union Address (January 29, 2002)" . Miller Center. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011.

^ Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 ( PDF ) ^ "Joint Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq" (Press release). The Office of the President of the United States.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2002.

^ "US, Britain and Spain Abandon Resolution" . Associated Press. 17 March 2003 . Retrieved 6 August 2006 .

^ a b "President Says Saddam Hussein Must Leave Iraq Within 48 Hours" (Press release).

White House Office of the Press Secretary . 17 March 2003 . Retrieved 28 July 2010 .

^ "Progress Report on the Global War on Terrorism" (PDF) .

White House . September 2003. p. 2. Archived from the original on 6 February 2009.

Iraq is now the central front for the war on terror. While the United States and its partners have defeated Saddam Hussein's regime of terror, enemies of freedom—both members of the old regime and foreign terrorists who have come to Iraq—are making a desperate stance to reclaim this liberated nation for tyranny. They will be defeated. In the past, terrorists have cited Beirut and Somalia as examples of America fleeing from challenge when harmed. In this, the President has affirmed, they are mistaken. We are resolved to win the global war on terrorism.

^ a b Anghie, Antony (2005).

"The War on Terror and Iraq in Historical Perspective" .

Osgoode Hall Law Journal .

43 (1/2): 45– 66.

doi : 10.60082/2817-5069.1344 .

S2CID 141571655 – via Osgoode.

^ "Iraq accuses U.S., Turkey of 'illegally' meeting with Kurds" . CNN. 9 March 2000. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008.

^ Parker, Nick; McCarthy, Rory (23 March 2003).

"Fierce battle around port" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

Mike Ryan (2003).

Baghdad or Bust . Pen and Sword. pp.

136– 37.

ISBN 978-1844150205 .

Leigh Neville (2012).

Special Operations Forces in Iraq . Osprey Publishing. pp.

10– 11.

ISBN 978-1849088268 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Mary Beth Norton; Carol Sheriff; David M. Katzman; David W. Blight; Howard Chudacoff (2008).

A People and a Nation: A History of the United States, Brief Edition . Cengage Learning. p. 895.

ISBN 978-0547175584 .

John Ehrenberg (2010).

The Iraq Papers . Oxford University Press. pp.

219– 25.

ISBN 978-0195398588 .

^ "President Bush Announces Major Combat Operations in Iraq Have Ended" (Press release). The White House. 1 May 2003.

^ Michael Ware (27 June 2004).

"Meet The New Jihad" .

Time . Archived from the original on 5 March 2005 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Iraq war: Last US combat brigade crosses into Kuwait" .

The Christian Science Monitor . 19 August 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Invaders, allies, occupiers, guests: A brief history of U.S. military involvement in Iraq" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

^ "US combat forces to leave Iraq by end of year" .

BBC News . 27 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

^ "Musharraf's book says Pakistan faced U.S. 'onslaught' if it didn't back terror war" .

USA Today . 26 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Ali, Rafaqat (5 December 2003).

"Musharraf vows to root out extremism: Banned outfits won't be allowed to resurface" .

Dawn . Pakistan. Archived from the original on 17 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Musharraf braced for jihadi backlash" .

Asia Times . 20 August 2002. Archived from the original on 11 September 2002 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Officials: Captured man says he's al Qaeda brass" . CNN. 1 April 2002. Archived from the original on 16 December 2006 . Retrieved 9 April 2010 .

^ "Operation Enduring Freedom | Afghanistan" . iCasualties. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Bin Laden 'shot in the head and chest' " . Dailynews.co.zw. 3 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ "Aid to Pakistan by the Numbers" .

Center For Global Development . Retrieved 27 August 2021 .

^ "Yemen: new air-strikes target al-Qaeda" . World War 4 Report. 19 December 2009 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ Spencer, Richard (28 December 2009).

"Detroit terror attack: Yemen is the true home of Al-Qaeda" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 December 2010 .

^ Grace Wyler (31 March 2011).

"Al Qaeda Declares Southern Yemeni Province An 'Islamic Emirate' " .

Business Insider .

^ MacLeod, Hugh (28 December 2009).

"Al-Qaida: US support for Yemen crackdown led to attack" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 9 April 2010 .

^ Jennifer Hansler (17 January 2024).

"Biden administration re-designates Houthis as Specially Designated Global Terrorists" .

CNN .

^ "In rare admission, Yemen's Houthis confirm they released Al-Qaeda terrorists" .

Arab news . 20 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Mohammed, Ali; Yan, Sophia (4 May 2024).

"Houthis team up with feared Al-Qaeda branch in new threat to Yemen" .

The Telegraph .

^ Sedghi, Ami; Arnett, George (3 September 2014).

"US military Isis air strikes in Iraq: day-by-day breakdown" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Lamarque, Kevin (9 September 2014).

"Obama tells lawmakers he has authorization for Islamic State fight" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2014 . Retrieved 9 September 2014 .

^ a b Shinkman, Paul D. (10 September 2014).

"Obama Unveils New Islamic State Strategy" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Cooper, Helene; Schmitt, Eric (23 September 2014).

"Airstrikes by U.S. and Allies Hit ISIS Targets in Syria" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 .

^ Tilghman, Andrew (2 October 2014).

"Pentagon: Medals for new Iraq mission to fall under Operation Enduring Freedom" .

Army Times . Retrieved 4 October 2014 .

^ Rhodan, Maya (15 October 2014).

"U.S. Military Action Against ISIS Deemed 'Operation Inherent Resolve' " .

Time . Retrieved 16 October 2014 .

^ "Six killed in Lanao del Sur encounter between soldiers, Maute group remnants" .

Manila Bulletin . Archived from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 January 2019 .

^ "Abu Dar emerges as new Maute group leader–AFP" .

Inquirer . 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 22 January 2019 .

^ a b c "Did Obama Defeat ISIS in Libya?" . NBC news. 28 January 2017.

^ "Obama to deploy 300 US troops to Cameroon to fight Boko Haram" .

The Guardian . 14 October 2015 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ "US troops deployed to Cameroon for Boko Haram fight" . Al Jazeera. 14 October 2015 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ "Operation Active Endeavour" .

NATO . 10 November 2010 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Full text: bin Laden's 'letter to America' " .

The Guardian . London. 24 November 2002 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ "Kashmir Militant Extremists" . Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 14 February 2007 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Al-Qaeda claim of Kashmir link worries India , The New York Times , 13 July 2006 ^ "No Al Qaeda presence in Kashmir: Army" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 18 June 2007 . Retrieved 2 February 2010 .

^ "Al Qaeda could provoke new India-Pakistan war: Gates" .

Dawn . 20 January 2010. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010 . Retrieved 23 January 2010 .

^ "US drones killed two terrorist leaders in Pak" . Archived from the original on 23 September 2009 . Retrieved 9 May 2012 .

, Dawn , 17 September 2009 ^ Chicago Man Pleads Not Guilty in Terror Cases , The New York Times , 25 January 2010 ^ Bruce Riedel (15 December 2009).

"Al Qaeda's American Mole" .

The Brookings Institution . Archived from the original on 24 September 2011 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ Ilyas Kashmiri alive, lays out future terror strategy , Daily Times (Pakistan) , 15 October 2009 Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ilyas Kashmiri had planned to attack COAS , The News International , 18 September 2009 [ dead link ] ^ "Militants recruit in Rawalpindi for anti-India activities" .

The Indian Express . 10 July 2012.

^ "Kashmir drone attacks raise fears of new turn in terror tactics" . Radio France Internationale. 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ " 'State support' behind drone strike, says top Army officer" .

Hindustan Times . 1 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ Schmitt, Eric (3 March 2017).

"United States Ramps Up Airstrikes Against Al Qaeda in Yemen" .

The New York Times .

^ Kayer, J (16 August 2002). "Israel urges U.S. to attack".

The Washington Post .

^ Alon, Gideon (13 August 2002). "Sharon Panel: Iraq is our biggest danger".

Haaretz .

^ Zeidan, Adam (7 July 2024).

"2006 Lebanon War" .

Britannica .

^ Mendelsohn, Barak (21 March 2015).

"Islamic State in Yemen: Why IS is seeking to expand" .

BBC .

^ Moreno, Luis Alberto (3 May 2002).

"Aiding Colombia's War on Terrorism" .

The New York Times .

^ Long, Robert (24 May 2009).

"Colombia's War on Terror" .

Harvard Political Review .

^ "Latin America: Terrorism Issues" (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service . 23 February 2011 . Retrieved 18 May 2011 .

^ "Bush, Uribe Applaud Strength of U.S.–Colombia Partnership" . US Department of State. 22 November 2004. Archived from the original on 24 August 2006 . Retrieved 26 April 2006 .

^ "China's 'War on Terror': September 11 and Uighur Separatism" . Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 10 September 2015 .

^ Simon Denyer (19 September 2014).

"China's war on terror becomes all-out attack on Islam in Xinjiang" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 10 September 2015 .

^ "Saudi crown prince defended China's imprisonment of a million Muslims in internment camps, giving Xi Jinping a reason to continue his 'precursors to genocide' " .

Business Insider . 23 February 2019.

^ "Saudi crown prince defends China's right to fight 'terrorism' " . Al Jazeera. 23 February 2019.

^ Shuster, Simon (19 September 2011).

"How the War on Terrorism Did Russia a Favor" .

Time . Archived from the original on 2 May 2023 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 .

^ Cohen, Ariel.

"Russia, Islam, and the War on Terrorism" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 November 2015 .

^ Borshchevskaya, Anna (5 April 2024).

"Putin Is No Ally In The War On Terror In 2024" .

19FortyFive .

^ "PM speaks on Ansett collapse, Anzus treaty" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 14 September 2001 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

^ "Partnership Action Plan against Terrorism" (PDF) .

NATO . 22 November 2002 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 .

[ dead link ] ^ "New frontline in the war on terror".

^ Rachel Levinson-Waldman (10 October 2013).

"The double danger of the NSA's 'collect it all' policy on surveillance" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 February 2014 .

^ "American Libraries – First Patriot Act Challenge Filed by ACLU" . ALA. 4 August 2003. Archived from the original on 22 January 2012 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ Combs, Cindy C. (2003).

Terrorism in the Twenty First Century (3rd ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education .

ISBN 978-013097519-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ "UN Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "U.S. Senate: Roll Call Vote" .

senate.gov . 27 January 2015 . Retrieved 25 June 2015 .

^ "US Cong votes for designating Haqqani network as terror group" .

The Indian Express . 28 July 2012.

^ Boghani, Priyanka; Robertson, Megan (21 February 2017).

"How 30 "Forever Prisoners" Got Out of Gitmo" .

PBS . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ "Trump signs order to keep Guantanamo military prison open" .

Fox News . Associated Press. 30 January 2018 . Retrieved 2 March 2018 .

^ Vavra, Shannon (5 January 2022).

"Biden Promised to Close Gitmo. Instead, He's Upgrading It" .

Yahoo . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ "Trump to prepare facility at Guantanamo for 30,000 migrants" .

Reuters . 29 January 2025.

^ "Politycy nie pozwolili śledczym tropić lotów CIA" .

Rzeczpospolita (in Polish). 17 April 2009. Archived from the original on 11 July 2015 . Retrieved 17 July 2010 .

^ "Transcend Media Service" .

^ "CIA Secret Detention and Torture" . opensocietyfoundations.org. Archived from the original on 20 February 2013.

^ Max Fisher (5 February 2013).

"A staggering map of the 54 countries that reportedly participated in the CIA's rendition program" .

The Washington Post .

^ Cobain, Ian; Ball, James (22 May 2013).

"New light shed on US government's extraordinary rendition programme" .

The Guardian .

^ Bush administration increased renditions Jane Mayer (14 February 2005).

"Outsourcing torture" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 26 October 2014 .

Greenwald, Glenn.

Senate Report Links Bush to Detainee Homicides; Media Yawns Archived 15 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Salon.com, 15 December 2008.

"Senate Panel's Report Links Detainees' Murders to Bush's Torture Policy" The Public Record , 30 April 2009.

Barnes, Greg and Miller, Julian.

"Senate Report Says Rumsfeld to Blame for Detainee Abuse" Los Angeles Times , 12 September 2008.

^ Obama administration renditions Joshua Keeting (16 June 2015).

"Senate votes to ban torture: Will It Stick This Time?" .

Slate . Retrieved 16 June 2015 .

Craig Whitlock (1 January 2013).

"Renditions continue under Obama, despite due-process concerns" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 26 October 2014 .

Cora Currier; Suevon Lee (26 July 2012).

"The Secret Prison" .

Slate . Retrieved 26 October 2014 .

^ Adam Taylor (20 November 2014).

"Torture, kidnapping and gulags: North Korea's alleged crimes against humanity" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 26 July 2015 .

^ "European court condemns Poland over secret CIA torture prisons" .

The Daily Telegraph . Agence France-Presse. 24 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 October 2014 .

^ Dan Bilesfsky (24 July 2014).

"Court Censures Poland Over C.I.A. Renditions" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 October 2014 .

^ Christian Lowe (17 February 2015).

"European court rejects Polish appeal in CIA jail case" .

Reuters . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ Whitlock, Craig (17 November 2005).

"Europeans Probe Secret CIA Flights" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 18 December 2005 .

^ "EU to look into 'secret US jails' " .

BBC News . 3 November 2005 . Retrieved 18 December 2005 .

^ Whitlock, Craig (4 November 2005).

"U.S. Faces Scrutiny Over Secret Prisons" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 18 December 2005 .

^ United Nations Treaty Collection, Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment ^ "Exclusive: Sources Tell ABC News Top Al Qaeda Figures Held in Secret CIA Prisons" . ABC News. 5 December 2005 . Retrieved 18 December 2005 .

^ Bengali, Shashank; Megerian, Chris (22 April 2018).

"The CIA closed its original 'black site' years ago. But its legacy of torture lives on in Thailand" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ "The Consequences of Covering Up" . 4 November 2005 . Retrieved 18 December 2005 .

^ Alexandrovna, Larisa; Dastych, David (7 March 2007).

"Soviet-era compound in northern Poland was site of secret CIA interrogation, detentions" .

The Raw Story . Archived from the original on 9 March 2007.

^ Byrne, John (8 March 2007).

"Former Polish intelligence chief who says report on CIA detention site part of US domestic battle admitted CIA had access to facility" .

The Raw Story . Archived from the original on 6 August 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2018 .

^ Duncan Campbell; Richard Norton-Taylor (2 June 2008).

"US accused of holding terror suspects on prison ships" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 17 July 2010 .

^ Guantanamo Bay prisoners plant seeds of hope in secret garden Archived 25 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , The Independent , 29 April 2006 ^ James P. Pfiffner, "Power Play: The Bush Presidency and the Constitution", (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2008), pp. 146–49 ^ Guantanamo and Illegal Detention Archived 15 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Amnesty International. Retrieved 3 November 2016 ^ The Independent , 9 May 2010, " Exclusive: Caught in America's Legal Black Hole " ^ Steyn, Johan, " Guantanamo Bay: The Legal Black Hole " The International and Comparative Law Quarterly , vol. 53, no. 1, 2004, pp. 1–15. JSTOR ^ "Machtwechsel in Amerika: Zehn Guantánamo-Gefangene nach Oman überstellt" .

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung . 16 January 2017.

^ "What Might Happen To Guantánamo Now That U.S. Troops Are Leaving Afghanistan" . NPR . Retrieved 19 August 2021 .

^ Ghobari, Mohammed; Mukhashaf, Mohammed (20 March 2015). Aboudi, Sami; Fahmy, Omar; El Gamal, Rania; Graff, Peter; Stonestreet, John (eds.).

"Suicide bombers kill 137 in Yemen mosque attacks" .

Reuters . Retrieved 7 June 2019 .

^ "Paris attacks: Suspect on the run as terror raids end in failure" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 16 November 2015 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

^ "L'organisation État islamique revendique les attentats de Paris" (in French). France 24. 14 November 2015. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

^ "Paris attacks: Hollande blames Islamic State for 'act of war' " .

BBC News . 14 November 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

^ Callimachi, Rukmini (5 December 2015).

"Islamic State Says 'Soldiers of Caliphate' Attacked in San Bernardino" .

The New York Times .

^ Rankin, Jennifer; Henley, Jon (22 March 2016).

"Islamic State claims attacks at Brussels airport and metro station" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 June 2019 .

^ "ISIS claims responsibility for Orlando mass shooting" . CBS News. 12 June 2016.

^ "Hamas's October 7 Attack: Visualizing the Data" .

Center for Strategic and International Studies . 19 December 2023.

^ Goldstein, Joshua S.

"Think Again: War" Archived 22 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

Foreign Policy Magazine , 15 August 2011.

^ "Doctors' group says 1.3 million killed in U.S. 'War on Terror' " .

Digital Journal . 25 March 2015.

^ "US 'war on terror' has killed over half a million people: study" .

Al Jazeera . 9 November 2018 . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ Savell, Stephanie (15 May 2023).

"How Death Outlives War: The Reverberating Impact of the Post-9/11 Wars on Human Health" .

The Costs of War .

Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs . Retrieved 22 May 2023 .

^ 597 killed in 2003, [2] , 23,984 killed from 2004 through 2009 (with the exceptions of May 2004 and March 2009), [3] 652 killed in May 2004, [4] 45 killed in March 2009, [5] Archived 3 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine 676 killed in 2010, [6] and 590 killed in 2011, [7] thus giving a total of 26,544 dead ^ "Insurgent body count documents released." Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Stars and Stripes. 1 October 2007. Number of convictions not specified.

^ "4,000 fighters killed, 'al-Qaida in Iraq' tape says." The Guardian . 28 September 2006.

^ "Once promised paradise, ISIS fighters end up in mass graves".

The Straits Times . 15 October 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2017.

^ "Over 26,000 Iraqi soldiers killed in 4 year war with ISIS." Archived 8 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine 13 December 2017.

^ Associated Press, 14 October 2009 ^ Iraq Family Health Survey Study Group; Alkhuzai, A.H.; Ahmad, I.J.; Hweel, M.J.; Ismail, T.W.; Hasan, H.H; Younis, A.R.; Shawani, O; Al-Jaf, V.M.; Al-Alak, M.M.; Rasheed, L.H.; Hamid, S.M.; Al-Gasseer, N.; Majeed, F.A.; Al Awqati, N.A.; Ali, M.M.; Boerma, J.T.; Mathers, C. (2008).

"Iraq Family Health Survey" .

New England Journal of Medicine .

358 (5): 484– 93.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMsa0707782 .

PMID 18184950 .

^ "More than 1,000,000 Iraqis murdered" . Archived from the original on 2 October 2007 . Retrieved 2 October 2007 .

. September 2007. Opinion Research Business. PDF report: Opinion.co.uk Archived 25 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Poll: Civilian Death Toll in Iraq May Top 1 Million" .

Common Dreams . Archived from the original on 31 May 2014 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ "Greenspan Admits Iraq was About Oil, As Deaths Put at 1.2 Million" .

Common Dreams . Archived from the original on 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2014 .

^ "IraqBodyCount" . IraqBodyCount . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "DCAS Reports – Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) Deaths" .

dcas.dmdc.osd.mil . Archived from the original on 21 April 2020 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ Rod Nordland; Mujib Mashal (26 January 2019).

"U.S. and Taliban Edge Toward Deal to End America's Longest War".

The New York Times . Retrieved 28 January 2019.

^ "In Afghanistan, al-Qaeda is working more closely with the Taliban, Pentagon says". the Washington post. 6 May 2016.

^ Seldin, Jeff (18 November 2017).

"Afghan Officials: Islamic State Fighters Finding Sanctuary in Afghanistan".

VOA News.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 November 2017.

^ a b " Body Count – Casualty Figures after 10 Years of the "War on Terror" – Iraq Afghanistan Pakistan " (PDF), by IPPNW , PGS and PSR , p. 78, First international edition (March 2015) Gabriela Motroc (7 April 2015).

"U.S. War on Terror has reportedly killed 1.3 million people in a decade" .

Australian National Review . Archived from the original on 5 May 2015.

"220,000 killed in US war in Afghanistan 80,000 in Pakistan: report" .

Daily Times . 30 March 2015. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015.

^ "Afghan Civilians" . Costs of War. 27 February 2001. Archived from the original on 16 June 2013 . Retrieved 17 July 2012 .

^ "Dossier on Civilian Victims of United States' Aerial Bombing" . Pubpages.unh.edu. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ Joshua Muravchik (10 October 2006).

"The FP Memo: Operation Comeback" .

Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 28 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "The Prof Who Can't Count Straight" .

The Weekly Standard . 26 August 2002. Archived from the original on 20 December 2007 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Operation Enduring Freedom: Why a Higher Rate of Civilian Bombing Casualties?" . Comw.org. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Operation Enduring Freedom: Why a Higher Rate of Civilian Bombing Casualties – Bombers and cluster bombs" . Comw.org. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Operation Enduring Freedom: Why a Higher Rate of Civilian Bombing Casualties – Appendix 1. Estimation of Civilian Bombing Casualties: Method and Sources" . Comw.org. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Strange Victory: A critical appraisal of Operation Enduring Freedom and the Afghanistan war" . Comw.org . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "The Americans ... They Just Drop Their Bombs and Leave" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 4 June 2002 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ " Forgotten Victims " The Guardian ^ a b c d "Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) U.S. Casualty Status" (PDF) .

American Forces Press Service . United States Department of Defense. 18 January 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 .

^ "Database – KPK from 2005 to present" . Retrieved 24 May 2019 .

^ "Database – FATA from 2005 to present" . Retrieved 24 May 2019 .

^ "Ethiopian army accomplished 75% of mission in Somalia – Zenawi" . SudanTribune article. 3 December 2006.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2007 . Retrieved 9 July 2011 .

^ Ignatius, David (13 May 2007).

"Ethiopia's Iraq" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2017 . Retrieved 16 May 2007 .

^ "KDF: We have killed 700 militants" .

Daily Nation . 7 January 2012. Archived from the original on 11 January 2013 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 .

^ U.S. Air Strikes, Drone Strikes, and Ground Raids in Somalia.

New America Foundation. Retrieved 19 August 2019.

^ "Mogadishu violence kills 6,500 in past year: rights group" . 21 March 2008 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ See List of drone strikes in Yemen .

^ "UAE aims to wipe out Yemen Al Qaeda branch" .

Dawn . 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 .

^ See civil conflict in the Philippines.

^ 270 killed and 453 captured (2009), [8] Archived 20 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine 349 killed and 254 captured (2010), [9] Archived 19 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine 384 killed and 370 captured (2011), [10] 391 killed and 461 captured (2012), [ citation needed ] 260 killed (2013), [ citation needed ] and 88 captured [ citation needed ] 259 killed and 445 captured (2014), [11] 172 killed (2015), [12] Archived 17 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine 162 killed and 377 captured (2016), [13] Archived 4 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine 82 killed and 296 captured (2017), [14] Archived 27 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine [15] Archived 27 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine total reported 2,329 killed and 2,744 captured ^ Gambrell, Jon (8 June 2009).

"Funeral held for soldier killed in Ark. attack" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011.

^ "Recruitment Shooting Suspect Doesn't Think Killing Was Murder" . Fox News. Associated Press. 9 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 September 2009 .

^ "Bill would give Purple Heart to Fort Hood shooting victims" .

Austin Statesman . 9 May 2012 . Retrieved 29 March 2013 .

Thirteen people were killed and more than 30 wounded in the rampage.

^ "Operation Iraqi Freedom | Iraq" . iCasualties. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 21 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Forces: U.S. & Coalition/POW/MIA" . CNN.

^ "Military Casualty Information" . Siadapp.dmdc.osd.mil. Archived from the original on 3 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "OEF | Fatalities By Year" . iCasualties. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 27 October 2018 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "Operation Iraqi Freedom | Fatalities By Nationality" . iCasualties. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 23 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "DCAS Reports – Operation Inherent Resolve (OIR) Casualty Summary by Casualty Category" .

dcas.dmdc.osd.mil . Archived from the original on 1 May 2020 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ Aikins, Matthieu; Koehler, Chris (2013).

"Mental Combat" .

Popular Science .

282 (3): 40– 45 . Retrieved 15 February 2013 .

^ "U.S. Budgetary Costs of Post-9/11 Wars Through FY2022: $8 Trillion | Figures | Costs of War" .

The Costs of War . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ "TSG IntelBrief: Terrorism in the Horn of Africa" . New York: The Soufan Group. 28 July 2015. Archived from the original on 21 November 2015 . Retrieved 28 July 2015 .

^ a b Daniel Trotta (29 June 2011).

"Cost of war at least $3.7 trillion and counting" .

Reuters . Retrieved 25 June 2012 .

^ "Estimated Cost to Each U.S. Taxpayer of Each of the Wars in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria" (PDF) . Retrieved 3 March 2025 .

^ a b c Annika, Djurle; Young, Beth; Berlin, Anna; Vågsholm, Ivar; Blomstrom, Anne; Nygren, Jim; Kvarnheden, Anders (2022).

"Addressing biohazards to food security in primary production" .

Food Security .

14 (6).

Springer Nature B.V.

: 1475– 97.

doi : 10.1007/s12571-022-01296-7 .

eISSN 1876-4525 .

ISSN 1876-4517 .

S2CID 250250761 . AD ORCID 0000-0003-1830-6406 , AB ORCID 0000-0002-9518-5719 , IV ORCID 0000-0002-1661-0677 , ALB ORCID 0000-0003-4455-311X , AK ORCID 0000-0001-9394-7700 .

^ Amy Belasco (16 July 2010).

"The Cost of Iraq, Afghanistan, and Other Global War on Terror Operations Since 2011" .

Congressional Research Service . Archived from the original on 27 January 2011 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 .

^ K. Alan Kronstadt (6 February 2009).

"Pakistan–U.S. Relations" .

Congressional Research Service . Archived from the original on 22 December 2011 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 .

^ Congressional Research Service (11 February 2011).

"Long-Term Implications of the 2011 Future Years Defense Program" . Retrieved 25 June 2012 .

^ Eisenhower Study Group (2011).

"Cost of Iraq, Afghanistan, and Anti-Terrorism Operations" .

Watson Institute for International Studies , Brown University . Archived from the original on 28 June 2012 . Retrieved 24 June 2012 .

^ George Monbiot , "A Wilful Blindness" ("Those who support the coming war with Iraq refuse to see that it has anything to do with US global domination"), monbiot.com (author's website archives), reposted from The Guardian , 11 March 2003. Retrieved 28 May 2007.

^ "Exporting Islamophobia in the Global 'War On Terror' " .

NYU Law Review . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ Singel, Ryan (13 March 2008).

"FBI Tried to Cover Patriot Act Abuses With Flawed, Retroactive Subpoenas, Audit Finds" .

Wired . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Williams, Shirley. " The seeds of Iraq's future terror ".

The Guardian , 28 October 2003.

^ "American Hegemony: How to Use It, How to Lose It by Gen. William Odom" (PDF) . Retrieved 27 February 2014 .

^ Obama's Muslim Speech , The New York Times , by Madeleine Albright . Retrieved 25 April 2016 "According to Muslim speakers at such events, one fact stands out: When the cold war ended, America needed an enemy to replace Communism and chose Islam...Mr. Obama's dilemma is that no speech, however eloquent, can disentangle U.S.–Muslim relations from the treacherous terrain of current events in places such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and the Middle East...Muslims desire respect and respect demands frankness. We cannot pretend that American soldiers and aircraft are not attacking Muslims." Archived from the original ^ Lustick, Ian S. (2006).

Trapped in the War on Terror . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0812239836 .

^ Chalabi, Mona (20 July 2018).

"Terror attacks by Muslims receive 357% more press attention, study finds" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 16 December 2018.

^ "America's Image in the World: Findings from the Pew Global Attitudes Project" . Pew Research Center. 14 March 2007 . Retrieved 13 February 2012 .

^ Hilal, Maha (4 August 2022).

"Ayman al-Zawahiri killing proves the 'war on terror' was never over" .

Middle East Eye . Archived from the original on 4 August 2022.

^ Jackson, Richard (2005).

Writing the War on Terrorism . Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press. p. 13.

ISBN 9780719071218 .

^ "Inquiry considers allegations of 80 unlawful civilian killings and cover-up by UK's SAS in Afghanistan" .

OCHA . 4 July 2023. Archived from the original on 6 July 2023.

^ Sabbagh, Dan (2 July 2023).

"Eighty Afghan civilians may have been summarily killed by SAS, inquiry told" .

Guardian . Archived from the original on 6 July 2023.

^ "SAS inquiry reveals possible summary killings of 80 Afghan civilians" .

WION . 3 July 2023. Archived from the original on 6 July 2023.

^ Leitsinger, Miranda (16 May 2012).

"US veterans to return war medals in protest" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2025 .

^ Wisniewski, Mary (21 May 2012).

"Veterans symbolically discard service medals at anti-NATO rally" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ Fisher, Max (9 December 2014).

"Map: The 54 countries that helped the CIA with its torture-linked rendition program" .

Vox . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ "Opinion: US drone complex bureaucratizes murder" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ Savell, Stephen.

"How Death Outlives War: The Reverberating Impact of the Post-9/11 Wars on Human Health." 15 May 2023. Brown University Watson Institute. Page 11.

^ Geneva Declaration Secretariat.

September 2008. Global Burden of Armed Violence. Geneva.

^ Neta C. Crawford and Catherine Lutz.

"Human Cost of Post-9/11 Wars: Direct War Deaths in Major War Zones." Brown University. 1 September 2022.

Further reading Coughlin, Stephen (2015).

Catastrophic Failure: Blindfolding America in the Face of Jihad . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1511617505 .

Davis, John, ed.

Terrorism in Africa: the evolving front in the war on terror (Rowman & Littlefield - Lexington Books, 2012).

ISBN 978-0-7391-3577-8 De Goede, Marieke. "The politics of preemption and the war on terror in Europe." European journal of international relations 14.1 (2008): 161–85.

online Dimaggio, Anthony.

Mass Media, Mass Propaganda: Understanding the News in the 'War on Terror'.

(Rowman & Littlefield - Lexington Books, 2008).

ISBN 978-0-7391-1902-0 Hill, Joshua, Willard M. Oliver, and Nancy E. Marion. " 'Shaping history' or 'Riding the wave'?: President Bush's influence on the public opinion of terrorism, homeland security, & crime." Journal of Criminal Justice 38.5 (2010): 896–902.

Jackson, Richard.

Writing the War on Terrorism: Language, Politics and Counter-Terrorism . (Manchester University Press, 2005).

ISBN 0719071216 .

Jones, David Martin, and M.L.R. Smith. "The age of ambiguity: Art and the war on terror twenty years after 9/11." Studies in Conflict & Terrorism (2021): 1–20.

online Lansford, Tom.

9/11 and the Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. A Chronology and Reference Guide (ABC-CLIO, 2012).

excerpt Lansford, Tom, Robert P. Watson, and Jack Covarrubias, eds.

America's war on terror (2nd ed. Ashgate, 2009).

excerpt Mueller, John (2008).

"War on Terror" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

531– 33.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n323 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Ryan, Maria. "'War in countries we are not at war with': The 'war on terror' on the periphery from Bush to Obama." International Politics 48.2 (2011): 364–89.

Webel, Charles, and Mark Tomass, eds.

Assessing the War on Terror: Western and Middle Eastern Perspectives (Taylor & Francis, 2017).

ISBN 978-113820456-0 External links Wikiquote has quotations related to War on terror .

White House information about the War on Terrorism CIA and the War on Terrorism Archived 8 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine U.S. National Military Strategic Plan for the War on Terrorism , 2006 The 9/11 Legacies Project , The Oriental Institute , Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague 9/11 At 20: A Week of Reflection , Responsible Statecraft, The Quincy Institute v t e War on terror September 11 attacks War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) ( Withdrawal ) Iraq War (2003–2011) ( Withdrawal ) Participants Operational ISAF Operation Enduring Freedom participants Afghanistan Northern Alliance Iraq ( Iraqi Armed Forces ) NATO Pakistan United Kingdom United States European Union Philippines Ethiopia Targets Individuals Osama bin Laden Hamza bin Laden Anwar al-Awlaki Sirajuddin Haqqani Jalaluddin Haqqani Anas Haqqani Khalil Haqqani Hafiz Saeed Mahmoud Mohamed Ahmed Bahaziq Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Factions al-Qaeda al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula Abu Sayyaf Al-Shabaab Boko Haram Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami Hizbul Mujahideen Islamic Courts Union Jaish-e-Mohammed Jemaah Islamiyah Lashkar-e-Taiba Taliban Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan Islamic State Conflicts Operation Enduring Freedom War in Afghanistan OEF – Philippines Georgian involvement in the Iraq War OEF – Horn of Africa OEF – Trans Sahara Drone strikes in Pakistan Other Operation Active Endeavour Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present) Insurgency in the North Caucasus Moro conflict in the Philippines Iraq War Iraqi insurgency Operation Linda Nchi Terrorism in Saudi Arabia Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa War in Somalia (2006–2009) 2007 Lebanon conflict al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen Policies Patriot Act (2001) Torture Memos (2002) Military Commissions Act of 2006 Military Commissions Act of 2009 President's Surveillance Program Protect America Act of 2007 Terrorist Surveillance Program Related Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse Axis of evil Bush Doctrine Clash of Civilizations Cold War Combatant Status Review Tribunal Criticism of the war on terror CIA black sites Killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri Killing of Osama bin Laden Enhanced interrogation techniques Extrajudicial prisoners Extraordinary rendition Guantanamo Bay detention camp Iranian Revolution Islamic terrorism Islamism North Korea and weapons of mass destruction Operation Noble Eagle Operation Eagle Assist Situation Room photograph State Sponsors of Terrorism Targeted killing Targeted Killing in International Law Targeted Killings: Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World Unitary executive theory Unlawful combatant CAGE Category Commons Articles relating to the War on Terror v t e Terrorism Main articles Definition Economics History Sociology Symbolism Social media Counterterrorism Anti-terrorism legislation International conventions War on terror By ideology Communist Green Ethnic violence Palestinian Zionist Left-wing Misogynist Narcoterrorism Nationalist Religious Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Revolutionary Right-wing Types and tactics Agro-terrorism Aircraft hijacking Bioterrorism Car bombing Cyber Domestic Economic Environmental Nuclear Piracy Propaganda of the deed Proxy bomb Stabbing Suicide attack Palestinian State involvement State terrorism State-sponsored terrorism Organisation Clandestine cell system Financing Front Lone wolf Training camp Lists Charities accused of ties to terrorism Designated terrorist organizations Incidents Islamist terrorist attacks Memorials and museums House of Terror Topography of Terror Victims of Acts of Terror Memorial By country Argentina Dirty War denial Iran sponsored Israel sponsored Kuwait sponsored Libya sponsored Pakistan sponsored Palestine Qatar sponsored Russia Sri Lanka state United States domestic sponsored state Venezuela sponsored Historical French Revolution Reign of Terror (1792/1793–1794) First White Terror (1795) Second White Terror (1815) Soviet Russia White Terror (1917–1922) Red Terror (1918–1922) Soviet state-sponsored terrorism v t e Al-Qaeda Leadership Saif al-Adel Abd al-Rahman al-Maghrebi Ali Mohamed Rage Sa'ad bin Atef al-Awlaki Ahmad Umar Iyad Ag Ghaly Amadou Koufa Ezedin Abdel Aziz Khalil Abu Ubaidah Youssef al-Annabi Ali Sayyid Muhamed Mustafa al-Bakri Ibrahim al-Banna Ibrahim al Qosi Abu Walid al-Masri Mahad Karate Mohammed Showqi Al-Islambouli Abdukadir Mohamed Abdukadir Fuad Qalaf Jehad Mostafa Abu Humam al-Shami Sami al-Oraydi Former leadership Killed Osama bin Laden ( killing ) Ayman al-Zawahiri ( killing ) Mohammed Atef Qaed Salim Sinan al-Harethi ( killing ) Mustafa Mohamed Fadhil Haitham al-Yemeni Abu Hamza Rabia Muhsin Musa Matwalli Atwah Abu Musab al-Zarqawi Omar al-Faruq Haitham al-Badri Abu Yaqub al-Masri Abu Talha al-Sudani Abu al-Layth al-Libi Abu Sulayman Al-Jazairi Midhat Mursi Mohamed Moumou Khalid Habib Abu Ghadiya Abu Zubair al-Masri Rashid Rauf Mohammad Hasan Khalil al-Hakim Fahid Mohammed Ally Msalam Sheikh Ahmed Salim Swedan Saad bin Laden Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan Abdullah Said al Libi Saleh al-Somali Saeed al-Masri Hamza al-Jawfi Ahmed Mohammed Hamed Ali Mohamed Abul-Khair Sheikh Fateh Huthaifa al-Batawi Ilyas Kashmiri Fazul Abdullah Mohammed Atiyah Abd al-Rahman Anwar al-Awlaki Samir Khan Tariq al-Dahab Muhammad Sa'id Ali Hasan Fahd al-Quso Abu Yahya al-Libi Hassan Ghul Abu-Zaid al Kuwaiti Said Ali al-Shihri Farman Ali Shinwari Abdelhamid Abou Zeid Ibrahim Haji Jama Mee'aad Abu Mansoor Al-Amriki Said Bahaji Abu Khalid al-Suri Omar Ould Hamaha Ahmed Abdi Godane Abu Yusuf Al-Turki Adnan Gulshair el Shukrijumah Adam Yahiye Gadahn Harith bin Ghazi al-Nadhari Othman Ahmad Othman al-Ghamdi Ibrahim Sulayman Muhammad al-Rubaysh Nasser bin Ali al-Ansi Nasir al-Wuhayshi Muhsin al-Fadhli Abu Khalil al-Madani Matiur Rehman Abu Firas al-Suri Ahmed Refai Taha Mokhtar Belmokhtar Abu Khayr al-Masri Ibrahim al-Asiri Hamza bin Laden Sari Shihab Asim Umar Qasim al-Raymi Abdelmalek Droukdel ( killing ) Khalid al-Aruri Abdullah Ahmed Abdullah Abu Muhsin al-Masri Captured Mamdouh Mahmud Salim Wadih el-Hage Khalid al-Fawwaz Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri Khalid Sheikh Mohammed Walid bin Attash Riduan Isamuddin Ali al-Bahlul Abu Faraj al-Libbi Mustafa Setmariam Nasar Abdulhadi al-Iraqi Muhammad Jafar Jamal al-Kahtani Mohamed Atiq Awayd Al Harbi Younis al-Mauritani Sulaiman Abu Ghaith Abu Anas al-Libi Muhanad Mahmoud Al Farekh Mukhtar Robow Amin al-Haq Other Abu Ubaidah al-Banshiri (died) Abu Ubaidah al-Masri (died) Mahfouz Ould al-Walid (left) Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi (expelled) Ahmed al-Sharaa (left) Abu Maria al-Qahtani (left) Ahmad Salama Mabruk (left) Abu Omar al-Turkistani (left) Abu Sulayman al-Muhajir (left) Khalid Batarfi (died) Timeline of attacks 1992 Aden hotel bombings 1998 United States embassy bombings 2000 USS Cole bombing 2001 September 11 attacks 2002 Bali bombings 2004 Madrid train bombings 2005 London bombings 2007 Algiers bombings 2008 Islamabad Danish embassy bombing 2008 Islamabad Marriott Hotel bombing 2008 Sanaa United States embassy attack 2013 In Amenas hostage crisis 2013 Westgate shopping mall attack 2015 Charlie Hebdo shooting 2015 Garissa University College attack 2015 Bamako hotel attack 2016 Ouagadougou attacks 2016 Grand-Bassam shootings 2016 Bamako attack 2019 Naval Air Station Pensacola shooting Wars Soviet–Afghan War Afghan Civil War (1989–1992) Afghan Civil War (1992–1996) First Chechen War Afghan Civil War (1996–2001) Second Chechen War War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Iraq War Somali Civil War War in North-West Pakistan ( drone strikes ) Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present) Syrian civil war Yemeni civil war (2014–present) Al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen Houthi insurgency Affiliates Al-Shabaab (Somalia) Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (Yemen) Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (North Africa) Al-Qaeda in the Indian subcontinent (Indian subcontinent) Jama'at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin (Mali) Charity organizations Benevolence International Foundation Al-Haramain Foundation Media Al Qaeda Handbook Al Neda As-Sahab Al-Andalus Media Al-Kataib Media Foundation Radio al-Andalus Shahada News Agency Al-Malahem Media Inspire Az-Zallaqa Foundation Fatawā of Osama bin Laden Al-Khansaa Kuala Lumpur al-Qaeda Summit Management of Savagery Voice of Jihad Qaedat al-Jihad Umar Media Global Islamic Media Front Al-I'tisam Media Foundation Video and audio Videos and audio recordings of Osama bin Laden Videos and audio recordings of Ayman al-Zawahiri Related Safe houses Saddam–al-Qaeda conspiracy theory Timeline Category:Al-Qaeda v t e People who have been called "high-value detainees" in the war on terror Captives transferred to Guantanamo Bay from CIA black sites Mustafa al-Hawsawi Ahmed Ghailani Ramzi bin al-Shibh Walid bin Attash Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri Abu Zubaydah Abu Faraj al-Libbi Ammar al-Baluchi Riduan Isamuddin (Hambali) Mohamad Farik Amin Mohammed Nazir Bin Lep Khalid Sheikh Mohammed Majid Khan Gouled Hassan Dourad Abdul Hadi al Iraqi Abdul Rahim al-Sharqawi Captives unaccounted for Musaad Aruchi Abu Yasir Al Jaza'iri Died in custody Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e Armed conflicts involving the Armed Forces of the United States Listed chronologically Domestic Shays' Rebellion Whiskey Rebellion Fries's Rebellion 1811 German Coast uprising Turner's Rebellion Dorr Rebellion Bleeding Kansas Utah War Harpers Ferry raid American Civil War New York City draft riots New Orleans Massacre of 1866 American Indian Wars Meridian race riot of 1871 Colfax Riot Brooks–Baxter War Battle of Liberty Place Vicksburg riot Range War Hamburg riot Great Railroad Strike of 1877 Lincoln County War Rock Springs Riot Seattle riot of 1886 Johnson County War Coal Creek War 1892 Coeur d'Alene labor strike Homestead strike Pullman Strike 1899 Coeur d'Alene labor confrontation Colorado Coalfield War Red Summer Denver streetcar strike of 1920 Battle of Blair Mountain Tulsa riot Bonus Army Puerto Rican revolts Ole Miss riot of 1962 1960s ghetto rebellions 1969 Greensboro uprising Kent State shootings Wounded Knee Occupation 1992 Los Angeles riots 2020 racial unrest 2021 U.S. Capitol attack 2025 Los Angeles protests Foreign American Revolutionary War American–Algerian War (1785–1795) Quasi-War First Barbary War War of 1812 Second Barbary War First Sumatran expedition Second Sumatran expedition 1840 Fiji expedition Ivory Coast expedition Mexican–American War 1855 Fiji expedition Second Opium War 1858 Fiji expedition Formosa Expedition Korean Expedition Spanish–American War Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion Banana Wars Border War World War I Russian Civil War World War II Korean War Bay of Pigs Invasion Vietnam War Dominican Civil War Iranian Revolution ( Operation Eagle Claw ) Invasion of Grenada Lebanese Civil War ( 1983 Beirut barracks bombings ) Invasion of Panama Gulf War Somali Civil War ( Operation Gothic Serpent ) Intervention in Haiti Bosnian War Kosovo War War in Afghanistan Iraq War War in North-West Pakistan First Libyan Civil War War against the Islamic State Iraq Syria Cameroon Libya Yemeni civil war Related Conflicts in the U.S.

Wars involving the U.S.

Timeline of U.S. military operations Length of U.S. participation in major wars Territorial evolution Military history History of the Central Intelligence Agency Casualties of war Peace movement List of anti-war organizations Conscientious objector Cold War War on terror War crimes v t e Post– Cold War conflicts in Africa North Africa Egypt Egyptian Crisis (2011–2014) 2011 revolution Sinai insurgency (2011–present) Post-coup unrest (2013–2014) Terrorism in Egypt (2013–present) Libya 2008 Kufra conflict Libyan crisis 2011 civil war 2011–2014 factional violence 2014–2020 civil war Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict (1970–present) War, 1975–1991 Clashes, 2020–present Others Algerian Civil War (1991–2002) Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present) Tunisian revolution (2010–2011) West Africa Nigeria Communal conflicts in Nigeria (1998–present) Herder–farmer conflicts Religious violence Boko Haram insurgency (2009–present) Niger Delta conflict (2003–present) 2016 conflict Insurgency in Southeastern Nigeria (2021–present) Mali Tuareg rebellions 1990–1995 2007–2009 2012 Mali War (2012–present) Sierra Leone Ndogboyosoi War Sierra Leone Civil War Liberia Liberian Civil Wars 1989–1996 1999–2003 Côte d'Ivoire Ivorian Civil Wars 2002–2007 2010–2011 Others Guinea-Bissau Civil War (1998–1999) Guinea clashes (2013) Casamance conflict (1982–present) 2016–2017 Gambian constitutional crisis ECOWAS military intervention Western Togoland Rebellion (2020–present) Central Africa Angola Angolan Civil War (1975–2002) Cabinda War (1975–present) DR Congo First Congo War (1996–1997) Allied Democratic Forces insurgency (1996–present) Second Congo War (1998–2003) Ituri conflict (1999–2007) Kivu conflict (2004–present) Dongo conflict (2009) Ituri conflict (2009–present) March 23 Movement conflict 2012–2013 rebellion 2022–present campaign Batwa–Luba clashes (2013–2018) Kamwina Nsapu rebellion (2016–2019) Western DR Congo clashes (2022–present) Republic of the Congo Civil wars 1993–1994 1997–1999 Pool Department conflict (2002–2003) Pool War (2016–2017) Central African Republic Bush War (2004–2007) Civil War (2012–present) Djotodia period, 2013–2014 Chad Civil War (2005–2010) Insurgency in Chad (2016–present) 2021 offensive Others Anglophone Crisis (Cameroon) Lord's Resistance Army insurgency (1987–present) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–present) East Africa Ethiopia Oromo conflict OLA insurgency, 2018–present Insurgency in Ogaden (1994–2018) Second Afar insurgency (1995–2018) Eritrean–Ethiopian border conflict (2000–2018) War, 1998–2000 Ethiopian civil conflict (2018–present) Afar–Somali clashes Benishangul-Gumuz conflict Oromo–Somali clashes Tigray war War in Amhara Somalia Puntland–Somaliland dispute (1998–present) Somali Civil War 2006–2009 Ethiopian intervention 2009–present phase AMISOM Piracy off the coast of Somalia Kenya Ethnic conflicts Somali–Kenyan conflict (1963–present) Likoni massacres (1997) Kenyan crisis (2007–2008) 2012–2013 Tana River District clashes (2012–2013) Baragoi clashes (2012) South Sudan Heglig Crisis (2012) Nomadic conflicts Ethnic violence Civil War (2013–2020) Abyei border conflict (2022–present) Sudan Second Sudanese Civil War (1983–2005) War in Darfur (2003–2020) Nomadic conflicts (2009–present) South Kordofan and Blue Nile conflict (2011–2020) Heglig Crisis (2012) Blue Nile clashes (2022–2023) Sudanese civil war (2023–present) Uganda Lord's Resistance Army insurgency (1987–present) Allied Democratic Forces insurgency (1996–present) Kasese clashes (2016) Others Rwandan Civil War / genocide (1990–1994) Djiboutian Civil War (1991–1994) Hanish Islands conflict 2008 invasion of Anjouan Djiboutian–Eritrean border conflict Burundian conflicts 1993–2005 Civil War 2015–2018 unrest Southern Africa Mozambique Mozambican Civil War (1977–1992) RENAMO insurgency (2013–2021) Insurgency in Cabo Delgado (2017–present) Others Bophuthatswana crisis (1994) Caprivi conflict (1994–1999) Lesothan conflicts SADC intervention in Lesotho (1998–1999) 2014 Lesotho political crisis Related topics War on terror Arab Spring Arab Winter Colour revolutions v t e Post– Cold War conflicts in Asia South Asia India Kashmir conflict (1947–present) 2013 India–Pakistan border skirmishes 2014–2015 India–Pakistan border skirmishes 2016–2018 India–Pakistan border skirmishes Kargil War (1999) Jammu and Kashmir insurgency (1989–present) Insurgency in Northeast India (1964–present) Insurgency in Punjab (1981–1995) Naxalite–Maoist insurgency (1967–present) Religious violence in India Pakistan Afghanistan–Pakistan border skirmishes Kashmir conflict (1947–present) 2013 India–Pakistan border skirmishes India–Pakistan border skirmishes (2014–2015) India–Pakistan border skirmishes (2016–2018) Kargil War (1999) Jammu and Kashmir insurgency (1989–present) Insurgency in Balochistan (2004–present) Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (2004–present) Insurgency in Sindh (2010–present) Religious violence in Pakistan Sri Lanka JVP insurrection (1971) Sri Lankan civil war (1983–2009) JVP insurrection (1987–1989) Others Maldives political crisis (2011–2013) Nepalese Civil War (1996–2006) Operation All Clear East Asia China Taiwan Strait Crisis (1996) Xinjiang conflict (1960s–present) Tibetan unrest (2008) Korea (North and South) Korean conflict Maritime border incidents 1994 North Korean nuclear crisis 2017–2018 crisis Taiwan Taiwan Strait Crisis (1996) Southeast Asia Cambodia Cambodian–Thai border 2008–2013 crisis 2025–present conflict Indonesia Papua conflict (1962–present) Insurgency in Aceh (1976–2005) East Indonesia Mujahideen insurgency (2015–2022) Myanmar Myanmar conflict (1948–present) Karen conflict Kachin conflict Rohingya conflict Civil war (2021–present) Philippines Moro Conflict (1968-2019) ISIL Insurgency (2014-present) New People's army conflict (1969-present) Thailand South Thailand insurgency (2004–present) Cambodian–Thai border 2008–2013 crisis 2025–present conflict East Timor Indonesian occupation (1975–1999) East Timor genocide 1999 crisis 2006 crisis Others Cambodian Conflict (1979–1998) FULRO insurgency (1964–1992) Laotian insurgency (1975–2022) 2013 Lahad Datu standoff Central Asia Afghanistan Afghanistan–Pakistan border skirmishes Afghan conflict Civil War 1989–1992 1992–1996 1996–2001 2001–2021 War Republican insurgency Kazakhstan Ethnic conflicts Kyrgyzstan 1990 Osh clashes 2010 Kyrgyz Revolution 2010 South Kyrgyzstan ethnic clashes Tajikistan Tajikistani Civil War (1992–1997) Insurgency in Gorno-Badakhshan (2010–2015) Uzbekistan Fergana massacre (1989) Andijan massacre (2005) West Asia Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict (1988–2024) First War 2016 conflict Second War Bahrain Bahraini uprising (2011) Iran Kurdish separatism in Iran KDPI insurgency (1989–1996) Iran–PJAK conflict (2004–2011) Western Iran clashes (2016–present) Arab separatism in Khuzestan (1922–2020) Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy war (1979–present) Qatif conflict Iran–Israel (1985–present) South Lebanon (1985–2000) Lebanon War (2006) Syrian arena (2012–2024) Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency (2004–present) Iraq Iraqi–Kurdish conflict (1918–2003) Iraqi Kurdish Civil War (1994–1997 Iraqi conflict Iraqi Kurdistan conflict (2001–2003) Iraq War (2003–2011) Iraqi insurgency (2011–2013) War in Iraq (2013–2017) ISIL insurgency (2017–present) Israel Israeli–Palestinian (1948–present) Second Intifada (2000–2005) Gaza–Israel (2006–present) Iran–Israel (1985–present) Syrian arena (2012–2024) Lebanon South Lebanon conflict (1985–2000) Lebanon War (2006) Conflict in Northern Lebanon (2007) Lebanon conflict (2008) Palestine Israeli–Palestinian (1948–present) Second Intifada (2000–2005) Gaza–Israel (2006–present) Fatah–Hamas conflict (2006–2008) Saudi Arabia Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy war (1979–present) Qatif conflict Persian Gulf crisis (2019–2021) Syria Syrian Civil War (2011–present) Regional spillover Turkey Maoist insurgency DHKP/C insurgency Kurdish–Turkish conflict Turkey–ISIL conflict Yemen Civil war (1994) al-Qaeda (1998–2015) Houthi (2004–2015) South Yemen (2009–2015) Yemeni crisis (2011–present) Houthi takeover (2014–2015) Civil War (2014–present) Inter-continental conflict Sinai insurgency (2011–present) Related topics War on terror Operation Inherent Resolve Arab Spring Arab Winter Colour revolutions v t e Post– Cold War conflicts in Europe Eastern Europe Nagorno-Karabakh conflict (1988–2024) First War 2016 conflict Second War Gagauzia conflict (1989–1995) Transnistria conflict (1990–present) Transnistria War (1990–1992) Georgian Civil War (1991–1993) South Ossetia War (1991–92) War in Abkhazia (1992–1993) East Prigorodny conflict (1992) Russian constitutional crisis (1993) First Chechen War (1994–1996) War in Abkhazia (1998) Second Chechen War (1999–2009) Tuzla Island conflict (2003) Russo-Georgian War (2008) Maidan Uprising (2013) Revolution of Dignity (2014) Russo-Ukrainian War (2014–present) Russian annexation of Crimea (2014) War in Donbas Russian invasion of Ukraine Wagner Group rebellion (2023) Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis (2021–present) Southern Europe Slovenian War of Independence (1991) Croatian War of Independence (1991–1995) Bosnian War (1992–1995) Croat–Bosniak War (1992–1994) Albanian Civil War (1997) Kosovo War (1998–1999) Insurgency in the Preševo Valley (1999–2001) Insurgency in Macedonia (2001) Related topics European re-armament in the 2020s List of Post-Soviet conflicts List of ongoing armed conflicts List of proxy wars List of frozen conflicts War on terror v t e George W. Bush 43rd President of the United States (2001–2009) 46th Governor of Texas (1995–2000) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inaugurations 2001 2005 Timeline 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 January 2009 Domestic policy Legislation and programs Economic policy Foreign policy International trips Bush Doctrine Russia summits Slovenia Slovakia War in Afghanistan Patriot Act No Child Left Behind Act 2003 invasion of Iraq Status of Forces Agreement Relations with Iran Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act USA Freedom Corps Department of Homeland Security Space policy Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty "War on Terror" President's Council on Service and Civic Participation award Dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy Email controversy Judicial appointments Supreme Court candidates John Roberts Harriet Miers Samuel Alito controversies Cabinet Cheney vice presidency Pardons Impeachment efforts Executive orders Presidential proclamations State funeral of Ronald Reagan State funeral of Gerald Ford Obama transition Life and legacy Childhood home Early life and career Presidential library Official White House portrait Military service controversy Killian documents controversy authenticity issues Professional life Governorship of Texas Prairie Chapel Ranch Walker's Point Estate Clinton Bush Haiti Fund Speeches Joint session of Congress (Feb 2001) Remarks at the Islamic Center of Washington (2001) Joint session of Congress (September 11 attacks) (2001) Mission Accomplished (2003) State of the Union addresses 2002 ( "Axis of evil" ) 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Elections U.S. House 1978 Gubernatorial 1994 1998 Presidential 2000 campaign primaries running mate selection convention debates election Bush v. Gore 2004 campaign primaries convention debates election Public image Bushisms Nicknames As the subject of books and films Fictionalized portrayals Miss Me Yet?

" Yo, Blair " Books A Charge to Keep (1999) Decision Points (2010) 41: A Portrait of My Father (2014) Portraits of Courage (2017) Out of Many, One (2021) Popular culture Fahrenheit 9/11 (2004 documentary) W.

(2008 film) Family Laura Bush (wife) Barbara Pierce Bush (daughter) Jenna Bush Hager (daughter) George H. W. Bush (father presidency ) Barbara Bush (mother) Robin Bush (sister) Jeb Bush (brother) Neil Bush (brother) Marvin Bush (brother) Dorothy Bush Koch (sister) Barney (dog) Miss Beazley (dog) India (cat) Spot Fetcher (dog) ← Bill Clinton Barack Obama → Category v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐9hff2
Cached time: 20250818091103
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.729 seconds
Real time usage: 4.192 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24661/1000000
Revision size: 236208/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 990226/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 29155/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 98/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1342177/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.260/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12953553/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3346.474      1 -total
 61.60% 2061.548      3 Template:Reflist
 25.61%  857.110    149 Template:Cite_web
 23.60%  789.886    146 Template:Cite_news
  7.44%  249.021      1 Template:War_on_terror_infobox
  4.42%  147.898      3 Template:Ubli
  3.97%  132.790      4 Template:Efn
  2.96%   98.900     14 Template:Fix
  2.85%   95.506      1 Template:Short_description
  2.66%   88.909     16 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13425800:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818091103 and revision id 1306257763. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=War_on_terror&oldid=1306257763 " Categories : War on terror 2000s conflicts 2010s conflicts 2020s conflicts 2000s in Afghanistan 2010s in Afghanistan 2000s in Iraq 2010s in Iraq 21st-century conflicts Aftermath of the September 11 attacks Al-Qaeda Counterterrorism in the United States Counterterrorist operations Metaphors referring to war and violence United States federal policy Operations involving special forces Presidency of George W. Bush Presidency of Barack Obama First presidency of Donald Trump Presidency of Joe Biden Wars involving Afghanistan Wars involving Australia Wars involving Bahrain Wars involving Bangladesh Wars involving Belgium Wars involving Canada Wars involving Chad Wars involving China Wars involving Colombia Wars involving Denmark Wars involving Estonia Wars involving Ethiopia Wars involving France Wars involving Germany Wars involving Hezbollah Wars involving India Wars involving Iran Wars involving Iraq Wars involving Israel Wars involving Italy Wars involving Kenya Wars involving Latvia Wars involving Lebanon Wars involving Lithuania Wars involving Norway Wars involving Pakistan Wars involving the Philippines Wars involving Russia Wars involving Saudi Arabia Wars involving South Africa Wars involving South Korea Wars involving Spain Wars involving the Taliban Wars involving Turkey Wars involving the United Arab Emirates Wars involving the United Kingdom Wars involving the United States Wars involving Yemen Foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration George W. Bush administration controversies Wars involving Somalia Wars involving Libya Wars involving Syria Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2013 Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Articles with dead external links from December 2011 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2024 CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2015 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 20:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents War on terror 68 languages Add topic

