Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission statement 2 History 3 Notable persons 4 Sponsored professorships 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents John M. Olin Foundation 2 languages Deutsch Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Defunct conservative US grant-making foundation John M. Olin Foundation Formation 1953 Founder John M. Olin Dissolved November 29, 2005 Type Conservative grant-making foundation Headquarters Manhattan , New York City , U.S.

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The John M. Olin Foundation was a conservative American grant-making foundation established in 1953 by John M. Olin , president of the Olin Industries chemical and munitions manufacturing businesses. Unlike most other foundations, it was charged to spend all of its assets within a generation of Olin's death, for fear of mission drift over time and to preserve donor intent . It made its last grant in the summer of 2005 and officially disbanded on November 29, 2005. It had disbursed over $370 million in funding, primarily to conservative think tanks , media outlets, and law programs at influential universities. It is most notable for its early support and funding of the law and economics movement and the Federalist Society . "All in all, the Federalist Society has been one of the best investments the foundation ever made," wrote the Foundation to its trustees in 2003.

[ 1 ] Mission statement [ edit ] According to the official website, "the general purpose of the John M. Olin Foundation is to provide support for projects that reflect or are intended to strengthen the economic, political and cultural institutions upon which the American heritage of constitutional government and private enterprise is based. The Foundation also seeks to promote a general understanding of these institutions by encouraging the thoughtful study of the connections between economic and political freedoms, and the cultural heritage that sustains them." [ 2 ] History [ edit ] From 1958 to 1966, the foundation was used to launder money for the Central Intelligence Agency , which funded covert anti-communist propaganda.

[ 3 ] The fund was largely inactive until 1969, when John M. Olin was disturbed by the Willard Straight Hall takeover at his alma mater, Cornell University . At the age of 80, he decided that he must pour his time and resources into preserving the free market system.

[ 4 ] The Foundation is most notable for its early support and funding of the law and economics movement, [ 5 ] a discipline that applies incentive-based thinking and cost-benefit analysis to the field of legal theory .

[ citation needed ] The executive director of the Foundation in its early years was conservative activist Michael S. Joyce , who left to head the similar Bradley Foundation .

[ 5 ] William E. Simon , a leverage buyout pioneer who was United States Secretary of the Treasury under Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford , was president of the Foundation from 1977 until his death in 2000.

[ 6 ] He frequently discussed the foundation's commitment to supporting the "counter-intelligentsia". Conservative scholar James Piereson was the last executive director [ 5 ] and secretary.

The foundation supported conservative thinkers such as Heather Mac Donald of the Manhattan Institute ; Mac Donald is the John M. Olin Fellow at this New York City–based institution.

[ 7 ] In 2005, following longstanding plans, [ 8 ] the foundation announced its final grants and closed its doors.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The foundation closed in the same year as the Franklin W. Olin Foundation , which was established by John Olin's father, Franklin W. Olin . The Franklin W. Olin Foundation also shut down for donor intent reasons, but the two foundations were entirely independent and unrelated, except for the family connection of their founders.

[ 9 ] According to the Philanthropy Roundtable , the Olin Foundation "dispensed hundreds of millions of dollars to scholars, think tanks, publications, and other organizations" and "shaped the direction and aided the growth of the modern conservative movement that first sprang into visibility in the 1980s." [ 5 ] According to the New York Observer , the Foundation distributed "grants to conservative think tanks and intellectuals—the architects of today's sprawling right-wing movement—for a quarter-century." [ 6 ] Notable persons [ edit ] James Piereson – past executive director and board member Peter M. Flanigan – past director Charles F. Knight – past director William E. Simon - past president Sponsored professorships [ edit ] There are several dozen John M. Olin Professors at universities and law schools around the world, including: John M. Olin Professor at Fordham University (formerly Ernest van den Haag ) John M. Olin Professor at George Mason University (formerly Walter E. Williams ) John M. Olin Professor at Yale Law School (currently George L. Priest ) John M. Olin Professor at Georgetown University (formerly Walter F. Berns ) See also [ edit ] Donors Trust References [ edit ] ^ Miller, John J.

(Fall 2001).

"A Federalist Solution" .

Philanthropy . Philanthropy Roundtable . Retrieved October 23, 2015 .

^ Jmof.org Archived March 5, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ Mayer, Jane . (2017)[2016].

Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the Rise of the Radical Right . Anchor Books. p. 127.

^ "Ripples from a past protest" .

www.chronicle.com . April 17, 2016 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ a b c d e Miller, John J.

"John Olin" .

Philanthropy Roundtable . Retrieved October 23, 2015 .

^ a b c Ratner, Lizzy (May 9, 2005).

"Olin Foundation, Right-Wing Tank, Snuffing Itself" .

New York Observer . Retrieved October 23, 2015 .

^ "Articles About Heather Mac Donald" .

The New York Times . November 4, 2010 . Retrieved November 4, 2010 .

Heather Mac Donald is a contributing editor of City Journal and the John M. Olin Fellow at the Manhattan Institute. Her latest book, co-written with Victor Davis Hanson and Steven Malanga, is The Immigration Solution .

^ Piereson, James (March–April 2002).

"The Insider's Guide to Spend Down: Switching off the lights at the Olin Foundation" .

Philanthropy . Retrieved June 13, 2012 .

^ Miller, John J.

(2006).

A Gift of Freedom: How the John M. Olin Foundation Changed America . San Francisco: Encounter.

Further reading [ edit ] John J. Miller , A Gift of Freedom: How the John M. Olin Foundation Changed America (2005) ISBN 1-59403-117-7 Jane Mayer , Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the Rise of the Radical Right (2016) ISBN 978-0307947901 External links [ edit ] Jason DeParle, " Goals Reached, Donor on Right Closes Up Shop " (May 29, 2005), The New York Times .

John M. Olin Center for Inquiry into the Theory and Practice of Democracy National Review Online: "Foundation's End," by John J. Miller Archived May 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine "Muscular Philanthropy: Tough love and the John M. Olin Foundation", Townhall.com , November 15, 2005 Archived November 17, 2005, at the Wayback Machine "John M. Olin Foundation" . Internal Revenue Service filings.

ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer .

v t e Olin Corporation Facilities Badger Army Ammunition Plant Lake City Army Ammunition Plant U.S. Repeating Arms Company People Franklin W. Olin John M. Olin Spencer Truman Olin Related F. W. Olin Foundation John M. Olin Foundation Winchester Repeating Arms Company Western Cartridge Company Winchester Mystery House Winchester Repeating Arms Company Historic District Oliver Winchester Sarah Winchester William Wirt Winchester Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_M._Olin_Foundation&oldid=1305725868 " Categories : Political and economic research foundations based in the United States The Heritage Foundation Organizations established in 1953 Organizations disestablished in 2005 2005 disestablishments in New York (state) Conservative organizations in the United States Defunct organizations based in New York City CIA-funded propaganda John M. Olin Foundation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John M. Olin Foundation 2 languages Add topic

