Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Philosophy 3 Works 4 Notes 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gerhard Dorn 10 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gerhard Dorn (c. 1530 – 1584) was a philosopher , translator , alchemist , physician and bibliophile .

Biography [ edit ] The details of Gerhard Dorn's early life, along with those of many other 16th century personalities, are lost to history.  It is known that he was born about 1530 in Mechelen , which is part of modern-day Belgium's Antwerp Province . He studied with Adam von Bodenstein , to whom his first book is dedicated and began publishing books from around 1565.  He used John Dee 's personal glyph from his 1564 book, the Monas Hieroglyphica , on the title page of his Chymisticum artificium .

Together with von Bodenstein, he rescued many of Paracelsus's manuscripts and printed them for the first time. He also translated many of them into Latin for the Basel publisher Pietro Perna and lived in Basel during the 1570s and Frankfurt in the early 1580s, where he died when he was in his mid-fifties.

Philosophy [ edit ] Dorn claimed to have found a better philosophy and a more Christian way of thinking in Paracelsus and was one of Paracelsus's strongest advocates. He depreciated practical laboratory work in favor of theoretical study of the human mind, considering the prevailing education of his day too scholastic. Like many alchemists , Dorn was hostile to the philosophy of Aristotle , with its emphasis upon the material world declaring that "whoever wishes to learn the alchemical art, let him not learn the philosophy of Aristotle but that which teaches the truth".

Dorn argued that learning needed a reform as had religion in the Reformation , as had medicine in the teachings of Paracelsus. What was needed, he asserted, was a mystical and spiritual "philosophy of love"—his radical theology claimed that it was God, not man who was in need of Redemption and he defined the alchemical opus as a labor which redeemed not man but God, a proposal which came perilously close to being heretical in the eyes of Christian orthodoxy. His principal writings are included in Volume I of the Theatrum Chemicum .

As Monika Wikman summarized in her book Pregnant Darkness , "Alchemists such as Gerhard Dorn, in his work 'The Speculative Philosophy,' referred to this next alchemical stage [inner healing] as Unus Mundus , where splits are healed, duality ceases, and the individual, the vir unus , unites with the world soul ." [ 1 ] Dorn's writings were of great interest to the psychologist Carl Jung , enough for him to take Dorn's principal writings with him when traveling to India in 1938. He is one of Jung's most frequently quoted sources upon alchemy .

Works [ edit ] Clavis totius Philosophiae Chymisticae , Lyons, 1567.

Chymisticum artificium naturae, theoricum et practicum , Frankfurt, 1568.

Aurorae Thesaurusque Philosophorum , Basel, 1577.

De Naturae Luce Physica , Frankfurt, 1583.

Dictionarium Paracelsi , Frankfurt, 1583.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Wikman, Monika.

Pregnant Darkness .  Berwick, Maine: Nicolas-Hays, Inc., 2004. Page 59 in trade paperback edition.

Sources [ edit ] Theatrum Paracelsicum : Prefaces and Dedications written by Gerhard Dorn Quotation from Theatrum Chemicum (vol.1 Speculative Philosophy ) Gerhard Dorn, Paul Ferguson, Adam McLean .

The Speculative Philosophy of Gerhard Dorn.

Glasgow.

Joel Blackstock, Gerhard Dorn: Alchemist, Philosopher, Visionary External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Gerhard Dorn .

Discussion of Dorn's thoughts on body, soul and spirit v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gerhard_Dorn&oldid=1301430702 " Categories : Philosophers of mind 16th-century Dutch philosophers Physicians from the Habsburg Netherlands Paracelsians Alchemists from the Spanish Netherlands 1530s births 1584 deaths 16th-century alchemists Hidden category: Use dmy dates from August 2021 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 20:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gerhard Dorn 10 languages Add topic

