Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common uses Toggle Common uses subsection 1.1 The is–ought problem 1.2 Moore's discussion 1.3 Appeal to nature 2 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 2.1 Bound-up functions 2.2 Irrationality of anti-naturalistic fallacy 2.3 Inconsistent application 2.4 Universally normative allegations of varied harm 2.5 Non-synonymous properties 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Naturalistic fallacy 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Purported fallacy in explaining good reductively For the claim that something is good or right because it is natural (or bad or wrong because it is unnatural), see Appeal to nature .

In metaethics , the naturalistic fallacy is the claim that it is possible to define good in terms of merely described entities, properties, or processes such as pleasant , desirable , or fitness .

[ 1 ] The term was introduced by British philosopher G. E. Moore in his 1903 book Principia Ethica .

[ 2 ] Moore's naturalistic fallacy is closely related to the is–ought problem , which comes from David Hume 's Treatise of Human Nature (1738–40); however, unlike Hume's view of the is–ought problem, Moore (and other proponents of ethical non-naturalism ) did not consider the naturalistic fallacy to be at odds with moral realism .

Common uses [ edit ] The is–ought problem [ edit ] Main article: Is–ought problem The term naturalistic fallacy is sometimes used to label the problematic inference of an ought from an is (the is–ought problem ).

[ 3 ] Michael Ridge relevantly elaborates that "[t]he intuitive idea is that evaluative conclusions require at least one evaluative premise—purely factual premises about the naturalistic features of things do not entail or even support evaluative conclusions." [ 1 ] This problematic inference usually takes the form of saying that if people generally do something (e.g., eat three times a day, smoke cigarettes, dress warmly in cold weather), then people ought to do that thing. The naturalistic fallacy occurs when the is–ought inference ("People eat three times a day, so it is morally good for people to eat three times a day") is justified by the claim that whatever practice exists is a natural one ("because eating three times a day is pleasant and desirable").

Bentham , in discussing the relations of law and morality, found that when people discuss problems and issues they talk about how they wish it would be, instead of how it actually is. This can be seen in discussions of natural law and positive law . Bentham criticized natural law theory because in his view it was an instance of the naturalistic fallacy, claiming that it described how things are rather than how they ought to be.

Moore's discussion [ edit ] The title page of Principia Ethica According to G. E. Moore 's Principia Ethica , when philosophers try to define good reductively, in terms of natural properties like pleasant or desirable , they are committing the naturalistic fallacy.

...the assumption that because some quality or combination of qualities invariably and necessarily accompanies the quality of goodness, or is invariably and necessarily accompanied by it, or both, this quality or combination of qualities is identical with goodness. If, for example, it is believed that whatever is pleasant is and must be good, or that whatever is good is and must be pleasant, or both, it is committing the naturalistic fallacy to infer from this that goodness and pleasantness are one and the same quality. The naturalistic fallacy is the assumption that because the words 'good' and, say, 'pleasant' necessarily describe the same objects, they must attribute the same quality to them.

[ 4 ] — Arthur N. Prior , Logic And The Basis Of Ethics In defense of ethical non-naturalism against ethical naturalism , Moore's argument is concerned with the semantic and metaphysical underpinnings of ethics. Moore argues that good, in the sense of intrinsic value , is simply ineffable. It cannot be defined because it is not reducible to other properties, being "one of those innumerable objects of thought which are themselves incapable of definition, because they are the ultimate terms by reference to which whatever 'is' capable of definition must be defined".

[ 5 ] On the other hand, ethical naturalists eschew such principles in favor of a more empirically accessible analysis of what it means to be good: for example, in terms of pleasure in the context of hedonism .

That "pleased" does not mean "having the sensation of red", or anything else whatever, does not prevent us from understanding what it does mean. It is enough for us to know that "pleased" does mean "having the sensation of pleasure", and though pleasure is absolutely indefinable, though pleasure is pleasure and nothing else whatever, yet we feel no difficulty in saying that we are pleased. The reason is, of course, that when I say "I am pleased", I do not mean that "I" am the same thing as "having pleasure". And similarly no difficulty need be found in my saying that "pleasure is good" and yet not meaning that "pleasure" is the same thing as "good", that pleasure means good, and that good means pleasure. If I were to imagine that when I said "I am pleased", I meant that I was exactly the same thing as "pleased", I should not indeed call that a naturalistic fallacy, although it would be the same fallacy as I have called naturalistic with reference to Ethics.

— G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica § 12 In §7, Moore argues that a property is either a complex of simple properties, or else it is irreducibly simple. Complex properties can be defined in terms of their constituent parts but a simple property lacks parts. In addition to good and pleasure , Moore suggests that colour qualia are undefined: if one wants to understand yellow, one must see examples of it. It will do no good to read the dictionary and learn that yellow names the colour of egg yolks and ripe lemons, or that yellow names the primary colour between green and orange on the spectrum, or that the perception of yellow is stimulated by electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of between 570 and 590 nanometers, because yellow is all that and more, by the open question argument .

Appeal to nature [ edit ] Main article: Appeal to nature Some people use the phrase, naturalistic fallacy or appeal to nature , in a different sense, to characterize inferences of the form "Something is natural; therefore, it is morally acceptable" or "This property is unnatural; therefore, this property is undesirable." Such inferences are common in discussions of medicine , homosexuality , environmentalism , and veganism .

The naturalistic fallacy is the idea that what is found in nature is good. It was the basis for social Darwinism , the belief that helping the poor and sick would get in the way of evolution, which depends on the survival of the fittest. Today, biologists denounce the naturalistic fallacy because they want to describe the natural world honestly, without people deriving morals about how we ought to behave (as in: If birds and beasts engage in adultery, infanticide, cannibalism, it must be OK).

— Steven Pinker [ 6 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Is–ought problem § Responses Bernard Williams called Moore's use of the term naturalistic fallacy a "spectacular misnomer", the matter in question being metaphysical, as opposed to rational.

[ 7 ] Some philosophers reject the naturalistic fallacy or suggest solutions for the proposed is–ought problem.

Bound-up functions [ edit ] Ralph McInerny suggests that ought is already bound up in is , insofar as the very nature of things have ends/goals within them. For example, a clock is a device used to keep time. When one understands the function of a clock, then a standard of evaluation is implicit in the very description of the clock, i.e., because it is a clock, it ought to keep the time. Thus, if one cannot pick a good clock from a bad clock, then one does not really know what a clock is. In like manner, if one cannot determine good human action from bad, then one does not really know what the human person is.

[ 8 ] [ page needed ] Irrationality of anti-naturalistic fallacy [ edit ] The belief that naturalistic fallacy is inherently flawed has been criticized as lacking rational bases , and labelled anti-naturalistic fallacy.

[ 9 ] [ page needed ] For instance, Alex Walter wrote: "The naturalistic fallacy and Hume's 'law' are frequently appealed to for the purpose of drawing limits around the scope of scientific inquiry into ethics and morality. These two objections are shown to be without force." [ 10 ] That is because said beliefs implicitly assert that there is no connection between the facts and the norms (in particular, between the facts and the mental process that led to adoption of the norms).

[ 11 ] However, philosophers show that these connections are inevitable.

A very basic example is that if people view rescuing people as morally correct, this would shape their beliefs on what constitutes danger and what situations warrant intervention. For wider-ranging examples, if one believes that a certain ethnic group of humans have a population-level statistical hereditary predisposition to destroy civilization while the other person does not believe that such is the case, that difference in beliefs about factual matters will make the first person conclude that persecution of said ethnic group is an excusable "necessary evil" while the second person will conclude that it is a totally unjustifiable evil.

Similarly, if two people think it is evil to keep people working extremely hard in extreme poverty, they will draw different conclusions on de facto rights (as opposed to purely semantic rights) of property owners. The latter is dependent on whether they believe property owners are responsible for the aforementioned exploitation. One who accepts this premise would conclude that it is necessary to persecute property owners to mitigate exploitation. The one who does not, on the other hand, would conclude that the persecution is unnecessary and evil.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Inconsistent application [ edit ] Some critics of the assumption that is-ought conclusions are fallacies point at observations of people who purport to consider such conclusions as fallacies do not do so consistently. Examples mentioned are that evolutionary psychologists who gripe about "the naturalistic fallacy" do make is-ought conclusions themselves when, for instance, alleging that the notion of the blank slate would lead to totalitarian social engineering or that certain views on sexuality would lead to attempts to convert homosexuals to heterosexuals. Critics point at this as a sign that charges of the naturalistic fallacy are inconsistent rhetorical tactics rather than detection of a fallacy.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Universally normative allegations of varied harm [ edit ] A criticism of the concept of the naturalistic fallacy is that while "descriptive" statements (used here in the broad sense about statements that purport to be about facts regardless of whether they are true or false, used simply as opposed to normative statements) about specific differences in effects can be inverted depending on values (such as the statement "people X are predisposed to eating babies" being normative against group X only in the context of protecting children while the statement "individual or group X is predisposed to emit greenhouse gases" is normative against individual/group X only in the context of protecting the environment), the statement "individual/group X is predisposed to harm whatever values others have" is universally normative against individual/group X. This refers to individual/group X being "descriptively" alleged to detect what other entities capable of valuing are protecting and then destroying it without individual/group X having any values of its own. For example, in the context of one philosophy advocating child protection considering eating babies the worst evil and advocating industries that emit greenhouse gases to finance a safe short term environment for children while another philosophy considers long term damage to the environment the worst evil and advocates eating babies to reduce overpopulation and with it consumption that emits greenhouse gases, such an individual/group X could be alleged to advocate both eating babies and building autonomous industries to maximize greenhouse gas emissions, making the two otherwise enemy philosophies become allies against individual/group X as a "common enemy". The principle, that of allegations of an individual or group being predisposed to adapt their harm to damage any values including combined harm of apparently opposite values inevitably making normative implications regardless of which the specific values are, is argued to extend to any other situations with any other values as well due to the allegation being of the individual or group adapting their destruction to different values. This is mentioned as an example of at least one type of "descriptive" allegation being bound to make universally normative implications, as well as the allegation not being scientifically self-correcting due to individual or group X being alleged to manipulate others to support their alleged all-destructive agenda which dismisses any scientific criticism of the allegation as "part of the agenda that destroys everything", and that the objection that some values may condemn some specific ways to persecute individual/group X is irrelevant since different values would also have various ways to do things against individuals or groups that they would consider acceptable to do. This is pointed out as a falsifying counterexample to the claim that "no descriptive statement can in itself become normative".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Non-synonymous properties [ edit ] In 1939, William Frankena [ 18 ] critiqued G. E. Moore 's conception of the naturalistic fallacy, claiming the concept was an instance of a definist fallacy . Frankena stated that, in arguing that good cannot be defined by natural properties, Moore was trying to avoid a broader confusion caused by attempting to define a term using non-synonymous properties.

[ 19 ] Frankena also argued that naturalistic fallacy is a complete misnomer because it is neither limited to naturalistic properties nor necessarily a fallacy. On the first word ( naturalistic ), he noted that Moore rejected defining good in non-natural as well as natural terms.

[ 20 ] Frankena rejected the idea that the second word ( fallacy ) represented an error in reasoning – a fallacy as it is usually recognized – rather than an error in semantics .

[ 21 ] In Moore's open-question argument , because questions such as "Is that which is pleasurable good?" have no definitive answer, then pleasurable is not synonymous with good. Frankena rejected this argument as: the fact that there is always an open question merely reflects the fact that it makes sense to ask whether two things that may be identical in fact are.

[ 22 ] Thus, even if good were identical to pleasurable, it makes sense to ask whether it is; the answer may be "yes", but the question was legitimate. This seems to contradict Moore's view which accepts that sometimes alternative answers could be dismissed without argument; however, Frankena objects that this [ clarification needed ] would be committing the fallacy of begging the question .

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Appeal to nature Appeal to novelty Appeal to tradition Moralistic fallacy Evidence-based medicine Evolution of morality Fact–value distinction Is-Ought Problem Metaethics Philosophical naturalism Norm (philosophy) Open-question argument Principia Ethica The Right and the Good Value theory Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Ridge, Michael (Fall 2019).

"Moral Non-Naturalism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 1 September 2024 .

^ Moore, G.E.

Principia Ethica § 10 ¶ 3 ^ W. H. Bruening, "Moore on 'Is-Ought'," Ethics 81 (January 1971): 143–49.

^ Prior, Arthur N.

(1949), Chapter 1 of Logic And The Basis Of Ethics , Oxford University Press ( ISBN 0-19-824157-7 ) ^ Moore, G.E.

Principia Ethica § 10 ¶ 1 ^ Sailer, Steve (30 October 2002).

"Q&A: Steven Pinker of 'Blank Slate' " .

UPI .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2015 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ Williams, Bernard Arthur Owen (2006).

Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy .

Abingdon, Oxfordshire : Taylor & Francis. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-415-39984-5 .

^ McInerny, Ralph (1982). "Chp. 3".

Ethica Thomistica . Cua Press.

^ Casebeer, W. D., "Natural Ethical Facts: Evolution, Connectionism, and Moral Cognition", Cambridge, MA: MIT Press , (2003) ^ Walter, Alex (2006).

"The Anti-naturalistic Fallacy: Evolutionary Moral Psychology and the Insistence of Brute Facts" .

Evolutionary Psychology .

4 : 33– 48.

doi : 10.1177/147470490600400102 .

^ "naturalistic fallacy" , TheFreeDictionary .

^ Susana Nuccetelli, Gary Seay (2011) "Ethical Naturalism: Current Debates" ^ Peter Simpson (2001) "Vices, Virtues, and Consequences: Essays in Moral and Political Philosophy" ^ Jan Narveson (2002) "Respecting persons in theory and practice: essays on moral and political philosophy" ^ H. J. McCloskey (2013) "Meta-Ethics and Normative Ethics" ^ Steven Scalet, John Arthur (2016) "Morality and Moral Controversies: Readings in Moral, Social and Political Philosophy" ^ N.T. Potter, Mark Timmons (2012) "Morality and Universality: Essays on Ethical Universalizability" ^ Frankena, W. K. (October 1939). "The Naturalistic Fallacy".

Mind .

48 (192). Oxford University Press: 464– 477.

doi : 10.1093/mind/XLVIII.192.464 .

JSTOR 2250706 .

^ Preston, Aaron (30 December 2005).

"Moore, George Edward" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ Hamid, Md. Abdul (1989).

G.E. Moore: A Study of His Ethics . Mittal Publications. pp.

93– 96.

ISBN 978-81-7099-174-8 .

^ a b Ridge, Michael (26 June 2008).

"Moral Non-Naturalism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ Flew, Antony (1984).

"Definist fallacy" .

A Dictionary of Philosophy . Macmillan. p. 85.

ISBN 978-0-312-20923-0 .

References [ edit ] Moore, George Edward (1903).

Principia Ethica . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-334-04040-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Frankena, W. K.

(1939). "The Naturalistic Fallacy".

Mind .

XLVIII (192): 464– 77.

doi : 10.1093/mind/XLVIII.192.464 .

JSTOR 2250706 .

Curry, Oliver (2006).

"Who's afraid of the naturalistic fallacy?" .

Evolutionary Psychology .

4 : 234– 47.

doi : 10.1177/147470490600400120 .

Walter, Alex (2006).

"The anti-naturalistic fallacy: Evolutionary moral psychology and the insistence of brute facts" .

Evolutionary Psychology .

4 : 33– 48.

doi : 10.1177/147470490600400102 .

Wilson, David Sloan ; Dietrich, Eric; Clark, Anne B. (2003). "On the inappropriate use of the naturalistic fallacy in evolutionary psychology".

Biology and Philosophy .

18 (5): 669– 81.

doi : 10.1023/A:1026380825208 .

S2CID 30891026 .

External links [ edit ] Principia Ethica Archived 2021-04-12 at the Wayback Machine Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"G.E. Moore" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Moral non-naturalism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Appeal to Nature entry in The Fallacy Files v t e Common fallacies ( list ) Formal In propositional logic Affirming a disjunct Affirming the consequent Denying the antecedent Argument from fallacy Masked man Mathematical fallacy In quantificational logic Existential Illicit conversion Proof by example Quantifier shift Syllogistic fallacy Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise Negative conclusion from affirmative premises Exclusive premises Existential Necessity Four terms Illicit major Illicit minor Undistributed middle Informal Equivocation Equivocation False equivalence False attribution Moral equivalence Quoting out of context Loki's Wager No true Scotsman Reification Map–territory relation Question-begging Circular reasoning / Begging the question Loaded language Leading question Compound question / Loaded question / Complex question No true Scotsman Correlative-based False dilemma Perfect solution Denying the correlative Suppressed correlative Illicit transference Composition Division Ecological Secundum quid Accident Converse accident Faulty generalization Anecdotal evidence Sampling bias Cherry picking McNamara Base rate / Conjunction Double counting False analogy Slothful induction Overwhelming exception Ambiguity Accent False precision Moving the goalposts Quoting out of context Slippery slope Sorites paradox Syntactic ambiguity Questionable cause Animistic Furtive Correlation implies causation Cum hoc Post hoc Gambler's Inverse Regression Single cause Slippery slope Texas sharpshooter Appeals Law/Legality Stone / Proof by assertion Consequences Argumentum ad baculum Wishful thinking Emotion Children Fear Flattery Novelty Pity Ridicule In-group favoritism Invented here / Not invented here Island mentality Loyalty Parade of horribles Spite Stirring symbols Wisdom of repugnance Genetic fallacy Ad hominem Appeal to motive Association Reductio ad Hitlerum Reductio ad Stalinum Bulverism Poisoning the well Tone Tu quoque Whataboutism Authority Accomplishment Ipse dixit Poverty / Wealth Etymology Nature Tradition / Novelty Chronological snobbery Other fallacies of relevance Arguments Ad nauseam Sealioning Argument from anecdote Argument from silence Argument to moderation Argumentum ad populum Cliché The Four Great Errors I'm entitled to my opinion Ignoratio elenchi Invincible ignorance Moralistic / Naturalistic Motte-and-bailey fallacy Psychologist's fallacy Rationalization Red herring Two wrongs make a right Special pleading Straw man Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bjqmq
Cached time: 20250812002832
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.441 seconds
Real time usage: 0.547 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2852/1000000
Revision size: 22311/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 109271/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5487/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77369/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.261/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7071835/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  465.799      1 -total
 28.49%  132.724      1 Template:Reflist
 19.27%   89.754      6 Template:Navbox
 16.95%   78.961      1 Template:Fallacies
 14.15%   65.892      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.09%   56.314      1 Template:Short_description
  8.95%   41.675      2 Template:Page_needed
  8.22%   38.298      2 Template:Fix
  6.98%   32.517      6 Template:Cite_journal
  6.58%   30.627      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21826:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812002832 and revision id 1302220047. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Naturalistic_fallacy&oldid=1302220047 " Categories : Relevance fallacies Concepts in ethics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 03:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Naturalistic fallacy 22 languages Add topic

