Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Research 3 Works translated into English 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Axel Honneth 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (born 1949) Axel Honneth Honneth in 2016 Born ( 1949-07-18 ) 18 July 1949 (age 76) Essen , West Germany Education Alma mater University of Bonn Ruhr University Bochum Free University of Berlin Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Frankfurt School Neopragmatism Institutions Free University of Berlin Goethe University Frankfurt Columbia University Doctoral students Carolin Emcke [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Rahel Jaeggi Hartmut Rosa Harald Lemke [ de ] [ 3 ] Main interests Political philosophy Social philosophy Moral philosophy Critical theory Recognition Axel Honneth ( / ˈ h ɒ n ɛ t / ; German: [ˈaksl̩ ˈhɔnɛt] ; born 18 July 1949) is a German philosopher who is the Professor for Social Philosophy at Goethe University Frankfurt [ 4 ] and the Jack B. Weinstein Professor of the Humanities in the department of philosophy at Columbia University .

[ 5 ] He was also director of the Institut für Sozialforschung ( Institute for Social Research ) in Frankfurt am Main , Germany between 2001 and 2018.

Biography [ edit ] Honneth was born in Essen , West Germany , on 18 July 1949, studied in Bonn , Bochum , Berlin and Munich (under Jürgen Habermas ), and taught at the Free University of Berlin and the New School before moving to the Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University of Frankfurt in 1996. He also held the Spinoza Chair of Philosophy at the University of Amsterdam in 1999.

[ 6 ] Between 2001 and 2018 he was director of the Institute for Social Research, originally home to the so-called Frankfurt School , at the University of Frankfurt.

[ 7 ] Since 2011, he is also Jack B. Weinstein Professor of the Humanities at the department of philosophy at Columbia University in the City of New York.

[ 8 ] Honneth is co-editor of numerous specialist journals, including the Deutschen Zeitschrift für Philosophie , the European Journal of Philosophy and the journal Constellations . From 2007 to 2017, Honneth was President of the Internationale Hegel-Vereinigung (International Hegel Association).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Research [ edit ] Honneth's work focuses on social-political and moral philosophy , especially relations of power , recognition , and respect. One of his core arguments is for the priority of intersubjective relationships of recognition in understanding social relations. This includes non- and mis-recognition as a basis of social and interpersonal conflict. For instance, grievances regarding the distribution of goods in society are ultimately struggles for recognition justice .

His first main work The Critique of Power: Reflective Stages in a Critical Social Theory explores the affinities between the Frankfurt School and Michel Foucault . In his second main work The Struggle for Recognition: Moral Grammar of Social Conflicts , the recognition concept is derived mainly from G. W. F. Hegel 's early social philosophical works, but is supplemented by George Herbert Mead 's social psychology , Jürgen Habermas ' communicative ethics, and Donald Winnicott 's object relations theory . Honneth's critical adaptation of these is the basis of his critical social theory, which attempts to remedy the deficits of previous approaches. In 2003, Honneth co-authored Recognition or Redistribution?

with the feminist philosopher Nancy Fraser , who criticizes the priority of ethical categories such as recognition over structural social-political categories such as redistribution in Honneth's thought. His recent work Reification reformulates this key " Western Marxist " concept in terms of intersubjective relations of recognition and power. For Honneth, all forms of reification are due to intersubjectively based pathologies rather than the structural character of social systems such as capitalism as argued by Karl Marx and György Lukács .

In The Idea of Socialism , Honneth calls for a revision of socialist theory in order to make it relevant for the 21st century, based on a criticism of the socialist theory of historical materialism , ignorance of political rights and social differentiation in modern societies, and overemphasis on the working class as a revolutionary subject. In order to fully realize the three principles of the French Revolution , Honneth suggests three revisions: Replacing economic determinism with historical experimentation inspired by John Dewey , expanding social freedom – mutual dependence and cooperation among members of society – to the other spheres of modern society (i.e. the political and the private), as well as addressing all citizens of the democratic sphere.

Works translated into English [ edit ] Social Action and Human Nature , co-authored with Hans Joas (Cambridge University Press, 1988 [1980]).

The Critique of Power: Reflective Stages in a Critical Social Theory (MIT Press, 1991 [1985]).

The Fragmented World of the Social: Essays in Social and Political Philosophy (SUNY Press, 1995 [1990]).

The Struggle for Recognition: The Moral Grammar of Social Conflicts (Polity Press, 1995 [1992]).

Redistribution or Recognition?: A Political-Philosophical Exchange , co-authored with Nancy Fraser (Verso, 2003).

Reification: A Recognition-Theoretical View (Oxford University Press, 2007).

Disrespect: The Normative Foundations of Critical Theory (Polity Press, 2007 [2000]).

Pathologies of Reason: On the Legacy of Critical Theory (2009).

The Pathologies of Individual Freedom: Hegel's Social Theory (2010).

The I in We: Studies in the Theory of Recognition (2012).

Freedom's Right (2014).

The Idea of Socialism (2016).

The Poverty of Our Freedom (Polity Press, 2020).

The Working Sovereign: Labour and Democratic Citizenship (Polity Press, 2024).

See also [ edit ] Biography portal Critical theory Recognition (sociology) Social exclusion Charles Taylor (philosopher) References [ edit ] ^ "Authors - PublicSpace" .

^ "Journalism, human rights and moral rectitude: Letters from a war zone" . 14 August 2010.

^ "Einstein Forum – Wissen essen oder die Weisheit eines guten Geschmacks" .

^ "Goethe-Universität —" .

^ "Axel Honneth | Philosophy" .

^ uva.nl ^ "Axel Honneth | Institut für Sozioalforschung (IfS), Frankfurt (Main)" . Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2020 .

^ "Axel Honneth | Department of Philosophy - Columbia University" . Archived from the original on 15 April 2012 . Retrieved 6 March 2012 .

^ "Internationale Hegelvereinigung e.V." Internationale Hegelvereinigung e.V.

(in German) . Retrieved 15 January 2025 .

^ "News: New Vorstand of the Internationale Hegel-Vereinigung/ Neuer Vorstand der Internationalen Hegel-Vereinigung/ Nouveau Vorstand de l'Internationale Hegel-Vereinigung | hegelpd" . Retrieved 16 January 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bert van den Brink and David Owen, Recognition and Power: Axel Honneth and the Tradition of Critical Social Theory (Cambridge University Press, 2007).

Deranty, Jean-Philippe, Beyond Communication: A Critical Study of Axel Honneth's Social Philosophy (Brill, 2009).

Iser, Matthias, Empörung und Fortschritt. Grundlagen einer Kritischen Theorie der Gesellschaft (Campus, 2008).

Schmidt-am-Busch, Hans-Christoph and Zurn, Christopher (eds), The Philosophy of Recognition. Historical and Contemporary Perspectives (Lexington Books, 2009) Thompson, Simon, The Political Theory of Recognition. A Critical Introduction (Polity, 2006).

Huttunen, Rauno, Habermas, Honneth and Education (Lambert Academic Publishing 2009).

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Axel Honneth .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Axel Honneth .

Tanner Lecture on Reification, 2005 Archived 13 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine 2006 Program of Research: Paradoxes of Capitalist Modernization Joel Anderson's Introduction to The Struggle for Recognition.

Honneth in London Axel Honneth in conversation with Peter Dews, 2007 Homepages of Axel Honneth at the University of Frankfurt and the Institute for Social Research .

2007 Talks by Honneth Archived 23 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine "Patterns of Intersubjective Recognition: Love, Rights, and Solidarity" by Honneth "Social Criticism in the Age of the Normalized Intellectual" Chapter 1, The Pathologies of Individual Freedom: Hegel's Social Theory (2010) Recognition Forum (Research on recognition theory, bibliographies, theses, events, forum) Interview with Axel Honneth, Barcelona Metropolis, num. 78, Spring, 2010.

Interview with Honneth for the Platypus Review 59 (September, 2013) Publications by Axel Honneth in WorldCat Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID PhilPeople Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Axel_Honneth&oldid=1305731153 " Categories : 1949 births 20th-century German essayists 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German philosophers 21st-century German essayists 21st-century German male writers 21st-century German non-fiction writers 21st-century German philosophers Columbia University faculty Frankfurt School philosophers Academic staff of the Free University of Berlin German ethicists German male essayists German male non-fiction writers German political philosophers German sociologists Academic staff of Goethe University Frankfurt Living people The New School faculty German philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics German philosophers of history Philosophers of social science German philosophy academics University of Bonn alumni Academic staff of the University of Konstanz Writers about activism and social change Writers from Essen Hegel scholars Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from May 2019 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Axel Honneth 24 languages Add topic

