Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Scope and duration 2.2 Causes 2.2.1 Low harvest 2.2.2 Collectivization, procurements, and the export of grain 2.2.3 Discrimination and persecution of Ukrainians 2.2.4 Peasant resistance 2.3 Regional variation 2.4 Repressive policies 2.4.1 Preceding the famine 2.4.2 During the famine 2.4.3 Near the end of and after the famine 2.5 Torgsin system 2.6 Cannibalism 2.7 Ukrainians in other republics 2.7.1 Kuban and the North Caucasus of Russia 2.7.2 Kazakhstan 2.8 Aftermath and immediate reception 2.9 Death toll 3 Genocide question 4 Soviet and Western denial and downplay 5 In modern politics Toggle In modern politics subsection 5.1 Government recognition of Holodomor 6 Remembrance Toggle Remembrance subsection 6.1 Ukraine 6.2 Germany 6.3 Canada 6.4 Poland 6.5 United States 6.6 On film 6.7 Vatican City 6.8 Holodomor memorials 7 In culture and the arts Toggle In culture and the arts subsection 7.1 Cinema 7.2 Literature 7.3 Theatre 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 12.1 Declarations and legal acts 12.2 Books and articles 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Holodomor 84 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Ladino Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русский Саха тыла Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1932–1933 human-made famine in Soviet Ukraine "Famine in Ukraine" redirects here. For other uses, see Famine in Ukraine (disambiguation) .

Holodomor Голодомор Starved peasants on a street in Kharkiv , 1933, Ukraine's capital at the time Country Soviet Union Location Ukraine SSR , northern Kuban , [ 1 ] Kazakh ASSR Period 1932–1933 Total deaths Around 3.5 to 5 million in Ukraine; see death toll 62,000 to "hundreds of thousands" in the Kuban [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Over 300,000 Ukrainians in Kazakhstan dead or migrated [ 4 ] Causes Industrialization policy during the First Five Year Plan Whether it was intentional is debated by scholars Relief Foreign relief rejected by the state. 176,200 and 325,000 tons of grains provided by the state as food and seed aids between February and July 1933.

[ 5 ] Consequences Heavy population loss in Ukraine Kuban Ukrainian population declined from 915,000 to 150,000 between 1926 and 1939 from various causes [ 6 ] Over 35% of Ukrainians in Kazakhstan lost in the famine [ 4 ] Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e The Holodomor , [ a ] also known as the Ukrainian famine , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ b ] was a mass famine in Soviet Ukraine from 1932 to 1933 that killed millions of Ukrainians . The Holodomor was part of the wider Soviet famine of 1930–1933 which affected the major grain-producing areas of the Soviet Union .

While most scholars are in consensus that the main cause of the famine was largely man-made, it remains in dispute whether the Holodomor was intentional , whether it was directed at Ukrainians, and whether it constitutes a genocide , the point of contention being the absence of attested documents explicitly ordering the starvation of any area in the Soviet Union. Some historians conclude that the famine was deliberately engineered by Joseph Stalin to eliminate a Ukrainian independence movement. Others suggest that the famine was primarily the consequence of rapid Soviet industrialisation and collectivization of agriculture. A middle position is that the initial causes of the famine were an unintentional byproduct of the process of collectivization but once it set in, starvation was selectively weaponized, and the famine was "instrumentalized" and amplified against Ukrainians as a means to punish them for resisting Soviet policies and to suppress their nationalist sentiments .

Ukraine was one of the largest grain-producing states in the USSR and was subject to unreasonably high grain quotas compared to the rest of the USSR in 1930.

[ 10 ] [ c ] This caused Ukraine to be hit particularly hard by the famine. Early estimates of the death toll by scholars and government officials vary greatly. A joint statement to the United Nations signed by 25 countries in 2003 declared that 7 to 10 million people died.

[ d ] More recent scholarship has estimated a lower range of between 3.5 and 5 million victims.

[ 11 ] Public discussion of the famine was banned in the Soviet Union until the glasnost period initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev in the 1980s.

[ 12 ] Since 2006, the Holodomor has been recognized as a genocide by Ukraine and 33 other UN member states, the European Parliament , and 35 of the 50 states of the United States [ 13 ] as a genocide against the Ukrainian people carried out by the Soviet government. In 2008, the Russian State Duma condemned the Soviet regime "that has neglected the lives of people for the achievement of economic and political goals".

[ 14 ] Etymology The Ukrainian word Holodomor means "death by hunger", "killing by hunger, killing by starvation", [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] or sometimes "murder by hunger or starvation." [ 18 ] It is a compound of the Ukrainian holod , ' hunger ' and mor , ' plague '. The Ukrainian verb moryty ( морити ) means "to poison, to drive to exhaustion, or to torment", and the expression holodom moryty means "to inflict death by hunger."  The perfective form of moryty is zamoryty , 'kill or drive to death'.

[ 19 ] In English, the Holodomor has also been referred to as the artificial famine , terror-genocide and the great famine .

[ 12 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The word was used in print in the 1930s in Ukrainian diaspora publications in Czechoslovakia as Haladamor , [ 22 ] and by Ukrainian immigrant organisations in the United States and Canada by 1978; [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] in the Soviet Union , of which Ukraine was a constituent republic , any references to the famine were dismissed as anti-Soviet propaganda , even after de-Stalinization in 1956, until the declassification and publication of historical documents in the late 1980s made continued denial of the catastrophe unsustainable.

[ 12 ] Discussion of the Holodomor became possible as part of the Soviet glasnost ("openness") policy in the 1980s. In Ukraine, the first official use of famine was in a December 1987 speech by Volodymyr Shcherbytskyi , First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine , on the occasion of the republic's 70th anniversary.

[ 26 ] Another early public usage in the Soviet Union was in a February 1988 speech by Oleksiy Musiyenko, Deputy Secretary for ideological matters of the party organisation of the Kyiv branch of the Union of Soviet Writers in Ukraine.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The term holodomor may have first appeared in print in the Soviet Union on 18 July 1988, when Musiyenko's article on the topic was published.

[ 29 ] Holodomor is now an entry in the modern, two-volume dictionary of the Ukrainian language, published in 2004, described as "artificial hunger, organised on a vast scale by a criminal regime against a country's population." [ 30 ] According to Elazar Barkan, Elizabeth A. Cole, and Kai Struve, the Holodomor has been described as a "Ukrainian Holocaust". They assert that since the 1990s the term Holodomor has been widely adopted by anti-communists in order to draw parallels to the Holocaust . However this term has been criticized by some academics, as the Holocaust was a heavily documented, coordinated effort by Nazi Germany and its collaborators to eliminate certain ethnic groups such as Jews. By contrast, there is no definitive documentation that Stalin directly ordered the mass murder of Ukrainians.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Barkan et al. state that the term Holodomor was "introduced and popularized by the Ukrainian diaspora in North America before Ukraine became independent" and that the term 'Holocaust' in reference to the famine "is not explained at all." [ 33 ] History Scope and duration The famine affected the Ukrainian SSR as well as the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (a part of the Ukrainian SSR at the time) in spring 1932, [ 34 ] and from February to July 1933, [ 35 ] with the most victims recorded in spring 1933. The consequences are evident in demographic statistics: between 1926 and 1939, the Ukrainian population increased by only 6.6%, whereas Russia and Belarus grew by 16.9% and 11.7% respectively.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] The number of Ukrainians as ethnicity decreased by 10%.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] From the 1932 harvest, Soviet authorities were able to procure only 4.3 million tons of grain, as compared with 7.2 million tons obtained from the 1931 harvest.

[ 40 ] Rations in towns were drastically cut back, and in winter 1932–1933 and spring 1933, people in many urban areas starved.

[ 41 ] Urban workers were supplied by a rationing system and therefore could occasionally assist their starving relatives in the countryside, but rations were gradually cut. By spring 1933, urban residents also faced starvation. It is estimated 70% to 80% of all famine deaths during the Holodomor in eight analyzed Oblasts in the Soviet Union occurred in the first seven months of 1933.

[ 42 ] The first reports of mass malnutrition and deaths from starvation emerged from two urban areas of the city of Uman , reported in January 1933 by Vinnytsia and Kyiv oblasts . By mid-January 1933, there were reports about mass "difficulties" with food in urban areas, which had been undersupplied through the rationing system, and deaths from starvation among people who were refused rations, according to the December 1932 decree of the Central Committee of the Ukrainian Communist Party. By the beginning of February 1933, according to reports from local authorities and Ukrainian GPU (secret police), the most affected area was Dnipropetrovsk Oblast , which also suffered from epidemics of typhus and malaria .

Odesa and Kyiv oblasts were second and third respectively. By mid-March, most of the reports of starvation originated from Kyiv Oblast.

[ citation needed ] By mid-April 1933, Kharkiv Oblast reached the top of the most affected list, while Kyiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Odesa, Vinnytsia, and Donetsk oblasts, and Moldavian SSR were next on the list. Reports about mass deaths from starvation, dated mid-May through the beginning of June 1933, originated from raions in Kyiv and Kharkiv oblasts. The "less affected" list noted Chernihiv Oblast and northern parts of Kyiv and Vinnytsia oblasts. The Central Committee of the CP(b) of Ukraine Decree of 8 February 1933 said no hunger cases should have remained untreated.

[ 43 ] The Ukrainian Weekly , which was tracking the situation in 1933, reported the difficulties in communications and the appalling situation in Ukraine.

[ 44 ] Local authorities had to submit reports about the numbers suffering from hunger, the reasons for hunger, number of deaths from hunger, food aid provided from local sources, and centrally provided food aid required. The GPU managed parallel reporting and food assistance in the Ukrainian SSR. Many regional reports and most of the central summary reports are available from present-day central and regional Ukrainian archives.

[ 43 ] Causes Soviet grain collections and exports (in thousand tons) [ 45 ] Year ending Collections Exports June 1930 16081 1343 June 1931 22139 5832 June 1932 22839 4786 June 1933 18513 1607 Main article: Causes of the Holodomor Olga Andriewsky writes that scholars are in consensus that the cause of the famine was man-made.

[ 46 ] The term "man-made" is, however, questioned by historians such as R. W. Davies and Stephen Wheatcroft , according to whom those who use this term "underestimate the role of ... natural causes", [ 47 ] though they agree that the Holodomor was largely a result of Stalin's economic policies. Among contemporary historians it is debated whether the famine was an intended result of such policies, [ 48 ] whether the Holodomor was directed at Ukrainians, and whether it constitutes a genocide, the point of contention being the absence of attested documents explicitly ordering the starvation of any area in the Soviet Union.

[ 49 ] Some historians conclude that the famine was deliberately engineered by Joseph Stalin to eliminate a Ukrainian independence movement.

[ e ] Others suggest that the famine was primarily the consequence of rapid Soviet industrialisation and collectivization of agriculture. A middle position, held for example by historian Andrea Graziosi, is that the initial causes of the famine were an unintentional byproduct of the process of collectivization but once it set in, starvation was selectively weaponized and the famine was "instrumentalized" and amplified against Ukrainians as a means to punish Ukrainians for resisting Soviet policies and to suppress their nationalist sentiments .

[ 50 ] Some scholars suggest that the famine was a consequence of human-made and natural factors.

[ 26 ] The most prevalent man-made factor was changes made to agriculture because of rapid industrialisation during the First Five Year Plan .

[ 51 ] [ 18 ] [ 52 ] There are also those who blame a systematic set of policies perpetrated by the Soviet government under Stalin designed to exterminate the Ukrainians.

[ e ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Low harvest According to historian Stephen G. Wheatcroft , the grain yield for the Soviet Union preceding the famine was a low harvest of between 55 and 60 million tons, [ 56 ] likely in part caused by damp weather and low traction power, [ 57 ] yet official statistics mistakenly reported a yield of 68.9 million tons.

[ 58 ] (A single ton of grain is enough to provide a good bread ration containing c.

2350 kCal per person for three people for one year.) [ 59 ] Historian Mark Tauger has suggested that drought and damp weather were causes of the low harvest.

[ 60 ] Mark Tauger suggested that heavy rains would help the harvest while Stephen Wheatcroft suggested it would hurt it, which Natalya Naumenko notes as a disagreement in scholarship.

[ 61 ] Another factor which reduced the harvest suggested by Tauger included endemic plant rust.

[ 62 ] However, in regard to plant disease, Stephen Wheatcroft notes that the Soviet extension of sown area combined with lack of crop rotation may have exacerbated the problem, [ f ] which Tauger also acknowledges in regard to the latter.

[ 63 ] Collectivization, procurements, and the export of grain See also: Collectivization in the Soviet Union ; Five-year plans of the Soviet Union § First plan, 1928–1932 ; and Causes of the Holodomor § Consequence of collectivization Postcard commemorating the 15th anniversary of the Holodomor, which shows Stalin looking at his kolkhoz built on a pile of starved Ukrainians. Published in 1948 by the Ukrainian Youth Association .

Due to factional struggles with the Bukharin wing of the party, peasant resistance to the NEP under Lenin , and the need for industrialization, Joseph Stalin declared a need to extract a "tribute" or "tax" from the peasantry.

[ 64 ] This idea was supported by most of the party in the 1920s.

[ 64 ] The tribute collected by the party took on the form of a virtual war against the peasantry that would lead to its cultural destruction and the relegating of the countryside to essentially a colony homogenized to the urban culture of the Soviet elite.

[ 64 ] Leon Trotsky , however, opposed the policy of forced collectivisation under Stalin and would have favoured a voluntary , gradual approach towards collective farming [ 65 ] [ 66 ] with greater tolerance for the rights of Soviet Ukrainians.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] This campaign of "colonizing" the peasantry had its roots both in old Russian Imperialism and modern social engineering of the nation state yet with key differences to the latter such as Soviet repression reflecting more the weakness of said state rather than its strength.

[ 64 ] In this vein, by the summer of 1930, the government instituted a program of food requisitioning, ostensibly to increase grain exports. According to Natalya Naumenko, collectivization in the Soviet Union and lack of favored industries were primary contributors to famine mortality (52% of excess deaths), and some evidence shows there was discrimination against ethnic Ukrainians and Germans. In Ukraine collectivisation policy was enforced, entailing extreme crisis and contributing to the famine. In 1929–1930, peasants were induced to transfer land and livestock to state-owned farms, on which they would work as day-labourers for payment in kind.

[ 69 ] Food exports continued during the famine, albeit at a reduced rate.

[ 70 ] Michael Ellman states that the 1932–1933 grain exports amounted to 1.8 million tonnes, which would have been enough to feed 5 million people for one year.

[ 6 ] The collectivization and high procurement quota explanation for the famine is somewhat called into question by the fact that the oblasts of Ukraine with the highest losses were Kyiv and Kharkiv , which produced far smaller amounts of grain than other parts of the country.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Historian Stephen G. Wheatcroft lists four problems Soviet authorities ignored during collectivization that would hinder the advancement of agricultural technology and ultimately contributed to the famine: [ 73 ] "Over-extension of the sown area" — Crops yields were reduced and likely some plant disease caused by the planting of future harvests across a wider area of land without rejuvenating soil leading to the reduction of fallow land.

"Decline in draught power" — the overextraction of grain led to the loss of food for farm animals, which in turn reduced the effectiveness of agricultural operations.

"Quality of cultivation" — the planting and extracting of the harvest, along with ploughing, was done in a poor manner due to inexperienced and demoralized workers and the aforementioned lack of draught power.

"The poor weather" — drought and other poor weather conditions were largely ignored by Soviet authorities, who gambled on good weather and believed agricultural difficulties would be overcome.

Mark Tauger notes that Soviet and Western specialists at the time noted draught power shortages and lack of crop rotation contributed to intense weed infestations, [ 63 ] with these both being also factors Stephen Wheatcroft lists as contributing to the famine. Natalya Naumenko calculated that reduced agriculture production in "collectivized" collective farms is responsible for up to 52% of Holodomor excess deaths .

[ 74 ] Discrimination and persecution of Ukrainians See also: Causes of the Holodomor § Soviet state policies that contributed to the Holodomor , and Russification of Ukraine § Mid-1920s to early 1930s At every [train] station there was a crowd of peasants in rags, offering icons and linen in exchange for a loaf of bread. The women were lifting up their infants to the compartment windows—infants pitiful and terrifying with limbs like sticks, puffed bellies, big cadaverous heads lolling on thin necks.

— Arthur Koestler , Hungarian-British journalist It has been proposed that the Soviet leadership used the human-made famine to attack Ukrainian nationalism , and thus it could fall under the legal definition of genocide.

[ 75 ] For example, special and particularly lethal policies were adopted in and largely limited to Soviet Ukraine at the end of 1932 and 1933. According to Timothy Snyder , "each of them may seem like an anodyne administrative measure, and each of them was certainly presented as such at the time, and yet each had to kill." [ g ] [ 76 ] Other sources discuss the famine in relation to a project of imperialism or colonialism of Ukraine by the Soviet state.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] A map of the Soviet famine of 1932–1933 with the areas of most disastrous famine shaded black According to a Centre for Economic Policy Research paper published in 2021 by Andrei Markevich, Natalya Naumenko, and Nancy Qian, regions with higher Ukrainian population shares were struck harder with centrally planned policies corresponding to famine such as increased procurement rate, [ 79 ] and Ukrainian populated areas were given lower numbers of tractors which the paper argues demonstrates that ethnic discrimination across the board was centrally planned, ultimately concluding that 92% of famine deaths in Ukraine alone along with 77% of famine deaths in Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus combined can be explained by systematic bias against Ukrainians.

[ 80 ] The paper found from its analysis that "the regime intended to take more grain from Ukrainian areas after conditioning for factors such as production capacity" [ 81 ] and noting that "in areas that the Bolshevik regime marked as important for grain production, ethnic Russians replaced ethnic Ukrainians as the largest ethnic group".

[ 82 ] Mark Tauger criticized Natalya Naumenko's work as being based on: "major historical inaccuracies and falsehoods, omissions of essential evidence contained in her sources or easily available, and substantial misunderstandings of certain key topics".

[ 63 ] For example, Naumenko ignored Tauger's findings of 8.94 million tons of the harvest that had been lost to crop "rust and smut", [ 63 ] four reductions in grain procurement to Ukraine including a 39.5 million puds reduction in grain procurements ordered by Stalin, [ 63 ] and that from Tauger's findings which are contrary to Naumenko's paper's claims the "per-capita grain procurements in Ukraine were less, often significantly less, than the per-capita procurements from the five other main grain-producing regions in the USSR in 1932".

[ 63 ] Other scholars argue that in other years preceding the famine this was not the case. For example, Stanislav Kulchytsky claims Ukraine produced more grain in 1930 than the Central Black Earth Oblast , Middle and Lower Volga and North Caucasus regions all together, which had never been done before, and on average gave 4.7 quintals of grain from every sown hectare to the state—a record-breaking index of marketability—but was unable to fulfill the grain quota for 1930 until May 1931. Ukraine produced a similar amount of grain in 1931; however, by the late spring of 1932 "many districts were left with no reserves of produce or fodder at all".

[ 10 ] Despite this, according to statistics gathered by Nataliia Levchuk, Ukraine and North Caucasus Krai delivered almost 100% of their grain procurement in 1931 versus 67% in two Russian Oblasts during the same period versus 1932 where three Russian regions delivered almost all of their procurements and Ukraine and North Caucasus did not.

[ 42 ] This can partially be explained by Ukrainian regions losing a third of their harvests and Russian regions losing by comparison only 15% of their harvest.

[ 42 ] Ultimately, Tauger states: "if the regime had not taken even that smaller amount grain from Ukrainian villages, the famine could have been greatly reduced or even eliminated" however (in his words) "if the regime had left that grain in Ukraine, then other parts of the USSR would have been even more deprived of food than they were, including Ukrainian cities and industrial sites, and the overall effect would still have been a major famine, even worse in "non-Ukrainian" regions." [ 63 ] In fact in contrast to Naumenko's paper's claims the higher Ukrainian collectivization rates in Tauger's opinion actually indicate a pro-Ukrainian bias in Soviet policies rather than an anti-Ukrainian one: "[Soviet authorities] did not see collectivization as "discrimination" against Ukrainians; they saw it as a reflection of—in the leaders' view—Ukraine's relatively more advanced farming skills that made Ukraine better prepared for collectivization (Davies 1980a, 166, 187–188; Tauger 2006a)." [ 63 ] Naumenko responded to some of Tauger's criticisms in another paper.

[ 83 ] Naumenko criticizes Tauger's view of the efficacy of collective farms arguing Tauger's view goes against the consensus, [ 83 ] she also states that the tenfold difference in death toll between the 1932-1933 Soviet famine and the Russian famine of 1891–1892 can only be explained by government policies, [ 83 ] and that the infestations of pests and plant disease suggested by Tauger as a cause of the famine must also correspond such infestations to rates of collectivization due to deaths by area corresponding to this [ 83 ] due Naumenko's findings that: "on average, if you compare two regions with similar pre-famine characteristics, one with zero collectivization rate and another with a 100 percent collectivization rate, the more collectivized region's 1933 mortality rate increases by 58 per thousand relative to its 1927–1928 mortality rate".

[ 83 ] Naumenko believes the disagreement between her and Tauger is due to a "gulf in training and methods between quantitative fields like political science and economics and qualitative fields like history" noting that Tauger makes no comments on one of her paper's results section.

[ 83 ] Tauger made a counter-reply to this reply by Naumenko.

[ 84 ] Tauger argues in his counter reply that Naumenko's attempt to correspond collectivization rates to famine mortality fails because "there was no single level of collectivization anywhere in the USSR in 1930, especially in the Ukrainian Republic" and that "since collectivization changed significantly by 1932–1933, any connection between 1930 and 1933 omits those changes and is therefore invalid".

[ 84 ] Tauger also criticizes Naumenko's ignoring of statistics Tauger's presented where "in her reply she completely ignored the quantitative data [Tauger] presented in [his] article" in which she against the evidence "denied that any famines took place in the later 1920s".

[ 84 ] To counter Naumenko's claim that collectivization explains the famine Tauger argues ( in his words) how agro-environmental disasters better explain the regional discrepancies: "[Naumenko's] calculations again omit any consideration of the agro-environmental disasters that harmed farm production in 1932. In her appendices, Table C3, she does the same calculation with collectivization data from 1932, which she argues shows a closer correlation between collectivization and famine mortality (Naumenko 2021b, 33). Yet, as I showed, those agroenvironmental disasters were much worse in the regions with higher collectivization—especially Ukraine, the North Caucasus, and the Volga River basin (and also in Kazakhstan)—than elsewhere in the USSR. As I documented in my article and other publications, these were regions that had a history of environmental disasters that caused crop failures and famines repeatedly in Russian history." [ 84 ] Tauger notes: "[Naumenko's] assumption that collectivization subjected peasants to higher procurements, but in 1932 in Ukraine this was clearly not the case" as "grain procurements both total and per-capita were much lower in Ukraine than anywhere else in the USSR in 1932".

[ 84 ] Peasant resistance Part of a series on the Holodomor Holodomor Memorial Day National Museum of the Holodomor-Genocide Historical background Famines in the Soviet Union Soviet famine of 1932–33 Kazakhstan famine of 1932–1933 Soviet institutions All-Union Communist Party (Bolshevik) Communist Party of Ukraine (Soviet Union) Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic Secret police (OGPU) Policies First five-year plan Collectivization Dekulakization Law of Spikelets Reversal of Ukrainization policies Propaganda in the Soviet Union Responsible parties Soviet Union Joseph Stalin Vyacheslav Molotov Lazar Kaganovich Pavel Postyshev Stanislav Kosior Vlas Chubar Investigation and understanding 1984 International Commission 1985 USA Commission Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor denial Genocide question Holodomor in modern politics v t e Part of a series on Genocide Issues List of genocides Genocides in history Genocides in history (before 1490) 1490–WWI WWI–WWII 1946–1999 21st century Effects on youth Denial Massacre Rape Incitement In relation to Colonialism / War Perpetrators, victims, and bystanders Prevention Psychology Recognition politics Risk factors Stages Types Anti-Indigenous Cultural Paper Utilitarian Studies Outline Bibliography Education Related topics Compulsory sterilization Democide Ethnic cleansing Ethnocide Forced assimilation Category v t e Part of a series on the History of Ukraine Early history Cucuteni–Trypillia culture Yamnaya culture Catacomb culture Cimmeria Taurica Scythia Bosporan Kingdom Sarmatia Zarubintsy culture Chernyakhov culture Hunnic Empire Middle Ages Early East Slavs Antes Rus' Khaganate Khazar Khaganate Kievan Rus' Cumania Principality of Kyiv Mongol invasion of Rus' Golden Horde Kingdom of Ruthenia Grand Duchy of Lithuania, Ruthenia and Samogitia Crimean Khanate Early Modern period Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Kyiv Voivodeship Cossacks Zaporozhian Host Zaporozhian Sich Khmelnytsky Uprising Cossack Hetmanate Left bank Right bank Russian Empire Sloboda Ukraine Danubian Sich Kuban Cossacks Habsburg Empire Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria Bukovina Carpathian Ruthenia Modern history Ukraine during World War I Ukraine after the Russian Revolution Ukrainian War of Independence Ukrainian People's Republic Makhnovshchina Ukrainian State Directorate of Ukraine West Ukrainian People's Republic Unification Act UPR in exile Ukrainian SSR Soviet Union Communist Party of Ukraine Holodomor Ukraine in World War II Reichskommissariat Ukraine Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists Volhynia massacre Chernobyl disaster Contemporary Ukraine Post-Soviet transition in Ukraine Cassette Scandal Orange Revolution Russia–Ukraine gas disputes Euromaidan Revolution of Dignity Russo-Ukrainian War Annexation of Crimea War in Donbas COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine Topics Name Flag Coat of arms Historical regions Christianity Economic history Banking Rail transport Shipbuilding Technology Television Jewish history Reference Bibliography of Ukrainian history Outline of Ukraine Outline of the Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine portal History portal v t e Collectivization in the Soviet Union , including the Ukrainian SSR, was not popular among the peasantry, and forced collectivisation led to numerous peasant revolts . The OGPU recorded 932 disturbances in Ukraine, 173 in the North Caucasus, and only 43 in the Central Black Earth Oblast (out of 1,630 total). Reports two years prior recorded over 4,000 unrests in Ukraine, while in other agricultural regions - Central Black Earth, Middle Volga, Lower Volga, and North Caucasus - the numbers were sightly above 1,000. OGPU's summaries also cited public proclamations of Ukrainian insurgents to restore the independence of Ukraine , while reports by the Ukrainian officials included information about the declining popularity and authority of the party among peasants.

[ 10 ] Oleh Wolowyna comments that peasant resistance and the ensuing repression of said resistance was a critical factor for the famine in Ukraine and parts of Russia populated by national minorities like Germans and Ukrainians allegedly tainted by "fascism and bourgeois nationalism" according to Soviet authorities.

[ 42 ] Regional variation The collectivization and high procurement quota explanation for the famine is called into question by the fact that the oblasts of Ukraine with the highest losses were Kyiv and Kharkiv , which produced far lower amounts of grain than other sections of the country.

[ 42 ] A potential explanation for this was that Kharkiv and Kyiv fulfilled and over fulfilled their grain procurements in 1930 which led to raions in these oblasts having their procurement quotas doubled in 1931 compared to the national average increase in procurement rate of 9%. While Kharkiv and Kyiv had their quotas increased, the Odesa oblast and some raions of Dnipropetrovsk oblast had their procurement quotas decreased.

[ 85 ] According to Nataliia Levchuk of the Ptoukha Institute of Demography and Social Studies, "the distribution of the largely increased 1931 grain quotas in Kharkiv and Kyiv oblasts by raion was very uneven and unjustified because it was done disproportionally to the percentage of wheat sown area and their potential grain capacity." [ 85 ] Famine losses by region [ 86 ] Oblast Total Deaths (1932–1934 in thousands) Deaths per 1000 (1932) Deaths per 1000 (1933) Deaths per 1000 (1934) Kyiv Oblast 1,110.8 13.7 178.7 7 Kharkiv Oblast 1,037.6 7.8 178.9 4.2 Vinnytsia Oblast 545.5 5.9 114.6 5.2 Dnipropetrovsk Oblast 368.4 5.4 91.6 4.7 Odesa Oblast 326.9 6.1 98.8 2.4 Chernihiv Oblast 254.2 6 75.7 11.9 Stalino Oblast 230.8 7 41.1 6.4 Tyraspol 68.3 9.6 102.4 8.1 Repressive policies A "black board" published in the newspaper "Under the Flag of Lenin" in January 1933—a "blacklist" identifying specific kolhozes and their punishment in the Bashtanka Raion , Mykolaiv Oblast , Ukraine.

Several repressive policies were implemented in Ukraine immediately preceding, during, and proceeding the famine, including but not limited to cultural-religious persecution the Law of Spikelets , Blacklisting , the internal passport system , and harsh grain requisitions.

Preceding the famine See also: Union for the Freedom of Ukraine process Coiner of the term genocide, Raphael Lemkin considered the repression of the Orthodox Church to be a prong of genocide against Ukrainians when seen in correlation to the Holodomor famine.

[ 87 ] Collectivization did not just entail the acquisition of land from farmers but also the closing of churches, burning of icons, and the arrests of priests.

[ 88 ] Associating the church with the tsarist regime, [ 89 ] the Soviet state continued to undermine the church through expropriations and repression.

[ 90 ] They cut off state financial support to the church and secularized church schools.

[ 89 ] By early 1930 75% of the Autocephalist parishes in Ukraine were persecuted by Soviet authorities.

[ 91 ] The GPU instigated a show trial which denounced the Orthodox Church in Ukraine as a "nationalist, political, counter-revolutionary organization" and instigated a staged "self-dissolution." [ 91 ] However the Church was later allowed to reorganize in December 1930 under a pro-Soviet cosmopolitan leader of Ivan Pavlovsky yet purges of the Church reignited during the Great Purge .

[ 91 ] Changes in cultural politics also occurred.

First soviet show trial in Ukraine in connection to the member of the Ukrainian Socialist-Revolutionary Party has taken place as early as 1921.

[ 92 ] Yet, the first show trial related to Ukraine in the period of the First five-year plan was a trial in 1928 in North Caucasus Krai , known as Shakhty Trial .

[ 93 ] Prior to this in October 1925 Shakhty Okrug (previously part of Donets Governorate ) was transferred from Ukrainian SSR to RSFSR [ 94 ] and thus the trial was held in Moscow.Yet, one of the central ones, was the "Union for the Freedom of Ukraine" Trial in which 45 intellectuals, higher education professors, writers, a theologian and a priest were publicly prosecuted in Kharkiv , then capital of Soviet Ukraine. Fifteen of the accused were executed, and 248 with links to the defendants were sent to the camps.

Ukrainian Youth Association was also considered a "sub-division" of the "Union for Freedom of Ukraine" and thus its members were also trialed.

[ 95 ] Other notable Ukrainian processes included "People's Revolutionary Socialist Party" trial in 1930 (it was claimed that this was an illegal armed insurgent organisation created in December 1929, which existed in Ukraine and Chechnya ) [ 96 ] and "Ukrainian National Center" trial in 1931 (another non-existent counter-revolutionary organisation).

[ 97 ] In RSFSR at that time some other show trials such as Industrial Party Trial (1930) and the 1931 Menshevik Trial were held. The total number is not known, [ 98 ] [ 99 ] but tens of thousands [ h ] of people are estimated to have been arrested, exiled, and/or executed during and after the trial including 30,000 [ 100 ] intellectuals, writers, teachers, and scientists.

During the famine The "Decree About the Protection of Socialist Property", nicknamed by the farmers the Law of Spikelets , was enacted on 7 August 1932. The purpose of the law was to protect the property of the kolkhoz collective farms. It was nicknamed the Law of Spikelets because it allowed people to be prosecuted for gleaning leftover grain from the fields. There were more than 200,000 people sentenced under this law.

[ 6 ] Stalin wrote a letter to Lazar Kaganovich on 11 September 1932, shortly before Kaganovich and Vyacheslav Molotov were appointed heads of special commissions to oversee the grain procurements in Ukraine and Kuban (a region populated primarily by ethnic Ukrainians at the time), in which Stalin urged Kaganovich to force Ukraine into absolute compliance: The main thing is now Ukraine. Matters in Ukraine are now extremely bad. Bad from the standpoint of the Party line. They say that there are two oblasts of Ukraine (Kyiv and Dnipropetrovs'k, it seems) where almost 50 raikomy [district Party committees] have come out against the plan of grain procurements, considering them unrealistic. In other raikomy , they confirm, the matter is no better. What does this look like? This is no party, but a parliament, a caricature of a parliament. Instead of directing the districts, Kosior is always waffling between the directives of the CC VKP(b) and the demands of the district Party committees and waffled to the end. Lenin was right, when he said that a person who lacks the courage at the necessary moment to go against the current cannot be a real Bolshevik leader. Bad from the standpoint of the Soviet [state] line.

Chubar is no leader. Bad from the standpoint of the GPU .

Redens lacks the energy to direct the struggle with the counterrevolution in such a big and unique republic as Ukraine. If we do not now correct the situation in Ukraine, we could lose Ukraine. Consider that Piłsudski is not daydreaming, and his agents in Ukraine are much stronger than Redens or Kosior imagine. Also consider that within the Ukrainian Communist Party (500,000 members, ha, ha) there are not a few (yes, not a few!) rotten elements that are conscious or unconscious Petliura adherents and in the final analysis agents of Pilsudski. If the situation gets any worse, these elements won't hesitate to open a front within (and outside) the Party, against the Party. Worst of all, the Ukrainian leadership doesn't see these dangers.... Set yourself the task of turning Ukraine in the shortest possible time into a fortress of the USSR, into the most inalienable republic. Don't worry about money for this purpose.

[ 101 ] The blacklist system was formalized in 1932 by the 20 November decree "The Struggle against Kurkul Influence in Collective Farms"; [ 102 ] blacklisting, synonymous with a board of infamy, was one of the elements of agitation-propaganda in the Soviet Union , and especially Ukraine and the ethnically Ukrainian Kuban region in the 1930s. A blacklisted collective farm, village, or raion (district) had its monetary loans and grain advances called in, stores closed, grain supplies, livestock, and food confiscated as a penalty, and was cut off from trade. Its Communist Party and collective farm committees were purged and subject to arrest, and their territory was forcibly cordoned off by the OGPU secret police.

[ 102 ] Although nominally targeting collective farms failing to meet grain quotas and independent farmers with outstanding tax-in-kind, in practice the punishment was applied to all residents of affected villages and raions, including teachers, tradespeople, and children.

[ 102 ] In the end 37 out of 392 districts [ 103 ] along with at least 400 collective farms where put on the "black board" in Ukraine, more than half of the blacklisted farms being in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast alone.

[ 104 ] Every single raion in Dnipropetrovsk had at least one blacklisted village, and in Vinnytsia oblast five entire raions were blacklisted.

[ 102 ] This oblast is situated right in the middle of traditional lands of the Zaporizhian Cossacks . Cossack villages were also blacklisted in the Volga and Kuban regions of Russia.

[ 102 ] Some blacklisted areas [ 103 ] in Kharkiv could have death rates exceeding 40% [ 86 ] while in other areas such as Vinnytsia blacklisting had no particular effect on mortality.

[ 86 ] The passport system in the Soviet Union (identity cards) was introduced on 27 December 1932 to deal with the exodus of peasants from the countryside. Individuals not having such a document could not leave their homes on pain of administrative penalties, such as internment in labour camps ( Gulag ). On 22 January 1933, Joseph Stalin signed a secret decree restricting travel by peasants after requests for bread began in the Kuban and Ukraine. Soviet authorities blamed the exodus of peasants during the famine on anti-Soviet elements, saying that "like the outflow from Ukraine last year, was organized by the enemies of Soviet power." [ i ] [ 105 ] There was a wave of migration due to starvation and authorities responded by introducing a requirement that passports be used to go between republics and banning travel by rail.

[ 106 ] During March 1933 GPU reported that 219,460 people were either intercepted and escorted back or arrested at its checkpoints meant to prevent movement of peasants between districts.

[ 107 ] It has been estimated that there were some 150,000 excess deaths as a result of this policy, and one historian asserts that these deaths constitute a crime against humanity .

[ 6 ] In contrast, historian Stephen Kotkin argues that the sealing of the Ukrainian borders caused by the internal passport system was in order to prevent the spread of famine-related diseases.

[ 108 ] A "Red Train" of carts from the "Wave of Proletarian Revolution" collective farm in the village of Oleksiyivka, Kharkiv oblast in 1932. "Red Trains" took the first harvest of the season's crop to the government depots. During the Holodomor, these brigades were part of the Soviet Government's policy of taking away food from the peasants.

Between January and mid-April 1933, a factor contributing to a surge of deaths within certain regions of Ukraine during the period was the relentless search for alleged hidden grain by the confiscation of all food stuffs from certain households, which Stalin implicitly approved of through a telegram he sent on 1 January 1933 to the Ukrainian government reminding Ukrainian farmers of the severe penalties for not surrendering grain they may be hiding.

[ 42 ] On the other hand, considerable grain reserves were held back by the Soviet government. By 1 July 1933, around 1,141,000 tons of grain were kept in partially secret reserves which the government did not want to touch. Stephen Wheatcroft, Mark Tauger, and R.W. Davies conclude: "it seems certain that, if Stalin had risked lower levels of these reserves in spring and summer 1933, hundreds of thousands – perhaps millions – of lives could have been saved".

[ 109 ] In order to make up for unfulfilled grain procurement quotas in Ukraine, reserves of grain were confiscated from three sources including, according to Oleh Wolowyna, "(a) grain set side for seed for the next harvest; (b) a grain fund for emergencies; (c) grain issued to collective farmers for previously completed work, which had to be returned if the collective farm did not fulfill its quota." [ 42 ] Near the end of and after the famine In Ukraine, there was a widespread purge of Communist party officials at all levels. According to Oleh Wolowyna, 390 "anti-Soviet, counter-revolutionary insurgent and chauvinist" groups were eliminated resulting in 37,797 arrests, that led to 719 executions, 8,003 people being sent to Gulag camps, and 2,728 being put into internal exile.

[ 42 ] 120,000 individuals in Ukraine were reviewed in the first 10 months of 1933 in a top-to-bottom purge of the Communist party resulting in 23% being eliminated as perceived class hostile elements.

[ 42 ] Pavel Postyshev was set in charge of placing people at the head of Machine-Tractor Stations in Ukraine which were responsible for purging elements deemed to be class hostile.

[ 42 ] The secretary of the Kharkiv Oblast referred to "bourgeois-nationalistic rabble" as "class enemies" even near the end of the famine.

[ 110 ] By the end of 1933, 60% of the heads of village councils and raion committees in Ukraine were replaced with an additional 40,000 lower-tier workers being purged.

[ 42 ] Bandura is a traditional Ukrainian musical instrument, whereas bandurists were the carriers of traditional songs and folklore. One of the communist newspapers in 1930 already stated that "being in love with nationalist romance is not a communist thing" and in December 1933 during the All-Ukrainian Union of Art Workers, the bandura and kobza were declared class-enemy instruments, [ 111 ] which lead to the beginning of the repressions against the musicians playing them.

Despite the crisis, the Soviet government refused to ask for foreign aid for the famine and persistently denied the famine's existence.

[ 112 ] What aid was given was selectively distributed to preserve the collective farm system. Grain producing oblasts in Ukraine such as Dnipropetrovsk were given more aid at an earlier time than more severely affected regions like Kharkiv which produced less grain.

[ 42 ] Joseph Stalin had quoted Vladimir Lenin during the famine declaring: " He who does not work, neither shall he eat ." [ 6 ] This perspective is argued by Michael Ellman to have influenced official policy during the famine, with those deemed to be idlers being disfavored in aid distribution as compared to those deemed "conscientiously working collective farmers".

[ 6 ] In this vein, Olga Andriewsky states that Soviet archives indicate that the most productive workers were prioritized for receiving food aid.

[ j ] Food rationing in Ukraine was determined by city categories (where one lived, with capitals and industrial centers being given preferential distribution), occupational categories (with industrial and railroad workers being prioritized over blue collar workers and intelligentsia), status in the family unit (with employed persons being entitled to higher rations than dependents and the elderly), and type of workplace in relation to industrialization (with those who worked in industrial endeavors near steel mills being preferred in distribution over those who worked in rural areas or in food).

[ 113 ] According to James Abbe , who visited Ukraine at that time, while the Soviet government insisted on him as well as other foreigners to sign an affidavit stating that "they had seen no forced labor in the Ukraine", [ 114 ] "only the actual industrial workers had received enough to eat and even their families had suffered".

[ 115 ] Describing the coal mines he visited in Donetsk region, James Abbe mentions: "The next day we went into the question of forced labor. Of course, the armed soldiers situated in the mine shafts, power houses and tipples had bayonets fastened to their rifles and revolvers strapped to their belts; but they were doubtless guarding the property — though the superintendent failed to tell us what they were guarding the mines against. Anyhow, the system of issuing and revoking food cards is far more sinister and effective than bayonets".

[ 116 ] There was also migration in to Ukraine as a response to the famine: in response to the demographic collapse, the Soviet authorities ordered large-scale resettlements, with over 117,000 peasants from remote regions of the Soviet Union taking over the deserted farms.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Areas depopulated by the famine were resettled by Russians in the Zaporizhzhia , Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, but not as much so in central Ukraine. In some areas where depopulation was due to migration rather than mortality, Ukrainians returned to their places of residence to find their homes occupied by Russians, leading to widespread fights between Ukrainian farmers and Russian settlers. Such clashes caused around one million Russian settlers to be returned home.

[ 119 ] Torgsin system Torgsin networks appeared in 1931.They were selling goods for foreign currency or exchanging them for precious metals. Originally only exclusively for foreigners, but later soviet citizens were also allowed to exchange the goods. During Holodomor people brought family heritage - crosses, earrings, wedding rings to Torgsins and exchanged it for special stamps, for which they could obtain basic goods - mostly flour, cereals or sugar. Torgsins operated at highly speculative prices and were known for long queues. With that mechanism authorities were able to extort from the population whatever could have been hidden during the confiscations. Many families survived, in particular thanks to Torgsin.

[ 120 ] Yet the network was also a cause of a psychological trauma, [ 121 ] since people had to give up on family valuables and relics that had not only material, but also spiritual value. During the Holodomor, the network of torgsins expanded considerably—by the end of 1933, there were already about 300 such shops in Soviet Ukraine.

[ 121 ] In 1933, the population brought 45 tons of pure gold to torgsins. The network existed until 1936.

Cannibalism Evidence of widespread cannibalism was documented during the Holodomor: [ 122 ] [ 123 ] Survival was a moral as well as a physical struggle. A woman doctor wrote to a friend in June 1933 that she had not yet become a cannibal, but was "not sure that I shall not be one by the time my letter reaches you." The good people died first. Those who refused to steal or to prostitute themselves died. Those who gave food to others died. Those who refused to eat corpses died. Those who refused to kill their fellow man died. Parents who resisted cannibalism died before their children did.... At least 2,505 people were sentenced for cannibalism in the years 1932 and 1933 in Ukraine, though the actual number of cases was certainly much higher.

[ 124 ] Most cases of cannibalism were " necrophagy , the consumption of corpses of people who had died of starvation". But the murder of children for food was common as well. Many survivors told of neighbors who had killed and eaten their own children. One woman, asked why she had done this, "answered that her children would not survive anyway, but this way she would". She was arrested by the police. The police also documented cases of children being kidnapped, killed, and eaten, and "stories of children being hunted down as food" circulated in many areas.

[ 125 ] When nearly all grain and all kinds of animal meat had been exhausted, "a black market arose in human flesh" and it "may even have entered the official economy." The police kept a close eye on butcher shops and slaughterhouses, trying to prevent them from bringing human flesh into circulation.

[ 126 ] The Italian consul, Sergio Gradenigo, nevertheless reported from Kharkiv that the "trade of human meat becomes more active." [ 127 ] In March 1933, the secret police in Kyiv province collected "ten or more reports of cannibalism every day" but concluded that "in reality there are many more such incidents", most of which went unreported. Those found guilty of cannibalism were often "imprisoned, executed, or lynched". But while the authorities were well informed about the extent of cannibalism, they also tried to suppress this information from becoming widely known, the chief of the secret police warning "that written notes on the subject do not circulate among the officials where they might cause rumours".

[ 125 ] And the information secretly collected failed to spur the Soviet government into action. Various reports of the horrors of the famine, including the cannibalism, were sent to Moscow, where they were apparently shelved and ignored.

[ 125 ] Ukrainians in other republics Ukrainians in other parts of the Soviet Union also experienced famine and repressive policies. Rural districts with Ukrainian populations in parts of the Soviet Union outside of Ukraine had higher mortality rates in Russia and Belarus than other districts, this discrepancy did not however apply to urban Ukrainians in these areas.

[ 128 ] This is sometimes viewed as being connected to the Holodomor in Ukraine.

[ 129 ] Kuban and the North Caucasus of Russia In 1932–1933, the policies of forced collectivization of the Ukrainian population of the Soviet Union, which caused a devastating famine that greatly affected the Ukrainian population of the Kuban. The number of documented victims of famine in Kuban was at least 62,000. According to other historians, the real death toll is many times higher.

[ 2 ] Brain Boeck thinks the figure more in the "hundreds of thousands".

[ 3 ] One source estimate that during the Soviet famine of 1932–1933 Krasnodar lost over 14% of its population.

[ 99 ] [ 42 ] Purges were also extensive in the region. 358 of 716 party secretaries in Kuban were removed, along with 43% of the 25,000 party members there; in total, 40% of the 115,000 to 120,000 rural party members in the North Caucasus were removed.

[ 130 ] Party officials associated with Ukrainization were targeted, as the national policy was viewed to be connected with the failure of grain procurement by Soviet authorities.

[ k ] In this vein the Kuban corresponding to the famine had a reversal of the previously attempted policy of Ukrainisation. Prior to the reversal of Ukrainianization, the policy was failing in the Kuban with most local districts not completing it partially due to opposition by local Cossack nationalists and Russian chauvinists in the Kuban including by sabotage despite punitive threats from the state to complete the process made in May 1932.

[ 3 ] The large Cossack stanitsa Poltavskaia sabotaged and resisted collectivization more than any other area in the Kuban which was perceived by Lazar Kaganovich to be connected to Ukrainian nationalist and Cossack conspiracy.

[ 3 ] Kaganovich relentlessly pursued the policy of requisition of grain in Poltavskaia and the rest of the Kuban and personally oversaw the purging of local leaders and Cossacks. Kaganovich viewed the resistance of Poltavskaia through Ukrainian lens delivering oration in a mixed Ukrainian language. To justify this Kaganovich cited a letter allegedly written by a stanitsa ataman named Grigorii Omel'chenko advocating Cossack separatism and local reports of resistance to collectivization in association with this figure to substantiate this suspicion of the area.

[ 3 ] However Kaganocvich did not reveal in speeches throughout the region that many of those targeted by persecution in Poltavskaia had their family members and friends deported or shot including in years before the supposed Omel'chenko crisis even started. Ultimately due to being perceived as the most rebellious area almost all (or 12,000) members of the Poltavskaia stantisa were deported to the north.

[ 3 ] This coincided with and was a part of a wider deportation of 46,000 cossacks from Kuban.

[ 131 ] According to the Holodomor Museum, 300,000 people were deported from the North Caucasus between 1930 and 1933, two thirds of them from the Kuban region.

[ 132 ] Likely in connection to the affairs in Poltavskaia, Ukrainization was officially reversed in a decree on 26 December 1932; as stated in this decree, there was a two-week deadline to transfer all publishing and paperwork in the region to Russian, and the Ukrainian language was effectively banned in Kuban until 1991.

[ 3 ] A representative of the Ukrainian state publishing house claimed 1,500 Ukrainian teachers in the Kuban were either deported or killed though this number has not been verified.

[ 3 ] The professional Ukrainian theatre in Krasnodar was closed. All Ukrainian toponyms in the Kuban, which reflected the areas from which the first Ukrainians settlers had moved, were changed.

[ 6 ] The names of Stanytsias such as the rural town of Kyiv, in Krasnodar, was changed to "Krasnoartilyevskaya", and Uman to "Leningrad", and Poltavskaia to "Krasnoarmieiskaya". Russification, the Holodomor of 1932–1933 and other tactics used by the Union government led to a catastrophic fall in the population that self-identified as being Ukrainian in the Kuban. Official Soviet Union statistics of 1959 state that Ukrainians made up 4% of the population, in 1989 – 3%. The self-identified Ukrainian population of Kuban decreased from 915,000 in 1926, to 150,000 in 1939.

[ 6 ] Kazakhstan Ethnic minorities in Kazakhstan were significantly affected by the Kazakh famine of 1930–1933 in addition to the Kazakhs. Ukrainians in Kazakhstan had the second highest proportional death rate after the Kazakhs themselves. Between the 1926 and 1937 censuses, Ukrainian population in Kazakhstan decreased by 36% from 859,396 to 549,859 – mainly from famine and epidemics but also including emigration – while Uzbeks, Uighurs, and other ethnic minorities in Kazakhstan each lost between 12% and 30% of their populations.

[ 4 ] Aftermath and immediate reception A print from a postcard designed by Zofia Nalepińska-Bojczuk, referring to the Holodomor, 1935 Despite attempts by the Soviet authorities to hide the scale of the disaster, it became known abroad thanks to the publications of journalists Gareth Jones , Malcolm Muggeridge , Ewald Ammende , and Rhea Clyman , and photographs made by engineer Alexander Wienerberger and others. To support their denial of the famine , the Soviets hosted prominent Westerners such as George Bernard Shaw , French ex-prime minister Édouard Herriot , and others at Potemkin villages , who then made statements that they had not seen hunger.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] During the German occupation of Ukraine , the occupation authorities allowed the publication of articles in local newspapers about Holodomor and other communist crimes, but they also did not want to pay too much attention to this issue in order to avoid stirring national sentiment.

[ citation needed ] In 1942, Stepan Sosnovy , an agronomist in Kharkiv , published a comprehensive statistical research on the number of Holodomor casualties, based on documents from Soviet archives.

[ 136 ] In the post-war period, the Ukrainian diaspora disseminated information about the Holodomor in Europe and North America. At first, the public attitude was rather cautious, as the information came from people who had lived in the occupied territories, but it gradually changed in the 1950s. Scientific study of the Holodomor, based on the growing number of memoirs published by survivors, began in the 1950s.

[ citation needed ] Death toll See also: Soviet Census (1937) A map of the depopulation of Ukraine and southern Russia from 1929 to 1933, with territories that were not part of the Soviet state during the famine in white The Soviet Union long denied that the famine had taken place. The NKVD (and later KGB ) controlled the archives for the Holodomor period and made relevant records available very slowly. The exact number of the victims remains unknown and is probably impossible to estimate even within a margin of error of a hundred thousand.

[ 137 ] However, by the end of 1933, millions of people had starved to death or otherwise died unnaturally in the Soviet republics. In 2001, based on a range of official demographic data, historian Stephen G. Wheatcroft noted that official death statistics for this period were systematically repressed and showed that many deaths were un-registered.

[ 138 ] Estimates vary in their coverage, with some using the 1933 Ukraine borders, some of the current borders, and some counting ethnic Ukrainians. Some extrapolate on the basis of deaths in a given area, while others use archival data. Some historians question the accuracy of Soviet censuses, as they may reflect Soviet propaganda .

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Other estimates come from recorded discussions between world leaders. In an August 1942 conversation, Stalin gave Winston Churchill his estimates of the number of " kulaks " who were repressed for resisting collectivisation as 10 million, in all of the Soviet Union, rather than only in Ukraine. When using this number, Stalin implied that it included not only those who lost their lives but also those who were forcibly deported.

[ 141 ] [ 140 ] There are variations in opinion as to whether deaths in Gulag labour camps should be counted or only those who starved to death at home. Estimates before archival opening varied widely such as: 2.5 million ( Volodymyr Kubiyovych ); [ 140 ] 4.8 million (Vasyl Hryshko); [ 140 ] and 5 million ( Robert Conquest ).

[ 142 ] In the 1980s, dissident demographer and historian Alexander P. Babyonyshev (writing as Sergei Maksudov) estimated officially non-accounted child mortality in 1933 at 150,000, [ 143 ] leading to a calculation that the number of births for 1933 should be increased from 471,000 to 621,000 (down from 1,184,000 in 1927).

[ verification needed ] Given the decreasing birth rates and assuming the natural mortality rates in 1933 to be equal to the average annual mortality rate in 1927–1930 (524,000 per year), a natural population growth for 1933 would have been 97,000 (as opposed to the recorded decrease of 1,379,000). This was five times less than the growth in the previous three years (1927–1930). Straight-line extrapolation of population (continuation of the previous net change) between census takings in 1927 and 1936 would have been +4.043 million, which compares to a recorded −538,000 change. Overall change in birth and death amounts to 4.581 million fewer people but whether through factors of choice, disease or starvation will never be fully known.

[ citation needed ] In the 2000s, there were debates among historians and in civil society about the number of deaths as Soviet files were released and tension built between Russia and the Ukrainian president Viktor Yushchenko . Yushchenko and other Ukrainian politicians described fatalities as in the region of seven to ten million.

[ 18 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] [ 146 ] Yushchenko stated in a speech to the United States Congress that the Holodomor "took away 20 million lives of Ukrainians,".

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Former Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper issued a public statement giving the death toll at about 10 million.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] Some Ukrainian and Western historians use similar figures.

David R. Marples gave a figure of 7.5 million in 2007.

[ 152 ] During an international conference held in Ukraine in 2016, Holodomor 1932–1933 loss of the Ukrainian nation , at the National University of Kyiv Taras Shevchenko , it was claimed that during the Holodomor 7 million Ukrainians were killed, and in total, 10 million people died of starvation across the USSR.

[ 153 ] However, the use of the 7 to 20 million figures has been criticized by historians Timothy D. Snyder and Stephen G. Wheatcroft . Snyder wrote: "President Viktor Yushchenko does his country a grave disservice by claiming ten million deaths, thus exaggerating the number of Ukrainians killed by a factor of three; but it is true that the famine in Ukraine of 1932–1933 was a result of purposeful political decisions, and killed about three million people." [ 151 ] In an email to Postmedia News , Wheatcroft wrote: "I find it regrettable that Stephen Harper and other leading Western politicians are continuing to use such exaggerated figures for Ukrainian famine mortality" and "[t]here is absolutely no basis for accepting a figure of 10 million Ukrainians dying as a result of the famine of 1932–1933." [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 154 ] In 2001, Wheatcroft had calculated total population loss (including stillbirth ) across the Union at 10 million and possibly up to 15 million between 1931 and 1934, including 2.8 million (and possibly up to 4.8 million excess deaths) and 3.7 million (up to 6.7 million) population losses including birth losses in Ukraine.

[ 138 ] Declassified Soviet statistics (in thousands) [ 140 ] Year Births Deaths Natural change 1927 1,184 523 661 1928 1,139 496 643 1929 1,081 539 542 1930 1,023 536 487 1931 975 515 460 1932 782 668 114 1933 471 1,850 −1,379 1934 571 483 88 1935 759 342 417 1936 895 361 534 In 2002, Ukrainian historian Stanislav Kulchytsky [ d ] , using demographic data including those recently unclassified, narrowed the losses to about 3.2 million or, allowing for the lack of precise data, 3 million to 3.5 million.

[ 140 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] The number of recorded excess deaths extracted from the birth/death statistics from Soviet archives is contradictory. The data fail to add up to the differences between the results of the 1926 Census and the 1937 Census .

[ 140 ] Kulchytsky summarized the declassified Soviet statistics as showing a decrease of 538,000 people in the population of Soviet Ukraine between 1926 census (28,926,000) and 1937 census (28,388,000).

[ 140 ] Historians estimate a quarter of the death toll was from children and extrapolate a further 600,000 lost births.

[ l ] [ 157 ] Similarly, Wheatcroft's work from Soviet archives showed that excess deaths in Ukraine in 1932–1933 numbered a minimum of 1.8 million (2.7 including birth losses): "Depending upon the estimations made concerning unregistered mortality and natality, these figures could be increased to a level of 2.8 million to a maximum of 4.8 million excess deaths and to 3.7 million to a maximum of 6.7 million population losses (including birth losses)".

[ 98 ] Starvation during the Holodomor, Kharkivshchyna , 1933. Photo by Alexander Wienerberger Passers-by and the corpse of a starved man on a street in Kharkiv , 1932 A 2002 study by French demographer Jacques Vallin and colleagues [ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] utilising some similar primary sources to Kulchytsky, and performing an analysis with more sophisticated demographic tools with forward projection of expected growth from the 1926 census and backward projection from the 1939 census estimates the number of direct deaths for 1933 as 2.582 million. This number of deaths does not reflect the total demographic loss for Ukraine from these events as the fall of the birth rate during the crisis and the out-migration contribute to the latter as well. The total population shortfall from the expected value between 1926 and 1939 estimated by Vallin amounted to 4.566 million.

[ 158 ] [ 161 ] Of this number, 1.057 million is attributed to the birth deficit, 930,000 to forced out-migration, and 2.582 million to the combination of excess mortality and voluntary out-migration. With the latter assumed to be negligible, this estimate gives the number of deaths as the result of the 1933 famine about 2.2 million. According to demographic studies, life expectancy , which had been in the high forties to low fifties, fell sharply for those born in 1932 to 28 years, and for 1933 fell further to the extremely low 10.8 years for females and 7.3 years for males. It remained abnormally low for 1934 but, as commonly expected for the post-crisis period peaked in 1935–36.

[ 158 ] [ 161 ] According to Snyder in 2010, the recorded figure of excess deaths was 2.4 million. However, Snyder claims that this figure is "substantially low" due to many deaths going unrecorded. Snyder states that demographic calculations carried out by the Ukrainian government provide a figure of 3.89 million dead, and opined that the actual figure is likely between these two figures, approximately 3.3 million deaths to starvation and disease related to the starvation in Ukraine from 1932 to 1933. Snyder also estimates that of the million people who died in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic from famine at the same time, approximately 200,000 were ethnic Ukrainians due to Ukrainian-inhabited regions being particularly hard hit in Russia.

[ 76 ] Russian historian Aleksandr Shubin and Kulchytsky believe that figures recorded by Soviet censuses are reliable, and that the figure of unrecorded deaths is not substantial. Shubin writes that for 10 years only around 300 000 deaths could go unrecorded in the whole Soviet Union, and estimates the number of direct deaths as between 1 and 2 millions.

[ 162 ] As a child, Mikhail Gorbachev , born into a mixed Russian-Ukrainian family, experienced the famine in Stavropol Krai , Russia. He recalled in a memoir that "In that terrible year [in 1933] nearly half the population of my native village, Privolnoye , starved to death, including two sisters and one brother of my father." [ 163 ] Wheatcroft and R. W. Davies concluded that disease was the cause of a large number of deaths: in 1932–1933, there were 1.2 million cases of typhus and 500,000 cases of typhoid fever . Malnourishment increases fatality rates from many diseases, and are not counted by some historians.

[ 164 ] From 1932 to 1934, the largest rate of increase was recorded for typhus, commonly spread by lice . In conditions of harvest failure and increased poverty, lice are likely to increase.

[ 165 ] Gathering numerous refugees at railway stations, on trains and elsewhere facilitates the spread. In 1933, the number of recorded cases was 20 times the 1929 level. The number of cases per head of population recorded in Ukraine in 1933 was already considerably higher than in the USSR as a whole. By June 1933, the incidence in Ukraine had increased to nearly 10 times the January level, and it was much higher than in the rest of the USSR.

[ 165 ] Estimates of the human losses due to famine must account for the numbers involved in migration (including forced resettlement ). According to Soviet statistics, the migration balance for the population in Ukraine for 1927–1936 period was a loss of 1.343 million people. Even when the data were collected, the Soviet statistical institutions acknowledged that the precision was less than for the data of the natural population change. The total number of deaths in Ukraine due to unnatural causes for the given ten years was 3.238 million. Accounting for the lack of precision, estimates of the human toll range from 2.2 million to 3.5 million deaths.

[ 166 ] According to Babyonyshev's 1981 estimate, [ 143 ] about 81.3% of the famine victims in the Ukrainian SSR were ethnic Ukrainians, 4.5% Russians , 1.4% Jews and 1.1% were Poles . Many Belarusians , Volga Germans and other nationalities were victims as well. The Ukrainian rural population was the hardest hit by the Holodomor. Since the peasantry constituted a demographic backbone of the Ukrainian nation, [ 167 ] the tragedy deeply affected the Ukrainians for many years. In an October 2013 opinion poll (in Ukraine) 38.7% of those polled stated "my families had people affected by the famine", 39.2% stated they did not have such relatives, and 22.1% did not know.

[ 168 ] Genocide question Main article: Holodomor genocide question Chicago American ' s front page Scholars continue to debate whether the human-made Soviet famine was a central act in a campaign of genocide, [ 169 ] or a tragic byproduct of rapid Soviet industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture.

[ 170 ] Whether the Holodomor is a genocide is a significant and contentious issue in modern politics . A number of governments, such as Canada, have recognized the Holodomor as an act of genocide. The decision was criticized by David R. Marples , who claimed that states who recognize the Holodomor as a genocide are motivated by emotion, or on pressure by local and international groups rather than hard evidence.

[ 171 ] In contrast, some sources argue that Russian influence and unwillingness to worsen relations with Russia would prevent or stall the recognition of Holodomor as a genocide in certain regions (for example, Germany).

[ 172 ] Scholarly positions are diverse.

Raphael Lemkin (a pioneer of genocide studies who coined the term genocide , and an initiator of the Genocide Convention ), called the famine an intentional genocide.

[ 173 ] James Mace and Norman Naimark have written that the Holodomor was a genocide and the intentional result of Soviet policies under Stalin.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] According to Lemkin, Ukraine was "perhaps the classic example of Soviet genocide, its longest and broadest experiment in Russification – the destruction of the Ukrainian nation". Lemkin stated that, because Ukrainians were very sensitive to the racial murder of its people and way too populous, the Soviet regime could not follow a pattern of total extermination (as in the Holocaust ). Instead the genocidal effort consisted of four steps: 1) extermination of the Ukrainian national elite, 2) liquidation of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church , 3) extermination of a significant part of the Ukrainian peasantry as "custodians of traditions, folklore and music, national language and literature", and 4) populating the territory with other nationalities with intent of mixing Ukrainians with them, which would eventually lead to the dissolution of the Ukrainian nation.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Because of these four factors, Lemkin considered the Holodomor an attempt to destroy the whole Ukrainian nation, not just the Ukrainian peasantry.

[ 178 ] The "rediscovery" of his 1953 address about the Holodomor has influenced Holodomor scholars, especially his view of genocide as a complex process targeting institutions, culture, and economic existence of a group and not necessarily meaning its "immediate destruction".

[ 173 ] Stanislav Kulchytsky, who recognizes Holodomor as genocide, believes that historians should approach the study of the famine with realization that in the Soviet socialist construction "appearance belied reality", and that the real intentions of some ideas and policies would not be put on paper. He nevertheless believes that there is enough evidence that proves that Stalin felt hostility and distrust towards Ukrainians and wanted to suppress any potential disobedience from their side. Kulchytsky bases his claims among other things on Stalin's telegrams and letters sent to the highest-ranked officials shortly before and during the time when most lethal policies were applied and executed in Ukraine and Kuban. He believes that while the famine started rather as a result of collectivization, near the end of 1932 it was turned into an instrument of intentional starvation of millions of Ukrainians to death.

[ 179 ] Timothy Snyder states that, in his opinion, Holodomor meets the criteria of the Genocide convention . He does, however, refrain from using the term and prefers the term "mass killing" instead, arguing that the public misinterprets the term genocide as an intention to murder every member of the national or ethnic group, something that the Armenian genocide and Holocaust are closer to than any other cases, including the Holodomor.

[ 180 ] : 1:30:50 Other historians such as Michael Ellman consider the Holodomor a crime against humanity , but do not classify it as a genocide.

[ 181 ] Economist Steven Rosefielde and historian Robert Conquest consider the death toll to be primarily due to state policy, and poor harvests.

[ 182 ] Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Conquest was granted access to the Soviet state archives alongside other western academics.

[ 183 ] In 2004, Wheatcroft published a private correspondence that he had with Conquest. In the exchange, Conquest wrote that he is now of the opinion that the Holodomor was not purposefully inflicted by Stalin but " What I argue is that with resulting famine imminent, he could have prevented it, but put "Soviet interest" other than feeding the starving first – thus consciously abetting it ".

[ 184 ] In an interview recorded in 2006 Conquest stated the Holodomor should be recognized as an attack on the Ukrainian people and discussed problems with the use of the term genocide .

[ 185 ] Robert Davies , Stephen Kotkin , Stephen Wheatcroft and J. Arch Getty reject the notion that Stalin intentionally wanted to kill Ukrainians, but conclude that Stalinist policies and widespread incompetence among government officials set the stage for famine in Ukraine and other Soviet republics.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] [ 108 ] Anne Applebaum believes that the famine was planned to undermine Ukrainian identity but discusses how shifts in understanding of the term genocide mean that it is more difficult to apply now that it was when the term was initially conceived. Another argument she puts forward is that the question of genocide is not as important as it once was because it was a proxy debate about Ukraine and Ukrainians' right to exist, a right which no longer needs historic justification.

[ 188 ] Soviet and Western denial and downplay Main article: Denial of the Holodomor Daily Express , 6 August 1934 Scholars consider Holodomor denial to be the assertion that the 1932–1933 famine in Soviet Ukraine did not occur.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Denying the existence of the famine was the Soviet state's position and reflected in both Soviet propaganda and the work of some Western journalists and intellectuals including George Bernard Shaw , Walter Duranty , and Louis Fischer .

[ 191 ] In Britain and the United States, eye-witness accounts by Welsh freelance journalist Gareth Jones [ 192 ] [ 193 ] and by the American Communist Fred Beal [ 194 ] were met with widespread disbelief.

[ 195 ] In the Soviet Union, any discussion of the famine was banned entirely. Ukrainian historian Stanislav Kulchytsky stated the Soviet government ordered him to falsify his findings and depict the famine as an unavoidable natural disaster, to absolve the Communist Party and uphold the legacy of Stalin.

[ 196 ] In modern politics Main article: Holodomor in modern politics The event is considered a genocide by Ukraine [ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] and the European Parliament , [ 201 ] and the lower house of parliament of Russia condemned the Soviet regime "that has neglected the lives of people for the achievement of economic and political goals".

[ 14 ] Lazar Kaganovich (left) played a role in enforcing Stalin's policies that led to the Holodomor.

[ 202 ] On 10 November 2003 at the United Nations , [ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] 25 countries, including Russia, Ukraine, and United States signed a joint statement on the seventieth anniversary of the Holodomor with the following preamble : In the former Soviet Union millions of men, women and children fell victims to the cruel actions and policies of the totalitarian regime. The Great Famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine (Holodomor), took from 7 million to 10 million innocent lives and became a national tragedy for the Ukrainian people. In this regard, we note activities in observance of the seventieth anniversary of this Famine, in particular organized by the Government of Ukraine . Honouring the seventieth anniversary of the Ukrainian tragedy, we also commemorate the memory of millions of Russians, Kazakhs and representatives of other nationalities who died of starvation in the Volga River region , Northern Caucasus , Kazakhstan and in other parts of the former Soviet Union, as a result of civil war and forced collectivisation, leaving deep scars in the consciousness of future generations.

[ 206 ] In 1984, the United States Congress established the U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine , which compiled its 1988 Report to Congress.

In the report, the US government concludes with anecdotal evidence, that the Soviets had purposely prevented Ukrainians from leaving famine-struck regions. This was corroborated following the discovery of Stalin's letter to Molotov titled, "Preventing the Mass Exodus of Peasants who are Starving", restricting travel by peasants after "in the Kuban and Ukraine a massive outflow of peasants 'for bread' has begun", that "like the outflow from Ukraine last year, was organized by the enemies of Soviet power." [ 207 ] The commission published the earlier-mentioned letter written by Stalin to Lazar Kaganovich on 11 September 1932.

[ 208 ] The Ukrainian parliament first recognized the Holodomor as a genocide in 2003, [ 209 ] and criminalized both Holodomor denial and Holocaust denial in 2006. In 2010, the Kyiv Court of Appeal ruled that the Holodomor was an act of genocide and held Joseph Stalin , Vyacheslav Molotov , Lazar Kaganovich , Stanislav Kosior , Pavel Postyshev , Mendel Khatayevich , Vlas Chubar and other Bolshevik leaders responsible.

[ 210 ] The Holodomor has been compared to the Irish Famine of 1845–1849 that took place in Ireland under British rule, [ 211 ] [ 212 ] [ 213 ] which has been the subject of similar controversy and debate .

Russia's war strategy in the war against Ukraine in 2022 has drawn parallels with the Holodomor for the intentional impediment of relief supplies to civilians, the blockade of Ukrainian ports that threatened to cause famine in other countries, and the deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure to deprive Ukrainians of the necessities of life.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] As of early May 2022, [update] Ukraine's Defense Ministry claims that Russian forces have plundered at least 500,000 tons of grain from farmers since the invasion started. This looting included the seizure of industrial farm equipment, such as tractors, and forcing farmers to surrender 70% of their grain yields.

[ 216 ] Russia's use of starvation as a weapon of war in 2022 has been cited as part of a genocidal pattern in a major report by 35 legal and genocide experts.

[ 217 ] Government recognition of Holodomor v t e Recognition of the Holodomor by country Ukraine's Ministry of Foreign Affairs has run campaigns and lobbied the United Nations and the Council of Europe to recognise the Holodomor as a genocide internationally.

[ 218 ] The governments of various countries have issued statements recognizing the Holodomor as genocide including Ukraine since 2006, [ 219 ] and 13 other countries as of 2015 [update] .

[ 220 ] In November 2022, the Belarusian opposition in exile recognised the Holodomor as a genocide, [ 221 ] and Pope Francis compared the Russian war in Ukraine with its targeted destruction of civilian infrastructure to the "terrible Holodomor Genocide", during an address at St. Peter's Square.

[ 222 ] As of October 2023 [update] , 34 countries recognise the Holodomor as a genocide.

Countries whose legislatures have passed a resolution recognizing the Holodomor as a genocide: Australia , 28 October 1993 [ 220 ] Belgium , 10 March 2023 [ 223 ] Brazil , 26 April 2022 [ 224 ] [ 225 ] Bulgaria , 1 February 2023 [ 226 ] [ 227 ] Canada , 20 June 2003 [ 220 ] Colombia , 21 December 2007 [ 220 ] Croatia , moved 15 June 2023, [ 228 ] approved 28 June 2023 [ 229 ] Czech Republic , 6 April 2022 [ 230 ] Ecuador , 30 October 2007 [ 220 ] Estonia , 20 October 1993 [ 220 ] [ 231 ] France , 28 March 2023 [ 232 ] [ 233 ] [ 234 ] Georgia , 20 December 2005 [ 220 ] Germany , 30 November 2022 [ 235 ] Hungary , 26 November 2003 [ 220 ] Iceland , 22 March 2023 [ 236 ] [ 237 ] [ 238 ] Ireland , 24 November 2022 (resolution passed by the Seanad ) [ 239 ] Italy , 26 July 2023 [ 240 ] Latvia , 13 March 2008 [ 220 ] Lithuania , 24 November 2005 [ 220 ] Luxembourg , 13 June 2023 [ 241 ] [ 242 ] Mexico , 19 February 2008 [ 220 ] Moldova , 24 November 2022 [ 243 ] Netherlands , 7 July 2023 [ 244 ] [ 245 ] Paraguay , 25 October 2007 [ 220 ] Peru , 19 June 2007 [ 220 ] Poland , 4 December 2006 [ 220 ] Portugal , 2 March 2017 [ 246 ] Romania , 24 November 2022 [ 247 ] Slovakia , 20 June 2023 [ 248 ] [ 249 ] Slovenia , 23 May 2023 [ 250 ] [ 251 ] Ukraine , 28 November 2006 [ 219 ] United Kingdom , 25 May 2023 (resolution passed by the House of Commons ) [ 252 ] Wales , 25 October 2023 [ 253 ] United States , 11 December 2018 (resolution passed by the House of Representatives ; on 4 October 2018 resolution passed by the Senate ) [ 254 ] [ 255 ] Vatican City , 2 April 2004 [ 256 ] [ 220 ] Other political bodies whose legislatures have passed a resolution recognizing Holodomor as a genocide: EU , 15 December 2022 [ 257 ] [ 258 ] Council of Europe , 12 October 2023 [ 259 ] Chechen Republic of Ichkeria (government in exile), 19 April 2023 [ 260 ] [ 261 ] Remembrance To honour those who perished in the Holodomor, monuments have been dedicated and public events held annually in Ukraine and worldwide.

Ukraine Candles and wheat as a symbol of remembrance during the Holodomor Remembrance Day 2013 in Lviv See also: Holodomor Memorial Day One of the interpretations of The Running Man painting by Kazimir Malevich , also known as Peasant Between a Cross and a Sword , is the artist's indictment of the Great Famine.

[ 262 ] "Kasimir Malevich's haunting 'The Running Man' (1933–34), showing a peasant fleeing across a deserted landscape, is eloquent testimony to the disaster." [ 263 ] Since 1998, Ukraine has officially observed the Holodomor Memorial Day on the fourth Saturday of November, [ 264 ] [ 168 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] [ 267 ] established by a presidential decree of Leonid Kuchma . In 2006, customs were established for a minute of silence at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, flags flown at half-mast, and restrictions on entertainment broadcasting.

[ 268 ] In 2007, three days of commemorations on the Maidan Nezalezhnosti included video testimonies of communist crimes in Ukraine and documentaries, scholarly lectures, [ 269 ] and the National Bank of Ukraine issued a set of commemorative coins.

[ 270 ] As of 2009, [update] Ukrainian schoolchildren take a more extensive course of the history of the Holodomor.

[ 271 ] The National Museum of the Holodomor-Genocide was erected on the slopes of the Dnieper river, welcoming its first visitors on 22 November 2008.

[ 272 ] The ceremony of the memorial's opening was dedicated to the 75th anniversary of the Holodomor. The year 2008 was declared by president Viktor Yushchenko as the "Year of Remembrance" to commemorate victims of the famine.

[ 273 ] In an October 2013 opinion poll, 33.7% of Ukrainians fully agreed and 30.4% rather agreed with the statement "The Holodomor was the result of actions committed by the Soviet authorities , along with Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, and was the result of human actions".

[ 168 ] In the same poll, 22.9% of those polled fully or partially agreed with the view that the famine was caused by natural circumstances, but 50.5% disagreed with that.

[ 168 ] Furthermore, 45.4% of respondents believed that the Holodomor was "a deliberate attempt to destroy the Ukrainian nation" and 26.2% rather or completely disagreed with this.

[ 168 ] Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych (right) and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev (left) near Memorial to the Holodomor Victims in Kyiv on 17 May 2010. Russia has since changed its policy and started downplaying or denying the Holodomor.

In a November 2021 poll, 85% agreed that the Holodomor was a genocide of Ukrainians.

[ 274 ] A poll undertaken in Ukraine in 2022 recorded 93% agreeing that the Holodomor was a genocide with 3% disagreeing.

[ 275 ] Ukraine's Commander-in-Chief Valerii Zaluzhnyi at an event to mark the 90th anniversary of the Holodomor, 25 November 2023 On 19 October 2022, Russian occupation authorities dismantled a Holodomor monument in the destroyed city of Mariupol on the basis that it was not a monument but a symbol of "disinformation at the state level".

[ 276 ] Ukrainian culture minister Oleksandr Tkachenko said "such acts signifies that the current Russian regime is a true successor to the one guilty of crimes against humanity and the Ukrainian people".

[ 277 ] Germany Perhaps the first public commemoration of victims was a procession held by Ukrainians displaced in the Second World War in 1948 in Munich, the administrative centre of the American zone of occupation in Germany.

[ 278 ] The most recent countries to recognize Holodomor as a genocide are Germany and Vatican City.

[ 279 ] Canada The first public monument to the Holodomor was erected and dedicated in 1983 outside City Hall in Edmonton , Alberta , Canada, to mark the 50th anniversary of the famine-genocide. Since then, the fourth Saturday in November has in many jurisdictions been marked as the official day of remembrance for people who died as a result of the 1932–1933 Holodomor and political repression.

[ 280 ] On 22 November 2008, Ukrainian Canadians marked the beginning of National Holodomor Awareness Week and Holodomor Memorial Day (the fourth Friday of November in Schools and the fourth Saturday of November globally). The success of this initiative is attributed to Valentina Kuryliw , as chair of the National Holodomor Education Committee [ 281 ] of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. Citizenship, Immigration, and Multiculturalism Minister Jason Kenney attended a vigil in Kyiv .

[ 282 ] In November 2010, Prime Minister Stephen Harper visited the Holodomor memorial in Kyiv, although Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych did not join him.

[ 283 ] [ 284 ] Saskatchewan became the first jurisdiction in North America and the first province in Canada to recognize the Holodomor as a genocide.

[ 285 ] The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act was introduced in the Saskatchewan Legislature on 6 May 2008, [ 286 ] and received royal assent on 14 May 2008.

[ 287 ] On 9 April 2009, the province of Ontario unanimously passed bill 147, "The Holodomor Memorial Day Act", which calls for the fourth Saturday in November to be a day of remembrance. This was the first piece of legislation in the Province's history to be introduced with Tri-Partisan sponsorship: the joint initiators of the bill were Dave Levac , MPP for Brant (Liberal Party); Cheri DiNovo , MPP for Parkdale–High Park (NDP); and Frank Klees , MPP for Newmarket–Aurora (PC). MPP Levac was made a chevalier of Ukraine's Order of Merit .

[ 288 ] On 2 June 2010, the province of Quebec unanimously passed bill 390, "Memorial Day Act on the great Ukrainian famine and genocide (the Holodomor)".

[ 289 ] On 25 September 2010, a new Holodomor monument was unveiled at St. Mary's Ukrainian Catholic Church, Mississauga , Ontario, Canada, bearing the inscription "Holodomor: Genocide By Famine in Ukraine 1932–1933" and a section in Ukrainian bearing mention of the 10 million victims.

[ 290 ] On 21 September 2014, a statue entitled "Bitter Memories of Childhood" was unveiled outside the Manitoba Legislative Building in Winnipeg to memorialize the Holodomor.

[ 291 ] A monument to the Holodomor has been erected on Calgary's Memorial Drive , itself originally designated to honour Canadian servicemen of the First World War. The monument is located in the district of Renfrew near Ukrainian Pioneer Park, which pays tribute to the contributions of Ukrainian immigrants to Canada.

[ citation needed ] On 21 October 2018, a memorial statue was unveiled on Canada Boulevard in Exhibition Place of Toronto. The site provides a place for an annual memorial on the fourth Saturday of November.

[ 292 ] Poland On 16 March 2006, the Senate of the Republic of Poland paid tribute to the victims of the Great Famine and declared it an act of genocide, expressing solidarity with the Ukrainian nation and its efforts to commemorate this crime.

[ 293 ] On 22 January 2015, a Holodomor monument was erected in the city of Lublin .

[ 294 ] United States The Ukrainian Weekly reported a meeting taking place on 27 February 1982 in the parish center of the Ukrainian Catholic National Shrine of the Holy Family in commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Great Famine caused by the Soviet authorities. On 20 March 1982, the Ukrainian Weekly also reported a multi-ethnic community meeting that was held on 15 February on the North Shore Drive at the Ukrainian Village in Chicago to commemorate the famine which took the lives of seven million Ukrainians. Other events in commemoration were held in other places around the United States as well.

[ citation needed ] On 29 May 2008, the city of Baltimore held a candlelight commemoration for the Holodomor at the War Memorial Plaza in front of City Hall. This ceremony was part of the larger international journey of the "International Holodomor Remembrance Torch", which began in Kyiv and made its way through thirty-three countries. Twenty-two other US cities were also visited during the tour. Then-Mayor Sheila Dixon presided over the ceremony and declared 29 May to be "Ukrainian Genocide Remembrance Day in Baltimore". She referred to the Holodomor "among the worst cases of man's inhumanity towards man".

[ 295 ] On 2 December 2008, a ceremony was held in Washington, D.C.

, for the Holodomor Memorial.

[ 296 ] On 13 November 2009, U.S. President Barack Obama released a statement on Ukrainian Holodomor Remembrance Day. In this, he said that "remembering the victims of the man-made catastrophe of Holodomor provides us an opportunity to reflect upon the plight of all those who have suffered the consequences of extremism and tyranny around the world".

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] NSC Spokesman Mike Hammer released a similar statement on 20 November 2010.

[ 299 ] In 2011, the American day of remembrance of Holodomor was held on 19 November. The statement released by the White House Press Secretary reflects on the significance of this date, stating that "in the wake of this brutal and deliberate attempt to break the will of the people of Ukraine, Ukrainians showed great courage and resilience. The establishment of a proud and independent Ukraine twenty years ago shows the remarkable depth of the Ukrainian people's love of freedom and independence".

[ 300 ] On 7 November 2015, the Holodomor Genocide Memorial was opened in Washington D.C.

[ 301 ] [ 302 ] In the 115th Congress , both the United States Senate and the United States House of Representatives adopted resolutions commemorating the 85th anniversary of the Holodomor, "the Soviet Union's manmade famine that it committed against the people of Ukraine in 1932 and 1933." [ 303 ] The Senate Resolution, S. Res. 435 (115th Congress) [ 304 ] was adopted on 3 October 2018 and stated that the U.S. Senate "solemnly remembers the 85th anniversary of the Holodomor of 1932–1933 and extends its deepest sympathies to the victims, survivors, and families of this tragedy." On 11 December 2018, the United States House of Representatives adopted H. Res. 931 (115th Congress), [ 255 ] a resolution extending the House's "deepest sympathies to the victims and survivors of the Holodomor of 1932–1933, and their families" and condemned "the systematic violations of human rights, including the freedom of self-determination and freedom of speech, of the Ukrainian people by the Soviet Government." [ citation needed ] On 12 May 2022, and at the 117th United States congress, a new H. Res. 1109 was adopted, recognizing the Holodomor as a genocide and the resolution to serve as a reminder of the repressive Soviet policies including the blockade policy that prevented the delivery of humanitarian aid and people from escaping.

[ 305 ] On film The 2019 feature film Mr Jones , starring James Norton and directed by Agnieszka Holland , focuses on Jones and his investigation of and reporting on the Ukrainian famine in the face of political and journalistic opposition. In January 2019, it was selected to compete for the Golden Bear at the 69th Berlin International Film Festival .

[ 306 ] The film won Grand Prix Golden Lions at the 44th Gdynia Film Festival in September 2019.

[ 307 ] Vatican City On 23 November 2022, Pope Francis held a ceremony to remember the victims of the famine. He referred to the Holodomor as a genocide. "Let us remember long-suffering Ukraine. This Saturday marks the anniversary of the terrible genocide of the Holodomor in 1932–1933 artificially caused by Stalin. Let us pray for the victims of this genocide and pray for the all Ukrainians, the children, the women and the elderly, the babies, who are today suffering the martyrdom of aggression." [ 308 ] Holodomor memorials Main article: List of Holodomor memorials and monuments First in the world: 1983 Holodomor Monument in Edmonton , Canada Touring van devoted to Holodomor education, seen in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, 2017 "Light the candle" event at a Holodomor memorial in Kyiv Plaque in Grand Park , Los Angeles , California , United States Poster by Australian artist Leonid Denysenko Stamp of Ukraine, 1993 Monument dedicated to victims of years 1932–1933 famine in Vyshhorod, Ukraine. The authors are Boris Krylov and Oles Sydoruk Holodomor Memorial to Victims of the Ukrainian Famine-Genocide of 1932–1933, Washington DC.

In culture and the arts Cinema Harvest of Despair (1984), directed by Slavko Nowytski ( documentary film ) – Video on YouTube [ 309 ] [ 310 ] Famine-33 (1991), directed by Oles Yanchuk The Guide (2014), directed by Oles Sanin Child 44 (2015), directed by Daniel Espinosa , based on the book by Tom Rob Smith – briefly describes the Holodomor Bitter Harvest (2017), directed by George Mendeluk Mr. Jones (2019), directed by Agnieszka Holland Seeds of Hunger (2023), directed by Guillaume Ribot (documentary film) [ 311 ] Capital of Despair: Holodomor Chroniclers (2023), a documentary series directed by Roman Barabash – Episode 1 on YouTube (in Ukrainian, English subtitles) Literature Ulas Samchuk 's novel Maria (1934) is dedicated to the Holodomor (English translation published 1952).

[ 312 ] Katherine Marsh 's book The Lost Year: A Survival Story of the Ukrainian Famine (2023) [ 313 ] was a finalist in the 2023 National Book Award for Young People's Literature .

[ 314 ] Theatre The play Holodomor premiered in Tehran, Iran in February 2021.

[ 315 ] See also Ukraine portal Soviet Union portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Holodomor .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Joint Statement on Holodomor 1921–1923 famine in Ukraine Allegations of genocide of Ukrainians in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Double genocide theory Droughts and famines in Russia and the Soviet Union Excess mortality in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin Great Chinese Famine Holodomor: The Unknown Ukrainian Tragedy (1932–1933) Hunger Plan Kazakh famine of 1930–1933 Khmer Rouge List of massacres in Ukraine Mass killings under communist regimes National Museum of the Holodomor-Genocide Outline of genocide studies Notes ^ Ukrainian : Голодомо́р , romanized : Holodomor , IPA: [ɦolodoˈmɔr] ; [ 7 ] derived from морити голодом , moryty holodom , 'to kill by starvation'); Also literally known as "Extermination by Hunger" or "Hunger-extermination" ^ Ukrainian : великий український голод , romanized : velykyi ukrainskyi holod ^ Marples 2009.

"Ukrainian scholars who write most regularly on the famine, such as Yurii Shapoval ([35]), Stanislav Kul'chyts'kyi ([15], [16], [17], [18]), Vasyl Marochko ([22], [23]) and Petro Panchenko et al. ([28]), place emphasis on several factors that appear to elucidate the true causes of the famine: the rapid introduction of collectivisation in Ukraine compared to other regions; the unreasonable grain quotas placed upon Ukraine; the closure of the borders of Ukraine and the North Caucasus according to Stalin's directive of 22 January 1933 to prevent the migration of starving peasants; the fact that Ukrainian officials informed Moscow of the situation in Ukraine and the imminence of famine as early as 1932 but without any results; Stalin's letter to Kaganovich of 11 August 1932 that outlined his suspicions of the Ukrainian peasantry and his fear of 'losing Ukraine' (Davies et al.[ 4]); the fact that the Extraordinary Commission in Ukraine led by Molotov took draconian measures, with its decree of 18 November 1932, confiscating not only grain, but also meat and vegetables, ensuring the inevitability of the peasants starving; the lack of such starvation in other republics, and most specifically Russia and Byelorussia; the link between the famine and the assault on the Ukrainian nation, as manifested by terror and deportations; the purge of cultural and national leaders; and the cessation of the earlier policy of Ukrainisation.

^ UN signatory nations, 2003 . "In the former Soviet Union millions of men, women and children fell victims to the cruel actions and policies of the totalitarian regime. The Great Famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine (Holodomor), which took from 7 million to 10 million innocent lives and became a national tragedy for the Ukrainian people. ... [A]s a result of civil war and forced collectivization, leaving deep scars in the consciousness of future generations. ... [W]e deplore the acts and policies that brought about mass starvation and death of millions of people. We do not want to settle scores with the past, it could not be changed, but we are convinced that exposing violations of human rights, preserving historical records and restoring the dignity of victims through acknowledgement of their suffering, will guide future societies and help to avoid similar catastrophes in the future. ...

^ a b Britannica "Holodomor" . "The Great Famine (Holodomor) of 1932–1933 – a man-made demographic catastrophe unprecedented in peacetime. Of the estimated six to eight million people who died in the Soviet Union, about four to five million were Ukrainians ... Its deliberate nature is underscored by the fact that no physical basis for famine existed in Ukraine ... Soviet authorities set requisition quotas for Ukraine at an impossibly high level. Brigades of special agents were dispatched to Ukraine to assist in procurement, and homes were routinely searched and foodstuffs confiscated ... The rural population was left with insufficient food to feed itself.

^ Davies, Wheatcroft 2004, (page 437) . "It was not until the autumn of 1932 that the restoration of proper crop rotation received the strong support of the authorities (see pp. 231–4). Meanwhile, much damage had been done. Such a dramatic expansion of sown area and reduction of fallow, without improved crop rotation and the careful introduction of alternative means for rejuvenating the soil with fertilisers or manure, was bound to lead to the reduction of yields and an increased likelihood of crop diseases. By 1932, in many regions, and particularly in Ukraine, soil exhaustion and crop diseases were widespread." ^ The term anodyne administrative measure in the quote means a measure that was not meant to solve the problem but to calm the hungry crowds, or a measure which, in of itself, would not create opposition (See wikt:anodyne ). The term ' Anodyne ' refers to pain relieving methods, drugs or remedies, used prior to the 20th century.

^ Werth, 2008.

"And while hunger hit the peasants harder than any other group, resulting in the death of millions in atrocious conditions, another form of repression, of a police nature, struck others in Ukraine at the same moment — the political and intellectual elites, from village teachers to national leaders, via the intelligentsia. Tens of thousands of Ukrainians were arrested and punished with camp sentences" ^ Martin 2001, pp. 306-307 . "TsK VKP/b/ and Sovnarkom have received information that in the Kuban and Ukraine a massive outflow of peasants 'for bread' has begun into Belorussia and the Central-Black Earth, Volga, Western, and Moscow regions. / TsK VKP/b/ and Sovnarkom do not doubt that the outflow of peasants, like the outflow from Ukraine last year, was organized by the enemies of Soviet power, the SRs and the agents of Poland, with the goal of agitation 'through the peasantry' ... TsK VKP/b/ and Sovnarkom order the OGPU of Belorussia and the Central-Black Earth, Middle Volga, Western and Moscow regions to immediately arrest all 'peasants' of Ukraine and the North Caucasus who have broken through into the north and, after separating out the counterrevolutionariy elements, to return the rest to their place of residence.' ... Molotov, Stalin ^ Andriewsky 2015, (page 17) . "Finally, new studies have revealed the very selective — indeed, highly politicized — nature of state assistance in Ukraine in 1932–1933. Soviet authorities, as we know, took great pains to guarantee the supply of food to the industrial workforce and to certain other categories of the population — Red Army personnel and their families, for example. As the latest research has shown, however, in the spring of 1933, famine relief itself became an ideological instrument. The aid that was provided in rural Ukraine at the height of the Famine, when much of the population was starving, was directed, first and foremost, to 'conscientious' collective farm workers — those who had worked the highest number of workdays. Rations, as the sources attest, were allocated in connection with spring sowing). The bulk of assistance was delivered in the form of grain seed that was 'lent' to collective farms (from reserves that had been seized in Ukraine) with the stipulation that it would be repaid with interest. State aid, it seems clear, was aimed at trying to salvage the collective farm system and a workforce necessary to maintain it. At the very same time, Party officials announced a campaign to root out 'enemy elements of all kinds who sought to exploit the food problems for their own counter-revolutionary purposes, spreading rumours about the famine and various 'horrors'. Famine-relief, in this way, became yet another way to determine who lived and who died." ^ Davies, Wheatcroft 2004, (page 109) . "In a considerable number of districts in Ukraine and the North Caucasus counter-revolutionary elements – kulaks, former officers, Petlyurians, supporters of the Kuban' Rada and others – were able to penetrate into the kolkhozy as chairmen or influential members of the board, or as bookkeepers and storekeepers, and as brigade leaders at the threshers, and were able to penetrate into the village soviets, land agencies and cooperatives. They attempt to direct the work of these organisations against the interests of the proletarian state and the policy of the party; they try to organise a counter-revolutionary movement, the sabotage of the grain collections, and the sabotage of the village." ^ Lost births are additional births that would hypothetically have taken place had there been no famine.

References ^ Naimark 2010 , p. 70.

^ a b Osadchenko & Rudneva 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h Boeck, Brian J. (30 October 2023). "Complicating the National Interpretation of the Famine: Reexamining the Case of Kuban".

Harvard Ukraine Studies .

30 (1/4): 48.

JSTOR 23611465 .

^ a b c Ohayon 2016 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , pp. 479–484.

^ a b c d e f g h Ellman 2007 .

^ Jones 2017 , p. 90.

^ "How Joseph Stalin Starved Millions in the Ukrainian Famine" .

HISTORY . 16 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2024 .

^ Renate, Stark (2010).

"Holodomor, Famine in Ukraine 1932-1933: A Crime against Humanity or Genocide?" .

Irish Journal of Applied Social Studies .

10 (1). Irish Journal of Applied Social Studies: Vol. 10: Iss. 1, Article 2.

doi : 10.21427/D7PQ8P . Retrieved 14 September 2024 .

^ a b c Kulchytsky 2017 ; Kulchytsky 2020 ; Kulchytsky 2008 ^ Gorbunova & Klymchuk 2020 ; Kravchenko 2020 ; Marples 2007 , p. 1; Mendel 2018 ; Yefimenko 2021 ^ a b c Serbyn 2005 , pp. 1055–1061.

^ "Wyoming becomes 32nd US state to recognize the Holodomor as genocide" . The New Voice of Ukraine . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ a b National Museum of the Holodomor 2019 .

^ Werth 2012 , p.

396 .

^ Werth 2007 , p. 132.

^ Graziosi 2005 , p. 464, 457.

^ a b c Fawkes 2006 .

^ SumInUa Dictionary 2010 .

^ Davies 2006 , p.

145 .

^ Boriak & von Hagen 2009 .

^ Applebaum 2017 , p. 363.

^ Hryshko 1983 .

^ Dolot 1985 .

^ Hadzewycz, Zarycky & Kolomayets 1983 .

^ a b Graziosi 2004 .

^ Musiienko 1988 .

^ US Commission Report vol.1 , p. 67.

^ Mace 2008 , p. 132.

^ Busel 2001 .

^ Getty 2018 .

^ Engerman 2009 , p.

196 .

^ Barkan, Cole & Struve 2007 .

^ Pyrih, 1990; No. 1-132 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , p. 204.

^ USSR Census 1939 .

^ Demoscope Weekly 2012 .

^ "Демоскоп Weekly - Приложение. Справочник статистических показателей" . 29 February 2024. Archived from the original on 29 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Демоскоп Weekly - Приложение. Справочник статистических показателей" . 20 May 2024. Archived from the original on 20 May 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , pp. 470, 476.

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , p. xviii.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Wolowyna 2021 .

^ a b Pyrih, 1990; No. 343-403 .

^ Reisenauer, Troy Philip (2014).

"The Great Famine in Soviet Ukraine: Toward New Avenues of Inquiry into the Holodomor" (PDF) . North Dakota State University. pp.

26– 28 . Retrieved 9 October 2024 .

^ Davies, Tauger & Wheatcroft 1995 , p. 645.

^ Andriewsky 2015 , p. 37: "Historians of Ukraine are no longer debating whether the Famine was the result of natural causes (and even then not exclusively by them). The academic debate appears to come down to the issue of intentions, to whether the special measures undertaken in Ukraine in the winter of 1932–33 that intensified starvation were aimed at Ukrainians as such." ^ Davies, Robert ; Wheatcroft, Stephen (2016).

The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931–1933 .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. xvi, xvii.

ISBN 9780230273979 .

Western commentators and historians long debated whether the famine was man-made ... Russian historians sometimes call the famine "rukotvornyi" – man-made ... But in our opinion they and Conquest underestimate the role of climate and other natural causes.

^ Rozenas, Arturas; Zhukov, Yuri M. (2019). "Mass Repression and Political Loyalty: Evidence from Stalin's 'Terror by Hunger' ".

American Political Science Review .

113 (2): 571.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055419000066 .

S2CID 143428346 .

Similar to famines in Ireland in 1846–1851 (Ó Gráda 2007) and China in 1959–1961 (Meng, Qian and Yared 2015), the politics behind Holodomor have been a focus of historiographic debate. The most common interpretation is that Holodomor was 'terror by hunger' (Conquest 1987, 224), 'state aggression' (Applebaum 2017) and 'clearly premeditated mass murder' (Snyder 2010, 42). Others view it as an unintended by-product of Stalin's economic policies (Kotkin 2017; Naumenko 2017), precipitated by natural factors like adverse weather and crop infestation (Davies and Wheatcroft 1996; Tauger 2001).

^ Ellman 2005 , p. 824; Davies & Wheatcroft 2006 , pp. 628, 631.

^ Werth 2008 .

^ Kulchytsky2007- Evidential Gaps .

^ Marples 2005 .

^ Ellman 2005 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2002 , p. 77, "[T]he drought of 1931 was particularly severe, and drought conditions continued in 1932. This certainly helped to worsen the conditions for obtaining the harvest in 1932".

^ Engerman 2009 , p.

194 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , pp. xix–xxi.

^ Wheatcroft 2018 .

^ Marples 2002 .

^ Davies, Tauger & Wheatcroft 1995 , p. 643.

^ Tauger 2001 , p. 45.

^ Naumenko 2021 .

^ Tauger 2001 , p. 39.

^ a b c d e f g h Tauger, Mark B.

"The Environmental Economy of the Soviet Famine in Ukraine in 1933: A Critique of Several Papers by Natalya Naumenko" (PDF) .

Econ Journal Watch .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2023 .

^ a b c d Viola, Lynne (2014). "Collectivization in the Soviet Union: Specificities and Modalities".

The Collectivization of Agriculture in Communist Eastern Europe:Comparison and Entanglements .

Central European University Press . pp.

49– 69.

ISBN 978-963-386-048-9 .

^ Beilharz, Peter (19 November 2019).

Trotsky, Trotskyism and the Transition to Socialism . Routledge. pp.

1– 206.

ISBN 978-1-000-70651-2 .

^ Rubenstein, Joshua (2011).

Leon Trotsky : a revolutionary's life . New Haven: Yale University Press . p. 161.

ISBN 978-0-300-13724-8 .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (5 January 2015).

The Prophet: The Life of Leon Trotsky .

Verso Books . p. 637.

ISBN 978-1-78168-721-5 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (April 1939).

"Problem of the Ukraine" – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Reid 2017 .

^ Applebaum 2017 , pp. 189–220, 221ff.

^ Selden 1982 .

^ Chamberlin 1933 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , pp. 436–441.

^ "The Wikipedia Library" .

wikipedialibrary.wmflabs.org .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

^ Margolis 2003 Kulchytsky2007- Evidential Gaps Finn 2008 Marples 2005 Bilinsky 1999 Kulchytsky 2006 ^ a b Snyder 2010 , pp. 42–46.

^ Irvin-Erickson, Douglas (12 May 2021).

"Raphaël Lemkin, Genocide, Colonialism, Famine, and Ukraine" .

Empire, Colonialism, and Famine in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries .

8 : 193– 215.

doi : 10.21226/ewjus645 .

S2CID 235586856 .

Hechter, Michael (12 May 2021).

"Internal Colonialism, Alien Rule, and Famine in Ireland and Ukraine" .

Empire, Colonialism, and Famine in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries .

8 : 145– 157.

doi : 10.21226/ewjus642 .

S2CID 235579661 .

Hrynevych, Liudmyla (12 May 2021).

"Stalin's Faminogenic Policies in Ukraine: The Imperial Discourse" .

Empire, Colonialism, and Famine in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries .

8 : 99– 143.

doi : 10.21226/ewjus641 .

S2CID 235570495 .

^ Klid, Bohdan (12 May 2021).

"Empire-Building, Imperial Policies, and Famine in Occupied Territories and Colonies" .

Empire, Colonialism, and Famine in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries .

8 : 11– 32.

doi : 10.21226/ewjus634 .

S2CID 235578437 .

^ Qian 2021 .

^ Markevich, Naumenko & Qian 2021 , Abstract.

^ Markevich, Naumenko & Qian 2021 , p. 27.

^ Markevich, Naumenko & Qian 2021 , p. 31.

^ a b c d e f Naumenko, Natalya (September 2023). "Response to Professor Tauger's Comments".

Econ Journal Watch : 313.

^ a b c d e Tauger, Mark B. (March 2024).

"Counter-Reply to Naumenko on the Soviet Famine in Ukraine in 1933" .

Econ Journal Watch .

21 (1): 79– 91.

^ a b Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute 2022 .

^ a b c Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute 2018 .

^ Serbyn 2015 .

^ Fitzpatrick 1994 , p. 6.

^ a b Fitzpatrick 1994 , p. 33.

^ Viola 1999 .

^ a b c Bociurkiw 1982 .

^ "Процес цк української партії соціалістів-революціонерів 1921" [The trial of the Central Committee of the Ukrainian Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries in 1921].

resource.history.org.ua . Archived from the original on 2 June 2024 . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ Ukrainian Institute of National Memory .

"1928 - pochavsya sud po "shakhtynsʹkiy spravi" " 1928 - почався суд по "шахтинській справі" [1928 - the trial of the "Shakhtyn case" began].

УІНП (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 6 March 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ "Postanovleniye Prezidiuma TSIK SSSR ot 16.10.1925 «Ob uregulirovanii granits Ukrainskoy Sotsialisticheskoy Sovetskoy Respubliki s Rossiyskoy Sotsialisticheskoy Federativnoy Sovetskoy Respublikoy i Belorusskoy Sotsialisticheskoy Sovetskoy Respublikoy»" Постановление Президиума ЦИК СССР от 16.10.1925 «Об урегулировании границ Украинской Социалистической Советской Республики с Российской Социалистической Федеративной Советской Республикой и Белорусской Социалистической Советской Республикой».

[Resolution of the Presidium of the CEC of the USSR of 16.10.1925 "On the settlement of the borders of the Ukrainian Socialist Soviet Republic with the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic and the Byelorussian Socialist Soviet Republic".] (in Russian) . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ " "Monstr-protses": kharkivsʹka sprava "Spilky Vyzvolennya Ukrayiny" 1930 r. u hromadsʹko-politychniy dumtsi Halychyny" "Монстр-процес": харківська справа "Спілки Визволення України" 1930 р. у громадсько-політичній думці Галичини [The "Monster Trial": The Kharkiv Case of the "Union for the Liberation of Ukraine" in 1930 in the Public and Political Thought of Galicia].

Україна Модерна (in Ukrainian). 3 April 2017. Archived from the original on 2 June 2024 . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ Shapoval, Yurii (12 December 2020).

"Narodnoyi revolyutsiynoyi sotsialistychnoyi partiyi Sprava" Народної революційної соціалістичної партії Справа [Case of "People's Revolutionary Socialist Party"].

Енциклопедія Сучасної України (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 2 June 2024 . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ Prystajko, Volodymyr I.; Šapoval, Jurij I. (1999).

Mychajlo Hruševs'kyj: sprava "UNC" i ostanni roky (1931-1934) = Paralleltit. Mykhailo Hrushevsky . Kyïv: Krytyka.

ISBN 978-966-7679-08-8 .

^ a b Wheatcroft 2001 .

^ a b Leonavičius & Ozolinčiūtė 2019 .

^ Malko 2021 , p. 191.

^ Mace, James E.

(Fall 2003).

"Is the Ukrainian Genocide a Myth?" (PDF) .

Canadian-American Slavic Studies .

376 (3): 45– 52.

doi : 10.1163/221023903X00378 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 March 2023 . Retrieved 25 March 2023 .

^ a b c d e Andriewsky 2015 .

^ a b Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute 2013 .

^ Papakin 2010 .

^ Pyrih, Ruslan I͡a. (2007).

1932–1933 rokiv v Ukraïni: Dokumenty i materialy 1932–1933 років в Ukraïni: Документи і матеріали [ Holodomor of 1932–33 in Ukraine: Documents and Materials ] (PDF) . Kyiv: Kyiv-Mohyla Academy . pp.

609– 10.

ISBN 978-966-518-419-5 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ Tauger 1991 .

^ Werth 1999 , p. 164.

^ a b Kotkin 2017 .

^ Davies, Tauger & Wheatcroft 1995 , pp. 656–657.

^ Kharkiv Oblast secretary 1933 .

^ " "Класово ворожа" бандура: пам'яті розстріляних кобзарів" [The "Class-Hostile" Bandura: In Memory of Executed Kobzars].

umoloda.kyiv.ua (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , pp. 441.

^ Malko 2021 , pp. 152–153.

^ James E. Abbe (1934).

I Photograph Russia . p. 304.

^ James E. Abbe (1934).

I Photograph Russia . p. 106.

^ Abbe, James E. (1934).

I Photograph Russia . p. 314.

^ Kuśnierz 2013 .

^ Kuśnierz 2018 .

^ Nalyvayko & Bulanenko 2016 .

^ "The book "Gold - the state! Torgsin in Soviet Ukraine, 1931–1936» – Чернігівський історичний музей ім. VV. Tarnovsky" . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ a b "The Holodomor and Torgsin System. Totally Secret" .

National Museum of the Holodomor-Genocide . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ Margolis 2003 .

^ Sokur 2008 .

^ Snyder 2010 , pp. 50–51.

^ a b c Applebaum 2017 , chapter 11.

^ Snyder 2010 , p. 51.

^ Quoted in Applebaum 2017 , chapter 11.

^ Meier 2022 .

^ Naimark, Norman M. (2010). Stalin's Genocides. Human Rights and Crimes against Humanity. Vol. 12. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-14784-0 p. 70 ^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , p. 178.

^ "Russia: Cossacks Punished" .

Time . 30 January 1933.

Archived from the original on 28 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ "What was Stanytsia Poltavska punished for?" .

Holodomor Museum . Archived from the original on 4 January 2024.

^ Loroff, Vincent & Kuryliw 2015 .

^ Shaw et al. 1934 .

^ Thevenin 2005 , p. 8.

^ Sosnovy 1953 , p. 222.

^ Soldatenko 2003 .

^ a b Uytkroft 2001 , p. 885.

^ Berezhkov 1993 .

^ a b c d e f g h Kulchytsky 2002 .

^ Berezhkov 1993 , p. 317.

^ Conquest 2002 .

^ a b Maksudov 1981 .

^ Sheeter 2007 .

^ Kulchytsky 2003 .

^ Yushchenko 2007 .

^ Yushchenko 2005 .

^ "Congressional Record House Articles" .

Congress.gov . 6 April 2005.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 .

^ a b Kyiv Post 2010 .

^ a b O'Neil 2010 .

^ a b Snyder 2009 .

^ Marples 2007 , p. 50.

^ Shevchenko University news 2016 .

^ Wheatcroft 2000 .

^ Kulchytsky 2004 .

^ Kulchytsky & Yefimenko 2003 , pp. 42–63.

^ Rudnytskyi, Omelian; Levchuk, Nataliia; Wolowyna, Oleh; Shevchuk, Pavlo; Kovbasiuk (Savchuk), Alla (2 April 2015).

"Demography of a man-made human catastrophe: The case of massive famine in Ukraine 1932-1933" .

Canadian Studies in Population .

42 ( 1– 2): 53– 80.

doi : 10.25336/P6FC7G .

ISSN 1927-629X .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2023 . Retrieved 1 September 2023 .

^ a b c Vallin et al. 2002 .

^ Meslé, Pison & Vallin 2005 , "What is striking in the long-term picture of Ukrainian life expectancy is the devastating impact of the calamities of the 1930s and 1940s. In 1933, the famine which had occasioned unparalleled excess mortality of 2.2 million, cut the period life expectancy to a low of under 10 years".

^ Meslé & Vallin 2003 .

^ a b Rudnytskyi et al. 2015 .

^ Шубин, А. В.

(2018). "Украина в XX веке (до 1945 г.)".

История Украины (in Russian). Алетейя.

ISBN 978-5-9906154-0-3 .

^ Gorbachev 2006 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , p. 429.

^ a b Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , p. 512.

^ Wheatcroft 2018 , p. 466.

^ Potocki 2003 .

^ a b c d e Interfax Ukraine 2013 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 , pp.

xiv ; Tauger 2001 , p. 1; Getty 2000 ; Suny 2017 , pp. 94–95 ^ Bilinsky 1999 ; [ page needed ] Kulchytsky2007- Evidential Gaps ; [ page needed ] Fawkes 2006 ; Marples 2005 ^ Marples 2009 .

^ Yanchenko 2022 .

^ a b Andriewsky 2015 , p. 35.

^ Lemkin 2008 ; Mace 1986 , p. 12; Naimark 2010 , pp. 134–135 ^ Naimark, Norman (2023).

"Genocide in Stalinist Russia and Ukraine, 1930–1938" . In Kiernan, Ben ; Lower, Wendy ; Naimark, Norman; Straus, Scott (eds.).

Genocide in the Contemporary Era, 1914–2020 . The Cambridge World History of Genocide. Vol. 3.

Cambridge University Press . pp.

183– 184.

doi : 10.1017/9781108767118.008 .

ISBN 978-1-108-48707-8 .

^ Lemkin 2010 .

^ Lemkin 2008 .

^ Serbyn, Roman.

"Role of Lemkin" .

HREC Education .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2019 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 .

^ Kulchytsky 2008 ; Kulchytsky 2017 ; Kulchytsky (2020) ; Zaxid (2020) ^ Snyder, Timothy (6 April 2017).

The Politics of Mass Killing: Past and Present (Speech). 15th Annual Arsham and Charlotte Ohanessian Lecture and Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies Symposium Keynote Address.

University of Minnesota College of Liberal Arts.

Archived from the original on 13 July 2023 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ Ellman 2007 , pp. 81–682, 686.

^ Rosefielde 1983 .

^ Fitzpatrick 2015 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2004 .

^ Chalupa, Irena (8 December 2008).

"On 'Genocide' And Famine" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .

^ Getty 2000 .

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2002 , p. 69 et seq..

^ Applebaum 2017 , pp. 347–356.

^ Radzinsky 1996 , pp. 256–59.

^ Conquest 2001 , p. 96.

^ Radzinsky 1996 , pp. 256–59; Pipes 1995 , pp. 232–36; Ukrainian Weekly 2002 ; Mace 2004 , p.

93 ; Totten, Parsons & Charny 2004 , p. 93 ^ "Welsh journalist who exposed a Soviet tragedy" .

Wales Online, Western Mail and the South Wales Echo . 13 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2022 .

^ "Famine Exposure: Newspaper Articles relating to Gareth Jones' trips to The Soviet Union (1930–35)" .

garethjones.org .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 April 2016 .

^ Beal 2021 .

^ Brown 2009 .

^ Levy 2009 .

^ InfoUkes Staff 2009 .

^ Gorbunova & Klymchuk 2020 ; Kravchenko 2020 , pp. 30–34; Marples 2007 , p. 246: "Still, the researchers have been unable to come up with a firm figure of the number of victims. Conquest cites 5 million deaths; Werth from 4 to 5 million; and Kul'chyts'kyi 3.5 million."; Mendel 2018 : "The data of V. Tsaplin indicates 2.9 million deaths in 1933 alone."; Yefimenko 2021 ^ Yefimenko 2021 .

^ Gorbunova & Klymchuk 2020 .

^ European Pravda 2022 .

^ Serbyn 2008 .

^ Rada, Nov. 2006 .

^ Dahm, Julia (15 December 2022).

"EU parliament votes to recognise 'Holodomor' famine as genocide" .

Euractiv .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

^ Deutsche Welle, Dec 2022 .

^ Ukrainian Weekly 2003 .

^ Martin 2001 , pp. 306–307: "TsK VKP/b/ and Sovnarkom have received information that in the Kuban and Ukraine a massive outflow of peasants "for bread" has begun into Belorussia and the Central-Black Earth, Volga, Western, and Moscow regions. / TsK VKP/b/ and Sovnarkom do not doubt that the outflow of peasants, like the outflow from Ukraine last year, was organized by the enemies of Soviet power, the SRs and the agents of Poland, with the goal of agitation "through the peasantry" . . . TsK VKP/b/ and Sovnarkom order the OGPU of Belorussia and the Central-Black Earth, Middle Volga, Western and Moscow regions to immediately arrest all "peasants" of Ukraine and the North Caucasus who have broken through into the north and, after separating out the counterrevolutionariy elements, to return the rest to their place of residence. . . . Molotov, Stalin" ^ "Is the Ukrainian Genocide a Myth?" (PDF) .

James E. Marce .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 March 2023 . Retrieved 25 March 2023 .

^ Verkhovna Rada, 2003 .

^ Interfax Ukraine 2010 .

^ Noack, Janssen & Cornerford 2014 .

^ Bayer 2014 .

^ Symposium: Starvation As A Political Tool, 2020 .

^ de Waal & Murdoch 2022 .

^ Santora & Vinograd 2022 .

^ Lister & Fylyppov 2022 .

^ Diamond 2022 .

^ Andriewsky 2015 , p. 21: "On 28 November 2006, the Parliament of Ukraine, with the president's support and in consultation with the National Academy of Sciences, voted to recognize the Ukrainian Famine of 1932–33 as a deliberate act of genocide against the Ukrainian people ("Zakon Ukrainy pro Holodomor"). A vigorous international campaign was subsequently initiated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to have the United Nations, the Council of Europe, and other governments do the same." ^ a b "ZAKON UKRAYINY: Pro Holodomor 1932–1933 rokiv v Ukrayini" ЗАКОН УКРАЇНИ: Про Голодомор 1932–1933 років в Україні [LAW OF UKRAINE: About the Holodomor of 1932–1933 in Ukraine].

rada.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). 28 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o "International Recognition of the Holodomor" .

Holodomor Education .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

^ "Romania and Belarus' opposition recognized Holodomor as a genocide of Ukrainians" .

The New Voice of Ukraine .

Yahoo! News . 24 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ Pianigiani, Gaia (23 November 2022).

"Pope Francis compares Russia's war against Ukraine to a devastating Stalin-era famine" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 24 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ "Belgium's House of Representatives recognises Holodomor as genocide of Ukrainians" . Archived from the original on 10 March 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ "The upper house of the Brazilian parliament has recognized the Holodomor as an act of genocide" . Archived from the original on 16 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ "Aprovado reconhecimento do Holodomor como genocídio contra ucranianos" [Approved recognition of Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainians].

Senado Federal (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 3 May 2022 . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

^ "Bulgarian parliament recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainian people" .

The Kyiv Independent . 1 February 2023. Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

^ "Bulgaria's National Assembly declares the Holodomor In Ukraine a genocide" . 1 February 2023. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023 . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

^ "Croatian government supports recognition of Holodomor as genocide" .

Kyiv Independent . 15 June 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 15 June 2023 .

^ Thomas, Mark (28 June 2023).

"Croatian Parliament Unanimously Recognizes Holodomor as Genocide against the Ukrainian People" .

Dubrovnik Times . Archived from the original on 1 July 2023.

^ "The Czech Republic recognized the Holodomor of 1932–1933 as genocide in Ukraine" . Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ "Riigikogu 20. oktoobri 1993. a avaldus" [Statement by Riigikogu on 20 October 1993] (in Estonian). 20 October 1993 . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ "France recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainians" .

The Kyiv Independent . 28 March 2023. Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ "Reconnaissance et condamnation de la grande famine de 1932–1933, connue sous le nom d'Holodomor, comme génocide" [Recognition and condemnation of the great famine of 1932–1933, known as the Holodomor, as genocide].

Assemblée nationale (in French). Archived from the original on 29 January 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "French Senate recognizes 1932–1933 Holodomor as genocide of Ukrainian people" .

Ukrinform . 17 May 2023. Archived from the original on 21 May 2023.

^ Sitnikova, Iryna (30 November 2022).

"Німеччина визнала Голодомор геноцидом українського народу" [Germany recognized the Holodomor with the genocide of the Ukrainian people] (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022 . Retrieved 30 November 2022 .

^ "Segja hungursneyð í Úkraínu hafa verið hópmorð" [Say the famine in Ukraine was mass murder].

Morgunblaðið (in Icelandic). 23 March 2023 . Retrieved 23 March 2023 .

^ "Iceland recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainians" .

The Kyiv Independent . 23 March 2023 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ "Iceland recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainian people" . 23 March 2023. Archived from the original on 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 23 March 2023 .

^ "Ireland's Senate recognizes Holodomor of 1932–1933 in Ukraine as genocide" . 24 November 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

"Mark Daly" .

Facebook . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

Stewart, Daniel (24 November 2022).

"Irish Senate recognizes Ukrainian genocide in the 1930s" .

News 360 .

MSN . Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ "Italian Senate recognizes Holodomor as genocide" .

The Kyiv Independent . 26 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 July 2023 .

^ "Luxembourg's parliament recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainians" .

Ukrinform . 14 June 2023. Archived from the original on 15 June 2023.

^ "Luxembourg Parliament recognises Holodomor as genocide of Ukrainian people" .

MSN .

Ukrainska Pravda . 13 June 2023. Archived from the original on 14 July 2023.

^ "Romania, Moldova, Ireland recognize Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainian people" . 24 November 2022. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

^ "Dutch House of Representatives recognises Holodomor as genocide of Ukrainian people" .

Ukrainska Pravda . 7 July 2023. Archived from the original on 7 July 2023.

^ Vaniyan, Roman (7 July 2023).

"The Netherlands recognizes Holodomor as a genocide of the Ukrainian people" .

Ukrainian News . Archived from the original on 7 July 2023 . Retrieved 7 July 2023 .

^ "Parlamento de Portugal reconheceu a Holodomor de 1932–1933 na Ucrânia como Genocídio contra o povo Ucraniano" [Parliament of Portugal recognized the Holodomor of 1932–1933 in Ukraine as Genocide against the Ukrainian people] (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 1 April 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

^ "Romania recognizes Holodomor of 1932–1933 in Ukraine as genocide" . 24 November 2022. Archived from the original on 16 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

^ "Návrh skupiny poslancov Národnej rady Slovenskej republiky na prijatie uznesenia Národnej rady Slovenskej republiky k uznaniu hladomoru na Ukrajine v rokoch 1932–1933 za genocídu (tlač 1734). Hlasovanie o návrhu uznesenia" [Proposal of a group of deputies of the National Council of the Slovak Republic to adopt a resolution of the National Council of the Slovak Republic to recognize the famine in Ukraine in the years 1932–1933 as genocide (print 1734). Voting on the draft resolution].

National Council of the Slovak Republic website (in Slovak). 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 July 2023 .

^ "Slovakian parliament recognises Holodomor as genocide of Ukrainian people" .

Ukrainska Pravda . 20 June 2023. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

^ Angleški, S. T. A. (23 May 2023).

"Slovenia recognizes Holodomor as genocide" .

Slovenia Times . Archived from the original on 24 May 2023 . Retrieved 24 May 2023 .

^ "Slovenija gladomor priznala za genocid, Zelenski se zahvaljuje poslancem" [Slovenia recognized the famine as genocide, Zelenski thanks the MPs].

24ur.com (in Slovenian). 23 May 2023. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 23 May 2023 .

^ "Ukrainian Holodomor: Debated on Thursday 25 May 2023" .

UK Parliament . Archived from the original on 25 May 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ "The Parliament of Wales recognized the Holodomor as genocide of the Ukrainian people" .

European Pravda . Retrieved 25 October 2023 .

^ "Senat SSHA vyznav Holodomor henotsydom ukrayinsʹkoho narodu" Сенат США визнав Голодомор геноцидом українського народу [The US Senate recognized the Holodomor as genocide of the Ukrainian people].

Ukrainian Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 4 October 2018 .

Najarian, Mark (5 October 2018).

"U.S. Senate Says Stalin 'Committed Genocide' In Famine-Hit Ukraine" .

Radio Free Europe . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

"US House of Representatives Authorizes Construction of Ukrainian Genocide Monument in Washington, D.C." UCCA . 16 November 2005. Archived from the original on 25 November 2005.

United States House of Representatives , Washington, D.C. (21 October 2003).

"HR356 "Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives regarding the man-made famine that occurred in Ukraine in 1932–1933" " . Archived from the original on 15 June 2008.

^ a b "Text – S.Res.435 – 115th Congress (2017-2018): A resolution expressing the sense of the Senate that the 85th anniversary of the Ukrainian Famine of 1932-1933, known as the Holodomor, should serve as a reminder of repressive Soviet policies against the people of Ukraine" .

United States Congress . 3 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

"Text – H.Res.931 – 115th Congress (2017–2018): Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives that the 85th anniversary of the Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933, known as the Holodomor, should serve as a reminder of repressive Soviet policies against the people of Ukraine" .

United States Congress . 11 December 2018. Archived from the original on 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ "Statement by Pope John Paul II on the 70th anniversary of the Famine" . skrobach.com. 2007. Archived from the original on 30 June 2007.

^ "European Parliament recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainian people" .

Ukrinform . Archived from the original on 24 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ Dahm, Julia (15 December 2022).

"EU parliament votes to recognise 'Holodomor' famine as genocide" .

Euractiv . Archived from the original on 15 December 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

^ "PACE recognises Holodomor as genocide" .

Ukrainska Pravda . 12 October 2023.

^ "O priznanii Golodomora 1932 — 1933 godov v Ukraine aktom genotsida ukrainskogo naroda" О признании Голодомора 1932 — 1933 годов в Украине актом геноцида украинского народа [On the Recognition of the Holodomor].

chechen-government.com (in Russian). Archived from the original on 22 August 2024 . Retrieved 19 April 2023 .

^ The New Voice of Ukraine (18 October 2022).

"Ukraine recognizes the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria" .

Yahoo! News . Archived from the original on 5 March 2024.

^ Horbachov 1998 .

^ Wilson 2002 , p.

144 .

^ Verkhovna Rada, 2007 .

^ AnyDay Guide 2017 .

^ Rud 2016 .

^ Van Herpen 2013 , p. 40.

^ Yushchenko 2006 .

^ Nat.RadioUkraine2007 .

^ Nat.BankUkraine2007 .

^ ZIK (information agency) 2009 .

^ National Museum of the Holodomor 2018 .

^ Zadorozhnii, Oleksandr (2016).

International Law in the Relations of Ukraine and the Russian Federation: Monograph . Yuri Marchenko.

ISBN 978-617-684-146-3 .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Rating Group Ukraine 2021 .

^ Ukrinform 2022d .

^ Balachuk 2022 .

^ New Voice - UA 2022 .

^ Lypovetakyi, Sviatoslav (14 November 2020).

"Vid the greatest generation do pokolinnia primarily dii" Від The greatest generation до покоління прямої дії .

Ukrainskyi Tyzhden (in Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ Kończal, Kornelia; Moses, A. Dirk (27 June 2023).

Patriotic History and the (Re)Nationalization of Memory .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 978-1-000-89930-6 .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Bradley 1999 .

^ Ukrainian Canadian Congress 2020 .

^ CTV news 2008 .

^ Luciuk., Lubomyr (21 November 2010).

"How to honor victims of Holodomor" .

Kyiv Post . Retrieved 21 June 2025 .

^ "Warrant for an Invasion: The Myth of the "American Coups" in Ukraine. 2. What Happened in 2014" . 16 April 2022 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 .

^ Government of Saskatchewan 2013 .

^ Visnyk 2008 , p. 13.

^ Ukrainian Canadian Congress 2008 .

^ "Ontario MPP gets Ukrainian knighthood for bill honouring victims of famine" .

The Canadian Press . 20 November 2010.

Archived from the original on 19 May 2015 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

^ Ukrainian Canadian Congress 2010 .

^ "Holodomor Monument – Пам'ятник Голодомору 1932–33" . St. Mary's Ukrainian Catholic Church.

Archived from the original on 6 January 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

^ "Unveiling of the Holodomor monument "Bitter Memories of Childhood" " . UkrainianWinnipeg.ca. 22 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2017 . Retrieved 22 November 2016 .

^ "The Holodomor Memorial Project" .

www.explace.on.ca . Canadian National Exhibition Association. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "Uchwała Senatu Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej z dnia 16 marca 2006 r. w sprawie rocznicy Wielkiego Głodu na Ukrainie" [Resolution of the Senate of the Republic of Poland of 16 March 2006 on the anniversary of the Great Famine in Ukraine].

isap.sejm.gov.pl (in Polish).

Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2021 .

^ "Odsłonięto pomnik ofiar Wielkiego Głodu na Ukrainie" [Monument unveiled to victims of the Great Famine in Ukraine].

wPolityce.pl (in Polish). 22 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 November 2016 .

^ Berg 2008 .

^ Bihun 2008 .

^ Interfax Ukraine 2009 .

^ Obama 2009 .

^ Obama2010 .

^ Obama2011 .

^ "Holodomor Memorial presented in Washington" .

UNIAN . 5 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

^ McDaniels 2015 .

^ "Text – S.Res.74 – 116th Congress (2019–2020): A resolution marking the fifth anniversary of Ukraine's Revolution of Dignity by honoring the bravery, determination, and sacrifice of the people of Ukraine during and since the Revolution, and condemning continued Russian aggression against Ukraine" .

www.congress.gov . 16 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ "Text – S.Res.435 – 115th Congress (2017–2018): A resolution expressing the sense of the Senate that the 85th anniversary of the Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933, known as the Holodomor, should serve as a reminder of repressive Soviet policies against the people of Ukraine" .

www.congress.gov . 3 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ "H.Res.1109 – Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives that the Ukrainian famine of 1932–1933, known as the Holodomor, is recognized as a genocide and should serve as a reminder of repressive Soviet policies against the people of Ukraine" . United States House of Representatives. 12 May 2022.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2022 . Retrieved 20 August 2022 .

^ "Selection for Competition and Berlinale Special Completed" .

Berlinale .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2019 . Retrieved 17 January 2019 .

^ "Mr. Jones tames the Golden Lions at the Polish Film Festival in Gdynia" .

Cineuropa . 23 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 27 October 2019 .

^ Ukrinform 2022a .

^ Klady 1985 .

^ Blow 1985 .

^ "Events to Mark 90 Years Since the Holodomor" . 13 May 2023.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 May 2023 .

^ Samchuk 1952 .

^ Marsh, Katherine (2023).

The Lost Year: A Survival Story of the Ukrainian Famine . Roaring Brook Press.

ISBN 978-1-250-31361-4 .

^ "The Lost Year: A Survival Story of the Ukrainian Famine" .

National Book Foundation .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2024 . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ Tehran Times 2021 .

Bibliography See also: Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union § Terror, famine and the Gulag Andriewsky, Olga (January 2015).

"Towards a Decentred History: The Study of the Holodomor and Ukrainian Historiography" .

East/West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies .

2 (1).

University of Alberta : 17.

doi : 10.21226/T2301N .

AnyDay Guide (25 November 2017).

"Remembrance Day for the Victims of Holodomors in Ukraine / November 25, 2017" .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 24 November 2017 .

Applebaum, Anne (2017).

Red Famine: Stalin's War on Ukraine .

Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-0-385-53886-2 .

Balachuk, Iryna (19 October 2022).

"Occupiers dismantle monument to victims of Holodomor in Mariupol" .

Ukrainska Pravda .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 . Retrieved 19 October 2022 .

Barkan, Elazar; Cole, Elizabeth A.; Struve, Kai (2007).

Shared History, Divided Memory: Jews and Others in Soviet-Occupied Poland, 1939–1941 . Leipziger Universitätsverlag. pp.

120– 121.

ISBN 978-3-86583-240-5 .

Bayer, Alexei (8 February 2014).

"Ukraine and Ireland: Overcoming Mighty Neighbors" .

The Globalist .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 .

Beal, Fred Erwin (2021) [originally published in 1937, New York: Hillman-Curl.].

Proletarian Journey: New England, Gastonia, Moscow . Hassell Street Press.

ISBN 978-1-01-433038-3 .

Berezhkov, Valentin M. (1993).

Kak ya stal perevodchikom Stalina Как я стал переводчиком Сталина [ How I became Stalin's translator ] (in Russian). Moscow: "ДЭМ" (DEM). p. 317.

ISBN 5-85207-044-0 .

Berg, Tabitha (6 June 2008).

"International Holodomor Remembrance Torch in Baltimore Commemorates Ukrainian Genocide" . eNewsChannels. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Bihun, Yaro (7 December 2008).

"Site of Ukrainian Genocide Memorial in D.C. is dedicated" (PDF) .

The Ukrainian Weekly .

76 (49): 1, 8.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 March 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Bilinsky, Yaroslav (1999).

"Was the Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933 Genocide?" .

Journal of Genocide Research .

1 (2): 147– 156.

doi : 10.1080/14623529908413948 . Archived from the original on 15 June 2008 . Retrieved 5 June 2006 .

Blow, Peter (15 April 1985).

"Film: Harvest of Despair: The 1932-33 Famine in Ukraine" .

Nowytski, Slavko (director) ; Luhovy, Yuri and Novytski, S. (producers). Toronto: Ukrainian Canadian Research and Documentation Centre .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

Documentary on Youtube Bociurkiw, Bohdan R. (1982).

"Soviet Religious Policy in the Ukraine in Historical Perspective" .

Occasional Papers on Religion in Eastern Europe .

2 (3).

Archived from the original on 6 March 2023 . Retrieved 16 December 2022 .

Boriak, Hennadii; von Hagen, Mark (2009).

Sources for the Study of the 'Great Famine' in Ukraine . The Holodomor Series. Cambridge, MA: Ukrainian Studies Fund.

ISBN 978-0-940465-06-0 .

Bradley, Lara (3 January 1999).

"Ukraine's 'Forced Famine' Officially Recognized" .

The Sudbury Star . Sudbury, Ontario, Canada. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012 – via reprint at ArtUkraine.com.

Brown, Mark (13 November 2009).

"1930s journalist Gareth Jones to have story retold" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 January 2022 .

Busel, Vyacheslav T., ed. (2004) [2001]. "holodomor" голодомор .

Velykyy tlumachnyy slovnyk suchasnoyi ukrayinsʹkoyi movy Великий тлумачний словник сучасної української мови [ Great Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Ukrainian ] (in Ukrainian). Kyiv: Perun.

ISBN 978-966-569-013-9 . Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 29 February 2016 .

Shtuchnyy holod, orhanizovanyy u velycheznykh masshtabakh zlochynnoyu vladoyu proty naselennya vlasnoyi krayiny.

Штучний голод, організований у величезних масштабах злочинною владою проти населення власної країни.

[An artificial famine organized on a huge scale by a criminal government against the population of its own country.] Chamberlin, William Henry (1933). "The Balance Sheet of the Five Year Plan".

Foreign Affairs .

11 (3): 458– 469.

doi : 10.2307/20030526 .

ISSN 0015-7120 .

JSTOR 20030526 .

Conquest, Robert (2001).

Reflections on a Ravaged Century (New ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-32086-2 .

Conquest, Robert (2002) [1986].

The Harvest Of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivisation and the Terror-Famine . London: Pimlico.

ISBN 978-0-7126-9750-7 .

CTV news (22 November 2008).

"Ukrainian-Canadians mark famine's 75th anniversary" .

CTV.ca . Archived from the original on 18 October 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Davies, Norman (2006).

Europe East and West . London: Jonathan Cape .

ISBN 978-0-224-06924-3 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2016 – via Google Books .

Davies, Robert W.

; Tauger, Mark B.; Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(1995).

"Stalin, Grain Stocks and the Famine of 1932-1933" .

Slavic Review .

54 (3): 642– 57.

doi : 10.2307/2501740 .

JSTOR 2501740 .

S2CID 163790684 .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2022 . Retrieved 3 December 2022 .

Davies, Robert W.

; Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(2002).

"The Soviet Famine of 1932–33 and the Crisis in Agriculture" (PDF) . In Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(ed.).

Challenging Traditional Views of Russian History . Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-333-75461-0 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

Davies, Robert ; Wheatcroft, Stephen (2004).

The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931–1933 . The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia. Vol. 5.

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-230-27397-9 .

OCLC 1075104809 .

Davies, Robert; Wheatcroft, Stephen (2006).

"Stalin and the Soviet Famine of 1932–33: A Reply to Ellman" (PDF) .

Europe-Asia Studies .

58 (4): 625– 633.

doi : 10.1080/09668130600652217 .

JSTOR 20451229 .

S2CID 145729808 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

Demoscope Weekly (January 2012).

"Vsesoyuznaya perepis' naseleniya 1939 goda: Ukrainskaya SSR" Всесоюзная перепись населения 1939 года: Украинская ССР [All-Union census of the population of 1939: Ukrainian SSR] (in Russian). Institute of Demography, National Research University Higher School of Economics.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2012.

Deutsche Welle (DW) staff (15 December 2022).

"European Parliament recognizes Ukraine Holodomor as genocide" .

DW broadcasting .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

de Waal, Alex; Murdoch, Catriona (29 March 2022).

"Russia could be guilty of starvation crimes in Ukraine. We must act" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 1 April 2022 .

Diamond, Yonah (27 May 2022).

"Independent Legal Analysis of the Russian Federation's Breaches of the Genocide Convention in Ukraine and the Duty to Prevent" (PDF) . Prof. John Packer, Erin Farrell Rosenberg (Principal Advisors) with 35 additional contributing experts. Yonah Diamond was the Principal Author.

New Lines Institute for Strategy and Policy ; Raoul Wallenberg Centre for Human Rights .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

Dolot, Miron (1985).

Execution by Hunger: The Hidden Holocaust . New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-30416-9 .

Ellman, Michael (September 2005). "The Role of Leadership Perceptions and of Intent in the Soviet Famine of 1931 – 1934".

Europe-Asia Studies .

57 (6): 823– 841.

doi : 10.1080/09668130500199392 .

S2CID 13880089 .

Ellman, Michael (June 2007). "Stalin and the Soviet famine of 1932 – 33 Revisited".

Europe-Asia Studies .

59 (4).

Routledge : 663– 693.

doi : 10.1080/09668130701291899 .

S2CID 53655536 .

Engerman, David C. (2009) [2003].

Modernization from the Other Shore: American Intellectuals and the Romance of Russian Development . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-03652-9 – via Google Books .

[ permanent dead link ] European Pravda (15 December 2022).

"European Parliament Recognises Holodomor as Genocide of Ukrainian People" .

www.eurointegration.com.ua (in English, Russian, and Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 15 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

Fawkes, Helen (24 November 2006).

"Legacy of famine divides Ukraine" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2012 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

Finn, Peter (27 April 2008).

"Aftermath of a Soviet Famine" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2012 . Retrieved 29 August 2017 .

Fitzpatrick, Sheila (1994).

Stalin's Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russian Village After Collectivization .

Oxford University Press .

Fitzpatrick, Sheila (2015). "Impact of the Opening of Soviet Archives on Western Scholarship on Soviet Social History".

The Russian Review .

74 (3): 377– 400.

doi : 10.1111/russ.12021 .

ISSN 0036-0341 .

JSTOR 43662294 .

Getty, J. Arch (2000).

"The Future Did Not Work" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 July 2020 .

Similarly, the overwhelming weight of opinion among scholars working in the new archives (including Courtois's co-editor Werth) is that the terrible famine of the 1930s was the result of Stalinist bungling and rigidity rather than some genocidal plan.

Getty, J. Arch (August 2018).

"New Sources and Old Narratives" .

Contemporary European History .

27 (3): 450– 455.

doi : 10.1017/S0960777318000322 .

ISSN 0960-7773 .

S2CID 149507259 .

Gorbachev, Mikhail Sergeevich (2006).

Manifesto for the Earth: action now for peace, global justice and a sustainable future . Clairview Books. p. 10.

ISBN 1-905570-02-3 .

Gorbunova, Viktoriia; Klymchuk, Vitalii (2020).

"The Psychological Consequences of the Holodomor in Ukraine" .

East/West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies .

7 (2): 33– 68.

doi : 10.21226/ewjus609 .

S2CID 228999786 .

Government of Saskatchewan (14 November 2013).

"Saskatchewan recognises genocide during Holodomor Remembrance Week | News and Media | Government of Saskatchewan" . Saskatchewan.ca.

Archived from the original on 6 May 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

Graziosi, Andrea (2004).

"The Soviet 1931–1933 Famines and the Ukrainian Holodomor: Is a New Interpretation Possible, and What Would Its Consequences Be?" (pdf) .

Harvard Ukrainian Studies .

27 (1/4): 97– 115.

ISSN 0363-5570 .

JSTOR 41036863 .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 7 December 2022 .

Graziosi, Andrea (2005).

"Les Famines Soviétiques de 1931–1933 et le Holodomor Ukrainien" [The Soviet Famines of 1931–1933 and the Ukrainian Holodomor].

Cahiers du monde russe et soviétique (in French).

46 (3): 453– 472.

doi : 10.4000/monderusse.8817 .

Graziosi, Andrea; McGowan, Mark G.; Totten, Samuel; Shirinian, George; Apsel, Joyce (14 April 2020).

"Symposium: Starvation As A Political Tool From The Nineteenth To The Twenty-First Century: The Irish Famine, The Armenian Genocide, The Ukrainian Holodomor And Genocide By Attrition In The Nuba Mountains Of Sudan" .

HREC Education [Holodomor Research and Education Consortium] .

Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 .

Hadzewycz, Roma; Zarycky, George B.; Kolomayets, Martha, eds. (1983).

The Great Famine in Ukraine: The Unknown Holocaust . Jersey City, NJ: Ukrainian National Association .

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute (2013).

"The Great Famine Project: Blacklisted Localities (Gallery)" .

gis.huri.harvard.edu .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 23 October 2022 .

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute (2018).

"The Great Famine Project: Total Direct Famine Losses of Population per 1,000 by Raion in Ukraine for 1933" .

gis.huri.harvard.edu .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 23 October 2022 .

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute (2022).

"The Great Famine Project: New Insights" . Archived from the original on 16 January 2022.

Horbachov, Dmytro (1998).

"Fullest Expression of Pure Feeling" .

Welcome to Ukraine (1). Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

Hryshko, Vasyl (1983) [1976]. Carynnyk, Marco (ed.).

The Ukrainian Holocaust of 1933 . Toronto: Bahrianyi Foundation.

ISBN 978-0-9691830-1-3 .

InfoUkes Staff (26 April 2009) [28 November 2006].

"The Artificial Famine/Genocide (Holodomor) in Ukraine 1932–33" . InfoUkes.

Archived from the original on 24 November 2016 . Retrieved 1 March 2022 .

Institute of History of Ukraine (1990). Pyrih, Ruslan Y.; Kentii, Anatoly V.; Komarova, Irina L.; Lozytskyi, V. S.; Solovyova, A. A. (eds.).

Documents 1-132 extracted from "Голодомор 1932–33 років в Україні: документи і матеріали"/ Упорядник Руслан Пиріг; НАН України.Ін-т історії України.-К.:Вид.дім "Києво-Могилянська академія" [ Documents 1-132 extracted from "The famine of 1932-1933 in Ukraine: through the eyes of historians, in the language of documents" ] (in Ukrainian). Kyiv: Kyiv-Mohyla Academy. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012 . Retrieved 7 September 2012 .

See also full book Institute of History of Ukraine (1990). Pyrih, Ruslan Y.; Kentii, Anatoly V.; Komarova, Irina L.; Lozytskyi, V. S.; Solovyova, A. A. (eds.).

Documents 343-403 extracted from "Голодомор 1932–33 років в Україні: документи і матеріали"/ Упорядник Руслан Пиріг; НАН України.Ін-т історії України.-К.:Вид.дім "Києво-Могилянська академія" [ Documents 343-403 extracted from "The famine of 1932-1933 in Ukraine: through the eyes of historians, in the language of documents" ] (in Ukrainian). Kyiv: Kyiv-Mohyla Academy. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012 . Retrieved 7 September 2012 .

See also full book Interfax Ukraine (14 November 2009).

"Remembrance of Holodomor in Ukraine will help prevent such tragedy in future, says Obama" .

Interfax-Ukraine .

Archived from the original on 1 March 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Interfax Ukraine (21 January 2010).

"Sentence to Stalin, his comrades for organizing Holodomor takes effect in Ukraine" .

Kyiv Post . Archived from the original on 3 March 2014.

Interfax Ukraine (20 November 2013).

"Poll: Almost two-thirds of Ukrainians believe famine of 1932–1933 was organized by Stalinist regime" .

Interfax-Ukraine .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 February 2016 .

Jones, Adam (2017).

Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-138-82384-6 .

Holodomor – the Ukrainian "famine-extermination" of 1932–1933 at the hands of Stalin's Soviet regime (Chapter 5); "a compound word combining the root holod 'hunger' with the verbal root mor 'extinguish', 'exterminate' (Lubomyr Hajda, Harvard University).

Kharkiv Oblast secretary (9 April 1933).

"Kharkiv Oblast State Archive Ф. П - 58, catalogue 1, file 59, lists 146-147, 152" . Archived from the original on 1 September 2010.

Klady, Leonard (1985) [originally published by Winnipeg Free Press, 26 October 1984].

"Famine Film Harvest of Despair " .

Forum: A Ukrainian Review (61). Scranton: Ukrainian Fraternal Association.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2011 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 – via InfoUkes.

Kotkin, Stephen (8 November 2017).

"Terrible Talent: Studying Stalin" .

The American Interest (Interview). Interviewed by Richard Aldous.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

Kravchenko, Ye (1 July 2020).

"The Concept of Demographic Losses in the Holodomor Studies" .

Vìsnik - Kiïvsʹkij nacìonalʹnij unìversitet ìmenì Tarasa Ševčenka: Ìstorìâ (144): 30– 34.

doi : 10.17721/1728-2640.2020.144.6 .

ISSN 1728-2640 .

S2CID 226687490 .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 7 September 2023 .

Kulchytsky, Stalislav (22 November 2002).

"Skilʹky nas zahynulo vid Holodomoru 1933 roku?" Скільки нас загинуло від Голодомору 1933 року?

[How many of us perished in Holodomor in 1933].

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

[ permanent dead link ] Kulchytsky, Stanislav; Yefimenko, Hennadiy (2003).

"Kulchytsky pages 42-64" (PDF) .

Demohrafichni naslidky holodomoru 1933 r. v Ukrayini. Vsesoyuznyy perepys 1937 r. v Ukrayini: dokumenty ta materialy Демографічні наслідки голодомору 1933 р. в Україні. Всесоюзний перепис 1937 р. в Україні: документи та матеріали [ Demographic consequences of the 1933 Holodomor in Ukraine. The all-Union census of 1937 in Ukraine: Documents and Materials ] (in Ukrainian). Kyiv: Institute of History. pp.

42– 63.

ISBN 978-966-02-3014-9 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 May 2013.

Kulchytsky, Stanislav (22 August 2003).

"Prychyny holodu 1933 roku v Ukrayini po storinkakh odniyeyi pidzabutoyi knyhy" Причини голоду 1933 року в Україні по сторінках однієї підзабутої книги [Reasons for the 1933 famine in Ukraine according to the pages of one all but forgotten book].

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Ukrainian) (16) . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

During the hearings, the Ukrainian politician Stefan Khmara said, 'I would like to address the scientists, particularly, Stanislav Kulchytsky, who attempts to mark down the number of victims and counts them as 3–3.5 million. I studied these questions analysing the demographic statistics as early as in 1970s and concluded that the number of victims was no less than 7 million'.

[ permanent dead link ] Kulchytsky, Stalislav (1 October 2004).

"Demohrafichni vtraty Ukrayiny v khkh stolitti" Демографічні втрати України в хх столітті [Demographic losses in Ukrainian in the twentieth century].

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

[ permanent dead link ] Kulchytsky, Stanislav (25 October 2005).

"Why did Stalin exterminate the Ukrainians? Comprehending the Holodomor. The position of Soviet historians – Six-part series" .

Den . No.

33– 39. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 – via Orange Revolution website.

Original online issues for series: "Part 1" .

Den . No. 33. 25 October 2005. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022.

(Kulchytsky 2005) "Part 2" .

Den . No. 34. 1 November 2005. Archived from the original on 20 August 2022.

(Kulchytsky 2005) "Part 3" .

Den . No. 35. 8 November 2005. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022.

(Kulchytsky 2005) "Part 4" .

Den . No. 37. 22 November 2005. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022.

(Kulchytsky 2005) "Part 5" .

Den . No. 38. 29 November 2005. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022.

(Kulchytsky 2005) "Part 6" .

Den . No. 39. 6 December 2005. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022.

(Kulchytsky 2005) Kulchytsky, Stanislav (24 November 2006).

"Holodomor-33: chomu i yak?" Голодомор-33: чому і як?

[Holodomor-33: Why and how?].

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Ukrainian) (25) . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

[ permanent dead link ] Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (13 February 2007).

"Holodomor of 1932–33 as genocide: gaps in the evidential basis Part 1 of 4" .

Den . No. 5. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022.

Part 2 , Part 3 , Part 4 .

Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (27 February 2007).

"Holodomor of 1932–33 as genocide: gaps in the evidential basis Part 2" .

Den . No. 7. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022.

Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (6 March 2007).

"Holodomor of 1932–33 as genocide: gaps in the evidential basis Part 3" .

Den . No. 8. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022.

Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (20 March 2007).

"Holodomor of 1932–33 as genocide: gaps in the evidential basis Part 4" .

Den . No. 9. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022.

Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (17 February 2007).

"Holodomor 1932–1933 rr. yak henotsyd: prohalyny u dokazovii bazi" Голодомор 1932 — 1933 рр. як геноцид: прогалини у доказовій базі [Holodomor 1932–1933 as genocide: gaps in the evidence].

Den (in Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 2 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 .

( English article Archived 1 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine ) Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (2008).

Holod 1932-1933 pp. v Ukrayini yak henotsyd: movoyu dokumentiv, ochyma svidkiv гoлoд 1932-1933 pp. в Україні як геноцид: мовою документів, очима свідків [ Famine 1932-1933 pp. in Ukraine as genocide: in the language of documents, through the eyes of witnesses ] (PDF) (in Ukrainian).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 May 2023 .

Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (September 2017).

"The Ukrainian Holodomor against the Background of the Communist Onslaught, 1929–1938" (PDF) .

Holodomor Research and Education Consortium . Translated by Kinsella, Ali; Olynyk, Marta D. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2021.

Kulchytsky, Stanislav [in Ukrainian] (27 November 2020).

"Chomu vidbuvsya Holodomor - Stanislav Kulʹchytsʹkyy" Чому відбувся Голодомор - Станіслав Кульчицький [Why did the Holodomor happen - Stanislav Kulchytsky] (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 .

Kuśnierz, Robert (21 November 2013).

Post-holodomor Population Resettlements to Ukraine (1933–1934) . 45th Annual Convention of the Association for Slavic, East European and Eurasian Studies. Boston. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016.

Kuśnierz, Robert (10 April 2018).

"Przesiedlenia ludności na Ukrainie w latach 1933–1934" [Resettlement of population in Ukraine in the years 1933–1934].

Dzieje Najnowsze [ pl ] (in Polish).

50 (1): 51– 68.

doi : 10.12775/DN.2018.1.03 .

Kyiv Post (30 October 2010).

"Harper accused of exaggerating Ukrainian genocide death toll" .

KyivPost .

MontrealGazette.com , Kyiv Post .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

Liber, George.

Total wars and the making of modern Ukraine, 1914–1954 ( U of Toronto Press, 2016).

Lemkin, Raphael (2008) [1953].

"Soviet Genocide in the Ukraine" (PDF) . In Luciuk, Lubomyr; Grekul, Lisa (eds.).

Holodomor: Reflections on the Great Famine of 1932–1933 in Soviet Ukraine .

Kashtan Press .

ISBN 978-1-896354-33-0 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 March 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Lemkin, Raphael (26 November 2010).

"Holodomor buv henotsydom. Tak vvazhav avtor terminu "henotsyd" " Голодомор був геноцидом. Так вважав автор терміну "геноцид" [Holodomor was a genocide, according to the author of the term] (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 24 January 2011 . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

Leonavičius, Vylius; Ozolinčiūtė, Eglė (1 December 2019).

"The Transformation of the Soviet Agriculture" .

Sociologija: Mintis Ir Veiksmas [ lt ] .

44 (1): 93– 131.

doi : 10.15388/SocMintVei.2019.1.10 .

S2CID 213399789 .

Levy, Clifford J. (16 March 2009).

"A New View of a Famine That Killed Millions" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

Lister, Tim; Fylyppov, Sanyo (5 May 2022).

"Russians steal vast amounts of Ukrainian grain and equipment, threatening this year's harvest" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2022 . Retrieved 5 May 2022 .

Loroff, Nicole; Vincent, Jordan; Kuryliw, Valentina (2015).

"Holodomor – Denial and Silences: The Cover-Up: Denials, Dismissals and Silences" .

HREC Education [Holodomor Research and Education Consortium] .

Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 14 February 2022 .

Mace, James (1986).

"The man-made famine of 1933 in Soviet Ukraine" . In Serbyn, Roman; Krawchenko, Bohdan (eds.).

Famine in Ukraine in 1932–1933 . Canada: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies .

ISBN 978-0-09-286243-4 .

Mace, James E.

(2004).

"Soviet Man-Made Famine in Ukraine" . In Totten, Samuel; Parsons, William S.; Charny, Israel W. (eds.).

Century of Genocide: Critical Essays and Eyewitness Accounts . London: Routledge . pp.

93– 126.

ISBN 978-0-415-94430-4 .

Mace, James E. (2008).

Ваші мертві вибрали мене ...

[ Your dead chose me ...

]. Kyiv: Vyd-vo ZAT "Ukraïns'ka pres-hrupa".

ISBN 978-966-8152-13-9 .

(A collection of Mace's articles and columns published in Den from 1993 to 2004).

Maksudov, Sergei (1981). "Losses Suffered by the Population of the USSR 1918–1958". In Medvedev, Roy A. (ed.).

The Samizdat Register II . London–New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-01419-8 .

Margolis, Eric (16 November 2003).

"Seven million died in the 'forgotten' holocaust" .

ukemonde.com .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2017 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

First appeared in Toronto Sun, 16Nov2003 Makuch, Andrij.

"The famine of 1932–1933" .

Encyclopædia Britannica online .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

Malko, Victoria A. (2021).

The Ukrainian Intelligentsia and Genocide: The Struggle for History, Language, and Culture in the 1920s and 1930s .

Lexington Books .

ISBN 978-1-4985-9679-4 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 22 December 2021 .

Markevich, Andrei; Naumenko, Natalya; Qian, Nancy (July 2021).

The Causes of Ukrainian Famine Mortality, 1932–33 (CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP16408).

doi : 10.3386/w29089 .

Marples, David R.

(14 July 2002).

"Analysis: Debating the undebatable? Ukraine Famine of 1932–1933" .

The Ukrainian Weekly . Vol. LXX, no. 28. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

Marples, David (30 November 2005).

"The great famine debate goes on ..." ExpressNews, University of Alberta . Archived from the original on 15 June 2008 – via originally published in the Edmonton Journal .

Marples, David R.

(1 January 2007).

Heroes and Villains: Creating National History in Contemporary Ukraine .

Central European University Press .

ISBN 978-963-7326-98-1 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 11 November 2021 – via Google Books .

Marples, David R. (1 May 2009). "Ethnic Issues in the Famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine".

Europe-Asia Studies .

61 (3): 505– 518.

doi : 10.1080/09668130902753325 .

ISSN 0966-8136 .

S2CID 67783643 .

Martin, Terry (2001).

The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet Union, 1923–1939 (paperback ed.). Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press . pp.

306– 307.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8677-7 .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 – via Google Books.

McDaniels, Andrea K. (7 November 2015).

"Organizers, including Timonium man, hope to educate with Ukrainian memorial in D.C." The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

Meier, Michael (1 October 2022).

"Why Did So Many Ukrainians Die in the Soviet Great Famine?" . Kellogg Insight.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2022 . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

Mendel, Iuliia (24 November 2018).

"85 Years Later, Ukraine Marks Famine That Killed Millions" .

The New York Times .

Gale A563244157 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

Meslé, France; Pison, Gilles; Vallin, Jacques (June 2005).

"France-Ukraine: Demographic Twins Separated by History" .

Population & Societies (413): 1– 4.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.738.7259 .

ProQuest 198225762 .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

Meslé, France; Vallin, Jacques (2003).

Mortalité et causes de décès en Ukraine au XXe siècle [ Mortality and causes of death in Ukraine in the 20th century ] (in French) (CDROM ed.). Paris: Institut national d'études démographiques : Centre de démographie et d'écologie humaine de Moscou : Institut national des problèmes de sécurité internationale. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

Musiienko, Oleksa H. (18 February 1988). "Hromadians'ka pozytsiia literatury i perebudova" Громадянська позиція літературі і перебудова [The Civic Position of Literature and Perestroika].

Literaturna Ukraïna (in Ukrainian): 7– 8.

Naimark, Norman M.

(2010).

Stalin's Genocides (Human Rights and Crimes against Humanity) . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0-691-14784-0 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2016 .

Nalyvayko, Severyn; Bulanenko, Iryna (27 November 2016).

"Historian Martyniuk: Ukrainian homes were massively occupied by Russian settlers" .

Euromaidan Press . Translated by Chraibi, Christine.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2019.

National Museum of the Holodomor (26 November 2018).

"Museum History" .

Memorial Ukraine [to the Victims of the Holodomor] . Kyiv.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

National Museum of the Holodomor (18 October 2019).

"Worldwide Recognition of the Holodomor as Genocide" .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

New Voice - UA (20 October 2022).

"Russia removes Holodomor memorial in Mariupol" .

The New Voice of Ukraine .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2022 . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

Naumenko, Natalya (March 2021).

"The Political Economy of Famine: The Ukrainian Famine of 1933" .

The Journal of Economic History .

81 (1): 156– 197.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050720000625 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

Noack, Christian; Janssen, Lindsay; Comerford, Vincent, eds. (October 2014).

Holodomor and Gorta Mór: Histories, Memories and Representations of Famine in Ukraine and Ireland .

Anthem Press .

ISBN 978-1-78308-319-0 .

[ page needed ] Obama, Barack (13 November 2009).

"Statement by the President on the Ukrainian Holodomor Remembrance Day" .

whitehouse.gov . Archived from the original on 16 February 2017 – via National Archives .

Obama administration- NSC Spokesman (20 November 2010).

"Statement by the National Security Council Spokesman Mike Hammer on Ukraine's Holodomor Remembrance Day" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 – via National Archives .

Obama administration- Office of the Press Secretary (19 November 2011).

"Statement by the Press Secretary on Ukrainian Holodomor Remembrance Day" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 – via National Archives .

Ohayon, Isabelle (13 January 2016).

"The Kazakh Famine: The Beginnings of Sedentarization" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 December 2021 .

O'Neil, Peter (30 October 2010).

"Harper accused of exaggerating Ukrainian genocide death toll" .

Ottawa Citizen .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 – via Pressreader.com.

Osadchenko, E. V.; Rudneva, S. E. (2012).

"Golod na kubani 1932-1933 GG" Голод на кубани 1932-1933 ГГ [Famine in the Kuban 1932-1933].

Успехи современного естествознания [Advances in current natural sciences] (in Russian) (1): 96– 98.

ISSN 1681-7494 .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 December 2022 .

На Кубани только за период с ноября 1932 г. по весну 1933 г. число задокументированных жертв голода составило 62 тысячи человек. По мнению большинства историков, реальная цифра погибших в разы больше.

[In the Kuban, only for the period from November 1932 to the spring of 1933, the number of documented victims of famine amounted to 62 thousand people. According to most historians, the real death toll is many times higher.] Papakin, Heorhii (27 November 2010).

" "Chorni doshky" Holodomoru – ekonomichnyi metod znyshchennia hromadian URSR (SPYSOK)" "Чорні дошки" Голодомору - економічний метод знищення громадян УРСР (СПИСОК) ["Black boards" of the Holodomor: An economic method for the destruction of community members of the Ukrainian SSR (list)].

Istorychna Pravda (in Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 3 January 2019 . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

Pianigiani, Gaia (23 November 2022).

"Pope Francis compares Russia's war against Ukraine to a devastating Stalin-era famine" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

Pipes, Richard (1995).

Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime . New York: Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-0-679-76184-6 .

Potocki, Robert (2003).

Polityka państwa polskiego wobec zagadnienia ukraińskiego w latach 1930–1939 [ The policy of the Polish state towards the Ukrainian question in the years 1930–1939 ] (in Polish and English). Lublin: Instytut Europy Środkowo-Wschodniej.

ISBN 978-83-917615-4-0 .

Qian, Nancy (2021).

"The Political Economic Causes of the Soviet Great Famine, 1932-1933" .

CEPR & VideoVox Economics (Webinar). Political Economy.

Centre for Economic Policy Research . Archived from the original on 14 December 2022 . Retrieved 14 December 2022 – via YouTube .

Rada (14 May 2003).

"Pro Zvernennya do Ukrayinsʹkoho narodu uchasnykiv spetsialʹnoho zasidannya Verkhovnoyi Rady Ukrayiny 14 travnya 2003 roku shchodo vshanuvannya pam'yati zhertv holodomoru 1932–1933" Про Звернення до Українського народу учасників спеціального засідання Верховної Ради України 14 травня 2003 року щодо вшанування пам'яті жертв голодомору 1932–1933 [Address of the Verkhovna Rada to the Ukrainian nation on commemorating the victims of Holodomor 1932–1933].

Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України (in Ukrainian). Verkhovna Rada (Parliament of Ukraine). Archived from the original on 10 July 2022 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

Rada (28 November 2006).

"ZAKON UKRAYINY: Pro Holodomor 1932–1933 rokiv v Ukrayini" ЗАКОН УКРАЇНИ: Про Голодомор 1932–1933 років в Україні [Law of Ukraine: About the Holodomor of 1932–1933 in Ukraine] (in Ukrainian).

Verkhovna Rada (Parliament of Ukraine).

Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

Rada (4 June 2007).

"Pro vstanovlennya Dnya pam'yati zhertv holodomoriv" Про встановлення Дня пам'яті жертв голодоморів [On the establishment of the Holodomor Remembrance Day].

Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України (in Ukrainian). Verkhovna Rada (Parliament of Ukraine).

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 .

Radzinsky, Edvard (1996).

Stalin: The First In-depth Biography Based on Explosive New Documents from Russia's Secret Archives . London: Hodder & Stoughton .

ISBN 978-0-340-60619-3 .

Rating Group Ukraine (26 November 2021).

"Dynamika stavlennya ukrayintsiv do holodomoru 1932–33" Динаміка ставлення українців до голодомору 1932–33 [Dynamics of the attitude of Ukrainians to the Holodomor of 1932–1933] (in Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 26 November 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 .

Reid, Anna (7 October 2017).

"Rule by Starvation" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

Rosefielde, Steven (1983). "Excess Mortality in the Soviet Union: A Reconsideration of the Demographic Consequences of Forced Industrialization, 1929–1949".

Soviet Studies .

35 (3): 385– 409.

doi : 10.1080/09668138308411488 .

JSTOR 151363 .

PMID 11636006 .

Rud, Victor (21 November 2016).

"Holodomor Remembrance Day: Why the Past Matters for the Future" .

Atlantic Council .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 24 November 2017 .

Rudnytskyi, Omelian P.; Levchuk, Nataliia M.; Wolowyna, Oleh; Shevchuk, Pavlo E.; Kovbasiuk, Alla B. (24 December 2015).

"Demography оf a Man-Made Human Catastrophe: the Case of Massive Famine in Ukraine 1932–1933" (PDF) .

Demography and Social Economy (3): 43– 63.

doi : 10.15407/dse2015.03.003 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

Rusanivsʹkyĭ, Vitaliĭ M., ed. (2010).

"Zamoryuvaty" Заморювати [To Freeze].

Academic explanatory dictionary of the Ukrainian language (in Ukrainian). Наукова думка and Sum.in.ua.

ISBN 978-966-02-7402-0 .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2022 . Retrieved 30 August 2022 .

Samchuk, U. (1952).

Maria. A Chronicle of a Life . Toronto: Language Lantern Publications. Archived from the original on 25 March 2017.

Santora, Marc; Vinograd, Cassandra (26 November 2022).

"On the Anniversary of Ukraine's Famine, Parallels to Russia's Strikes" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2022 . Retrieved 22 December 2022 .

Selden, Mark (September 1982).

"The Crisis of Collectivisation: Socialist Development and the Peasantry" .

The IDS Bulletin .

13 (4): 4– 11.

doi : 10.1111/j.1759-5436.1982.mp13004002.x .

[ permanent dead link ] Serbyn, Roman (2005). "Ukraine (Famine)". In Shelton, Dinah L. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity . Vol. 3. Detroit, MI: Thomson Gale. pp.

1055– 1061.

ISBN 0-02-865847-7 .

OCLC 470301730 .

Serbyn, Roman (27 February 2008).

"The Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933 and the UN Convention on Genocide" .

Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

Serbyn, Roman (9 May 2015).

"Role of Lemkin" .

HREC Education [Holodomor Research and Education Consortium] .

Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2019 . Retrieved 19 December 2021 .

Shaw, George Bernard ; Wells, H. G.

; Keynes, John Maynard ; Stalin, Joseph (1934).

Stalin-Wells-talk: The Verbatim Record and a Discussion . London: The New Statesman and Nation.

OCLC 1185552369 .

Sheeter, Laura (24 November 2007).

"Ukraine remembers famine horror" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

Shevchenko University news (2016).

"Mizhnarodna konferentsiya "Holodomor 1932–1933 rokiv: vtraty ukrayinsʹkoyi natsiyi" " Міжнародна конференція "Голодомор 1932–1933 років: втрати української нації" [International Conference "The Holodomor of 1932–1933: the losses of the Ukrainian nation"] (in Ukrainian).

Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

Snyder, Timothy (25 June 2009).

"Holocaust: The ignored reality" .

Eurozine .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 November 2010 .

Snyder, Timothy (2010).

Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin . New York: Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0-465-00239-9 .

Sokur, Vasily (21 November 2008).

"Vyyavlennym vo vremya golodomora lyudoyedam khodivshiye po selam meditsinskiye rabotniki davali otravlennyye "primanki" – kusok myasa ili khleba" Выявленным во время голодомора людоедам ходившие по селам медицинские работники давали отравленные "приманки" – кусок мяса или хлеба [Cannibals identified during the Holodomor were given poisoned "baits" by medical workers walking around the villages – a piece of meat or bread].

Facts and Commentaries (in Russian).

Archived from the original on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 .

The author suggests that never in the history of mankind was cannibalism so widespread as during the Holodomor.

Soldatenko, Valerii (2003).

"Holodnyy trydtsyatʹ tretiy sub'yektyvni dumky pro ob'yektyvni protsesy" Голодний тридцять третій суб'єктивні думки про об'єктивні процеси [The starvation of '33: subjective thoughts about objective processes].

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Ukrainian and Russian) (24, 28 June – 4 July). Kyiv.

[ permanent dead link ] Sosnovy, Stepan (1953). "The Truth about the Famine". In Pidhainy, Semen O. (ed.).

The Black Deeds of the Kremlin: A White Book. Volume 1: Testimonials (pdf) . Vol. 1. Translated by Oreletsky, Alexander; Prychodko, Olga. Toronto: The Basilian Press, for Ukrainian Association of Victims of Russian Communist Terror. p. 222.

ASIN B000EGMA4O .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 November 2022 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

Stephens, Katharine (26 May 2017).

"11 million, not 6 million, died in the Holocaust" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2022 . Retrieved 1 April 2022 .

Stewart, Daniel (24 November 2022).

"Irish Senate recognizes Ukrainian genocide in the 1930s" .

News 360 .

MSN .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

Suny, Ronald Grigor (2017).

Red Flag Unfurled: History, Historians, and the Russian Revolution .

Verso Books . pp.

94– 95.

ISBN 978-1-78478-564-2 .

Most scholars rejected this claim, seeing the famine as following from a badly conceived and miscalculated policy of excessive requisitioning of grain, but not as directed specifically against ethnic Ukrainians.

Tauger, Mark B. (Spring 1991). "The 1932 Harvest and the Famine of 1933".

Slavic Review .

50 (1): 70– 89.

doi : 10.2307/2500600 .

JSTOR 2500600 .

S2CID 163767073 .

Tauger, Mark B. (January 2001). Chase, William; Donnorummo, Bob; Linden, Ronald H. (eds.).

"Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931–1933" (PDF) .

The Carl Beck Papers in Russian and East European Studies (1506).

University of Pittsburgh Center for International Studies : 67.

doi : 10.5195/CBP.2001.89 .

ISSN 0889-275X . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2012.

"ResearchGate copy" . Retrieved 19 December 2022 – via ResearchGate.

Tehran Times (20 February 2021).

" "Holodomor" reveals how Stalin starved millions in Ukrainian famine" .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2021 . Retrieved 22 February 2021 .

Thevenin, Etienne (29 June 2005).

France, Germany and Austria: Facing the famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine (PDF) . James Mace Memorial Panel, IAUS Congress, Donetsk, Ukraine. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

Totten, Samuel; Parsons, William S.; Charny, Israel W. (2004).

Century of Genocide: Critical Essays and Eyewitness Accounts . Routledge. p. 93.

ISBN 978-0-415-94429-8 .

Ucrainica Research (2009).

"International Recognition of the Holodomor" .

Holodomor Education .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

Ukraine National Bank (17 December 2007).

"Commemorative Coins "Holodomor – Genocide of the Ukrainian People" . Archived from the original on 8 January 2008.

Ukraine National Radio (23 November 2007).

"Ceremonial events to commemorate Holodomor victims to be held in Kyiv for three days" . Archived from the original on 16 February 2011.

Ukrainian Weekly (14 July 2002).

"Editorial: Famine denial" (PDF) .

The Ukrainian Weekly .

70 (28): 6.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Ukrainian Weekly (16 November 2003).

"30 U.N. member-states sign joint declaration on Great Famine" (PDF) .

The Ukrainian Weekly .

71 (46): 1, 20.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

UN signatory nations (7 November 2003).

"Joint statement by the delegations of Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Egypt, Georgia, Guatemala, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Nauru, Pakistan, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and the United States of America on the 70th anniversary of the Great Famine of 1932-1933 in Ukraine (Holodomor)" .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

Ukrainian Canadian Congress (2008).

"Holodomor" . Ucc.sk.ca.

Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

Ukrainian Canadian Congress (3 June 2010).

"Quebec Passes Bill Recognizing Holodomor as a Genocide" .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Ukrainian Canadian Congress (26 June 2020).

"National Holodomor Education Committee" .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2022 .

Ukrainska Pravda (4 October 2018).

"Senat SSHA vyznav Holodomor henotsydom ukrayinsʹkoho narodu" Сенат США визнав Голодомор геноцидом українського народу [The US Senate recognized the Holodomor as genocide of the Ukrainian people].

Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 4 October 2018 .

Ukrinform (23 November 2022a).

"Pope honors victims of Holodomor, aggression against Ukraine" .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2022 . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

Ukrinform (24 November 2022c).

"Romania recognizes Holodomor of 1932–1933 in Ukraine as genocide" .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

Ukrinform (25 November 2022d).

"Poll: 93% of Ukrainians see Holodomor as genocide" .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

Ukrinform (15 December 2022e).

"European Parliament recognizes Holodomor as genocide against Ukrainian people" .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine (1988).

Mace, James Earnest ; Samilenko, Olga; Pechenuk, Walter (eds.).

Investigation of the Ukrainian Famine 1932–1933 Vol.1:Report to Congress . Vol. 1 of 3. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office . p.

67 . Archived from the original on 7 January 2007 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 .

U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine (1990).

Mace, James Earnest ; Heretz, Leonid (eds.).

Investigation of the Ukrainian famine, 1932–1933: Oral History Project of the Commission on the Ukraine Famine . Vol.

1– 3. U.S. Government Printing Office.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

Volume 1 . U.S. Government Printing Office. 1990.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 – via Google Books .

(US Commission- Oral History) Volume 2 . U.S. Government Printing Office. 1990.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 – via Google Books .

(US Commission- Oral History) Volume 3 . U.S. Government Printing Office. 1990.

Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 – via Google Books .

(US Commission- Oral History) USSR Census (1939).

"USSR Census of 1939" .

University of Toronto Data Library Service . Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.

Uytkroft, S. (2001). "O demograficheskikh svidetel'stvakh tragedii sovetskoy derevni v 1931–1933 gg." О демографических свидетельствах трагедии советской деревни в 1931–1933 гг.

[On demographic evidence of the tragedy of the Soviet village in 1931–1933]. In V.P. Danilov; et al. (eds.).

Tragediya sovetskoy derevni: Kollektivizatsiya i raskulachivaniye 1927–1939 gg.: Dokumenty i materialy Трагедия советской деревни: Коллективизация и раскулачивание 1927–1939 гг.: Документы и материалы [ The Tragedy of the Soviet Village: Collectivization and Dekulakization 1927–39: Documents and Materials ] (in Russian). Vol. 3. Moscow: ROSSPEN .

ISBN 978-5-8243-0225-7 . Archived from the original on 20 March 2008.

Vallin, Jacques; Meslé, France; Adamets, Serguei; Pyrozhkov, Serhii (January 2002). "A new estimate of Ukrainian population losses during the crises of the 1930s and 1940s".

Population Studies .

56 (3): 249– 264.

doi : 10.1080/00324720215934 .

PMID 12553326 .

S2CID 21128795 .

Van Herpen, Marcel (2013).

Putinism: The Slow Rise of a Radical Right Regime in Russia . Palgrave Macmillan UK.

ISBN 978-1-137-28282-8 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 February 2016 .

Viola, Lynne (1999).

Peasant Rebels Under Stalin (E-book ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press . p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-19-535132-3 .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2022 . Retrieved 19 December 2021 – via Google Books .

Visnyk (Summer 2008).

"Saskatchewan first province to recognize Holodomor as genocide" (PDF) .

Visnyk (Весник) . Vol. XXII, no. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

Werth, Nicolas (1999). "A State against Its People: Violence, Repression, and Terror in the Soviet Union". In Courtois, Stéphane (ed.).

The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression . Translated by Kraemer, Mark; Murphy, Jonathan (illustrated hardcover ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2 .

Werth, Nicolas (2007). "La grande famine ukrainienne de 1932–1933" [The Great Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933]. In Werth, Nicolas (ed.).

La terreur et le désarroi: Staline et son système [ Terror and disarray: Stalin and his system edited ] (in French). Paris: Perrin.

ISBN 978-2-262-02462-8 .

Werth, Nicolas (18 April 2008).

"The Great Ukrainian Famine of 1932-33" .

Sciences Po .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 13 December 2022 .

Werth, Nicolas (2012).

"Mass Deportations, Ethnic Cleansing, and Genocidal Politics in the Later Russian Empire and the USSR" . In Bloxham, Donald; Moses, A. Dirk (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Genocide Studies .

Oxford University Press . pp.

386– 406.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199232116.013.0020 .

ISBN 978-0-19-161361-6 .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 – via Google Books .

Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(7 December 2000).

A Note on Demographic Data as an Indicator of the Tragedy of the Soviet Village, 1931–33 (draft) (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 July 2013 . Retrieved 31 July 2012 .

Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(2001).

"Current knowledge of the level and nature of mortality in the Ukrainian famine of 1931–3" (PDF) . In Vasil'ev, V.; Shapovala, Y. (eds.).

Komandiri velikogo golodu: Poizdki V.Molotova I L.Kaganovicha v Ukrainu ta na Pivnichnii Kavkaz, 1932–1933 rr . Kyiv: Geneza. Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 8 September 2023 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(2018).

"The Turn Away from Economic Explanations for Soviet Famines" .

Contemporary European History .

27 (3): 465– 469.

doi : 10.1017/S0960777318000358 .

hdl : 10536/DRO/DU:30116832 .

Wilson, Andrew (2002).

The Ukrainians: Unexpected Nation (2nd ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-09309-4 .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2016 .

Wolowyna, Oleh (2 October 2021). "A Demographic Framework for the 1932–1934 Famine in the Soviet Union".

Journal of Genocide Research .

23 (4): 501– 526.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2020.1834741 .

S2CID 226316468 .

Yanchenko, Halyna (2 December 2022).

"Bundestah vyznav Holodomor henotsydom ukrayintsiv. Chomu stalysya tsi zminy u nimetsʹkiy politytsi?" Бундестаг визнав Голодомор геноцидом українців. Чому сталися ці зміни у німецькій політиці?

[The Bundestag recognized the Holodomor as a genocide of Ukrainians. Why did these changes in German politics happen?].

Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 23 December 2022 . Retrieved 23 December 2022 .

Yefimenko, Hennadiy (5 November 2021).

"More is not better. The deleterious effects of artificially inflated Holodomor death tolls" .

Euromaidan Press . Translated by Chraibi, Christine.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2022 . Retrieved 28 March 2022 .

Yushchenko, Viktor (6 April 2005).

"Ukrainian President Yushchenko: Yushchenko's Address before Joint Session of U.S. Congress" .

Official Website of President of Ukraine . Archived from the original on 6 October 2006 . Retrieved 7 September 2012 .

Yushchenko, Viktor (12 October 2006).

"UKAZ PREZYDENTA UKRAYINY № 868/2006: Pro vidznachennya u 2006 rotsi Dnya pam'yati zhertv holodomoriv ta politychnykh represiy" УКАЗ ПРЕЗИДЕНТА УКРАЇНИ № 868/2006: Про відзначення у 2006 році Дня пам'яті жертв голодоморів та політичних репресій [DECREE OF THE PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE No. 868/2006: On the commemoration of the Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Famine and Political Repression in 2006] (in Ukrainian).

Office of the President of Ukraine . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007.

Yushchenko, Viktor (27 November 2007).

"Holodomor" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 8 September 2008 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

Zaxid (27 November 2020).

"Vykhovannya holodom" Виховання голодом [Education by hunger].

Zaxid.net (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 9 December 2020 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 .

ZIK (information agency) (12 June 2009).

"Schoolchildren to study in detail about Holodomor and OUN-UPA" . ZIK–Western Information Agency. Archived from the original on 22 April 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Further reading See also: Bibliography of Ukrainian history , Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union , and Bibliography of Genocide studies Declarations and legal acts U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine . 19 April 1988. " Findings of the Commission on the Ukraine Famine " (Report to Congress).

United Nations . 2003.

Joint Statement on the Great Famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine (Holodomor) Books and articles Ammende, Ewald (2006) [Originally published: London: Allen & Unwin, 1936].

Human life in Russia . London: Hesperides Press.

ISBN 978-1-4067-3769-1 .

Bruski, Jan Jacek (2008).

Hołodomor 1932–1933. Wielki Głód na Ukrainie w dokumentach polskiej dyplomacji i wywiadu [ Holodomor 1932–1933. The Great Famine in Ukraine in the documents of Polish diplomacy and intelligence ] (in Polish). Warsaw: Polski Instytut Spraw Międzynarodowych.

ISBN 978-83-89607-56-0 .

Boriak, Hennadii (2001).

"The Publication of Sources on the History of the 1932–1933 Famine-Genocide: History, Current State, and Prospects" (PDF) .

Harvard Ukrainian Studies .

25 (3/4).

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute : 167– 186.

JSTOR 41036832 .

PMID 20030020 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

Boriak, Hennadii (November 2008).

"Holodomor Archives and Sources: The State of the Art" .

The Harriman Review .

16 (2): 30.

doi : 10.7916/d8-ba18-wc92 .

Conquest, Robert (1999). "Comment on Wheatcroft".

Europe-Asia Studies .

51 (8): 1479– 1483.

doi : 10.1080/09668139998426 .

JSTOR 153839 .

Curran, Declan; Luciuk, Lubomyr; Newby, Andrew, eds. (2015).

Famines in European Economic History: The last great European famines reconsidered . Routledge Explorations in Economic History. Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-65681-8 .

Davies, Robert (1980).

The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia, Volume 1: The Socialist Offensive: The Collectivisation of Soviet Agriculture, 1929–1930 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-81480-6 .

Dolot, Miron (1984).

Who killed them and why?: in remembrance of those killed in the Famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine . Ukrainian Studies Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University .

ISBN 978-0-9609822-1-9 .

Dolot, Miron (1985).

Execution by Hunger: The Hidden Holocaust . New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-30416-9 .

Dushnyk, Walter (1983).

50 years ago: the famine holocaust in Ukraine: Terror and Human Misery as Instruments of Soviet Russian Imperialism (PDF) . Toronto: World Congress of Free Ukrainians.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

Falk, Barbara (2005).

Sowjetische Städte in der Hungersnot 1932/33. Staatliche Ernährungspolitik und städtisches Alltagsleben [ Soviet cities in the famine of 1932/33. State food policy and everyday urban life ]. Beiträge zur Geschichte Osteuropas (in German). Vol. 38. Cologne: Böhlau Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-412-10105-3 .

Fürst, Juliane (2010).

Stalin's Last Generation: Soviet Post-War Youth and the Emergence of Mature Socialism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-161450-7 .

Graziosi, Andrea, ed. (1991).

Lettere da Kharkov: la carestia in Ucraina e nel Caucaso del Nord nei rapporti dei diplomatici italiani, 1932–33 [ Letters from Kharkiv: The famine in the Ukraine and in the North Caucasus in the reports of Italian diplomats, 1932-33 ] (in Italian). Torino: Einaudi.

ISBN 978-88-06-12182-2 .

Great Britain Foreign Office (1988). Carynnyk, Marco; Luciuk, Lubomyr Y.; Kordan, Bohdan S. (eds.).

The Foreign Office and the Famine: British Documents on Ukraine and the Great Famine of 1932–1933 . foreword by Michael Marrus . Kingston, Ontario: Limestone Press.

ISBN 978-0-919642-31-7 .

Gregorovich, Andrew (1974).

"Black Famine in Ukraine 1932–33: A Struggle for Existence" .

Forum: A Ukrainian Review (24). Scranton.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 – via InfoUkes.

Halii, Mykola (1963).

Organized Famine in Ukraine, 1932–1933 . Chicago: Ukrainian Research and Information Institute.

Hlushanytsia, Pavlo (1986).

Hlushanytsya P. Tretya svitova viyna Pavla Hlushanytsi Глушаниця П. Третя світова війна Павла Глушаниці [ The Third World War by Pavlo Hlushanitsa ] (PDF) (in English and Ukrainian). Translated by Moroz, Vera. Toronto: Anabasis Magazine. pp.

91– 187.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

Karatnytska, Nadia, ed. (1985).

Kholod na Ukrayini, 1932–1933: vybrani statyi Холод на Україні, 1932–1933: вибрані статї [ Holodomor in Ukraine, 1932–1933: selected articles ] (in Ukrainian). New York: Suchasnist.

Hryshko, Vasyl (1983) [1976]. Carynnyk, Marco (ed.).

The Ukrainian Holocaust of 1933 . Toronto: Bahrianyi Foundation.

ISBN 978-0-9691830-1-3 .

Institute of National Remembrance (2009). Bednarek, Jerzy; Bohunov, Serhiy; Kokin, Serhiy (eds.).

Holodomor. The Great Famine in Ukraine 1932–1933 (PDF) . Translated by Serówka, Dariusz. additional editors: Petro Kulakovsky, Marcin Majewski, Piotr Mierecki, Zbigniew Nawrocki, Yuriy Shapoval, Jędrzej Tucholski, Victor Tykhomyrov. Warsaw: Ministry of Interior and Administration, Republic of Poland.

ISBN 978-83-7629-077-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2022.

International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932–33 Famine in Ukraine . Toronto: World Congress of Free Ukrainians. 1990.

Final report (PDF) . Toronto: World Congress of Free Ukrainians. 1990. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2008.

(International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932–33 Famine, 1988.) Brussels, Belgium Proceedings [transcript], 23–27 May 1988 .

(International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932–33 Famine) New York City Proceedings [transcript], 21 October – 5 November 1988 .

(International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932–33 Famine) Kalynyk, Oleksa (1955).

Communism, the enemy of mankind: documents about the methods and practise of Russian Bolshevik occupation in Ukraine . London: Ukrainian Youth Association in Great Britain.

ASIN B0007J7SR2 .

OCLC 5170037 .

Kostiuk, Hryhory (1960).

Stalinist rule in Ukraine: a study of the decade of mass terror, 1929–1939 . Series I, No. 47. Munich: Institute for the Study of the USSR.

ASIN B005FGNR9K .

Kotkin, Stephen (2017b).

Stalin (volume 2): Waiting for Hitler, 1929–1941 . New York: Penguin Press.

ISBN 978-1-59420-380-0 .

Kovalenko, Liudmyla. B.; Maniak, Volodymyr A., eds. (1991).

33-y-Holod. Narodna knyha-memorial 33-й-Голод. Народна книга-меморіал [ 33rd [The Year 33] Famine. People's book-memorial ] (PDF) (in Ukrainian). Kyiv: Radians'kyj pys'mennyk [Радянський письменник].

ISBN 978-966-7891-95-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2022.

Kowalski, Ludwik (2011) [2008].

Hell on Earth: Brutality and Violence Under the Stalinist Regime . Wasteland Press.

ISBN 978-1-60047-232-9 . Archived from the original on 4 October 2011.

Krawchenko, Bohdan (1985).

Social change and national consciousness in twentieth-century Ukraine . St Antony's/Macmillan.

Basingstoke , UK: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-312-73160-1 .

Krawchenko, Bohdan ; Serbyn, Roman (1986).

Famine in Ukraine 1932–1933 . Canada: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies . p. 208.

ISBN 978-0-920862-43-8 .

Kuśnierz, Robert (2005). Marszałek, Adam (ed.).

Ukraina w latach kolektywizacji i Wielkiego Glodu (1929–1933) [ Ukraine in the years of collectivization and the Great Famine (1929–1933) ] (in Polish).

Toruń : Wydawnictwo Naukowe Grado.

ISBN 978-83-89588-35-7 .

Leshuk, Leonard, ed. (1995).

Days of Famine, Nights of Terror: Firsthand Accounts of Soviet Collectivization, 1928–1934 . Translated by Rueger, Raimund. Kingston, Washington: Kashtan Press.

ISBN 978-0-9706464-0-8 .

OCLC 35304980 .

Luciuk, Lubomyr; Grekul, Lisa, eds. (2008) [1953].

Holodomor: Reflections on the Great Famine of 1932–1933 in Soviet Ukraine . Kashtan Press.

ISBN 978-1-896354-33-0 .

Luciuk, Lubomyr, ed. (2004).

Not Worthy: Walter Duranty's Pulitzer Prize and The New York Times . Kingston: Kashtan Press.

ISBN 978-1-896354-34-7 .

Mace, James E.

(29 December 1983).

Communism and the dilemma of national liberation: national communism in Soviet Ukraine, 1918–1933 . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute .

ISBN 978-0-916458-09-6 .

Makohon, Pavlo (1983).

Witness: memoirs of the Famine of 1933 in Ukraine [ Witness: memoirs of the Famine of 1933 in Ukraine ] (PDF) . Translated by Moroz, Vera. Toronto: Anabasis Magazine.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2022 . Retrieved 19 December 2022 .

Martchenko, Borys, La famine-genocide en Ukraine: 1932–1933 , (Paris: Publications de l'Est europeen, 1983).

Marton, Kati (2007).

Great Escape . New York: Simon and Schuster . p.

98 .

ISBN 978-0-7432-6115-9 .

Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2003).

Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar . New York: Alfre.

ISBN 978-0-307-29144-8 .

Marunchak, Mykhaĭlo H. (1985).

Нація в боротьбі за своє існування: 1932–1933 в Україні і діяспорі [ The nation in the struggle for its existence: 1932–1933 in Ukraine and the diaspora ] (in Ukrainian). Winnipeg: Ukrainian Free Academy of Sciences.

OCLC 13135619 .

Memorial , compiled by Lubomyr Y. Luciuk and Alexandra Chyczij; translated into English by Marco Carynnyk, (Toronto: Published by Kashtan Press for Canadian Friends of "Memorial", 1989). [Bilingual edition in Ukrainian and English. this is a selection of resolutions, aims and objectives, and other documents, pertaining to the activities of the Memorial Society in Ukraine].

Mishchenko, Oleksandr, Bezkrovna viina: knyha svidchen' , (Kyiv: Molod', 1991).

Mykhailychenko, H. M.; Shatalina, E. P., eds. (1992).

Kolektyvizatsiya i holod na Ukrayini 1929–1933: zbirnyk dokumentiv i materialiv Колективізація і голод на Україні 1929–1933 : збірник документів і матеріалів [ Collectivization and famine in Ukraine 1929–1933: a collection of documents and materials ] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and Russian). Kyiv: Naukova Dumka.

ISBN 978-5-12-003210-0 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2018.

National Museum of the Holodomor (6 April 2022a).

"The Czech Republic recognized the Holodomor of 1932–1933 as genocide in Ukraine" .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

National Museum of the Holodomor (27 April 2022b).

"The upper house of the Brazilian parliament has recognized the Holodomor as an act of genocide" .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .

Oleksiw, Stephen, The agony of a nation: the great man-made famine in Ukraine, 1932–1933 , (London: The National Committee to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Artificial Famine in Ukraine, 1932–1933, 1983).

Pavel P. Postyshev, envoy of Moscow in Ukraine 1933–1934 , [selected newspaper articles, documents, and sections in books], (Toronto: World Congress of Free Ukrainians, Secretariat, [1988], The 1932–33 Famine in Ukraine research documentation) Pianciola, Niccolò (August 2020). "Review: Environment, Empire, and the Great Famine in Stalin's Kazakhstan: The Hungry Steppe: Famine, Violence and the Making of Soviet Kazakhstan, by Sarah Cameron".

Journal of Genocide Research .

23 (4).

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2020.1807140 .

S2CID 225294912 .

Pidhainy, Semen O., ed. (1953).

The Black Deeds of the Kremlin: A White Book. Volume 1: Testimonials (PDF) . Vol. 1. Translated by Oreletsky, Alexander; Prychodko, Olga. Toronto: The Basilian Press, for Ukrainian Association of Victims of Russian Communist Terror.

ASIN B000EGMA4O .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

Pidhainy, Semen O., ed. (1953).

The Black Deeds of the Kremlin: A White Book. Vol. 2: The Greate Famine in Ukraine in 1932–1933 (PDF) . Vol. 2. Translated by Oreletsky, Alexander; Prychodko, Olga. Toronto: The Basilian Press, for Ukrainian Association of Victims of Russian Communist Terror.

ASIN B000EGICL4 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 November 2022 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

Pidnayny, Alexandra, A bibliography of the great famine in Ukraine, 1932–1933 , (Toronto: New Review Books, 1975).

Pravoberezhnyi, Fedir, 8,000,000: 1933-i rik na Ukraini , (Winnipeg: Kultura і osvita, 1951).

Rajca, Czesław (2005).

Głód na Ukrainie . Lublin/Toronto: Werset.

ISBN 978-83-60133-04-0 .

Senyshyn, Halyna, Bibliohrafia holody v Ukraini 1932–1933 , (Ottawa: Montreal: Umman, 1983).

Solovei, Dmytro, The Golgotha of Ukraine: eye-witness accounts of the famine in Ukraine , compiled by Dmytro Soloviy, (New York: Ukrainian Congress Committee of America, 1953).

Stradnyk, Petro, Pravda pro soviets'ku vladu v Ukraini , (New York: N. Chyhyryns'kyi, 1972).

Taylor, S.J., Stalin's apologist: Walter Duranty, the New York Times's Man in Moscow , (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).

The man-made famine in Ukraine (Washington D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1984). [Seminar. Participants: Robert Conquest, Dana Dalrymple, James Mace, Michael Nowak].

United States, Commission on the Ukraine Famine. Investigation of the Ukrainian Famine, 1932–1933: report to Congress / Commission on the Ukraine Famine , [Daniel E. Mica, chairman; James E. Mace, Staff Director]. (Washington D.C.: U.S. G.P.O. 1988).

United States, Commission on the Ukrainian Famine. Oral history project of the Commission on the Ukraine Famine , James E. Mace and Leonid Heretz, eds. (Washington, D.C.: Supt. of Docs, U.S. G.P.O., 1990).

Velykyi holod v Ukraini, 1932–33: zbirnyk svidchen', spohadiv, dopovidiv ta stattiv, vyholoshenykh ta drukovanykh v 1983 rotsi na vidznachennia 50-littia holodu v Ukraini – The Great Famine in Ukraine 1932–1933: a collection of memoirs, speeches and essays prepared in 1983 in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Famine in Ukraine during 1932–33 , [Publication Committee members: V. Rudenko, T. Khokhitva, P. Makohon, F. Podopryhora], (Toronto: Ukrains'ke Pravoslavne Bratstvo Sv. Volodymyra, 1988), [Bilingual edition in Ukrainian and English].

Verbyts'kyi, M., Naibil'shyi zlochyn Kremlia: zaplianovanyi shtuchnyi holod v Ukraini 1932–1933 rokiv , (London: Dobrus, 1952).

Voropai, Oleksa, V deviatim kruzi , (London, England: Sum, 1953).

Voropai, Oleksa, The Ninth Circle: In Commemoration of the Victims of the Famine of 1933 , Olexa Woropay; edited with an introduction by James E. Mace, (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University, Ukrainian Studies Fund, 1983).

Wheatcroft, Stephen G.

(2004). "Towards Explaining the Soviet Famine of 1931–1933: Political and Natural Factors in Perspective".

Food and Foodways .

12 ( 2– 3): 107– 136.

doi : 10.1080/07409710490491447 .

S2CID 155003439 .

Wheatcroft, S. G. (September 2000b). "The Scale and Nature of Stalinist Repression and its Demographic Significance: On Comments by Keep and Conquest".

Europe-Asia Studies .

52 (6): 1143– 1159.

doi : 10.1080/09668130050143860 .

PMID 19326595 .

S2CID 205667754 .

West Germany Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1988). Zlepko, Dmytro (ed.).

Der ukrainische Hunger-Holocaust: Stalins verschwiegener Völkermord 1932/33 an 7 Millionen ukrainischen Bauern im Spiegel geheimgehaltener Akten des deutschen Auswärtigen Amtes [ The Ukrainian hunger holocaust: Stalin's concealed genocide of 1932/33 against 7 million Ukrainian peasants as reflected in secret files of the German Foreign Office: a documentation ] (in German).

Sonnenbühl : Helmut Wild Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-925848-03-2 .

External links National Museum of the Holodomor (10 September 2019).

"Website of the National Museum of the Holodomor" .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

"Holodomor survivors share their stories" .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

Nowytski, Slavko (director) ; Luhovy, Yuri and Novytski, S. (producers); Peter Blow (Scriptwriter) (15 April 1985).

Film: Harvest of Despair: The 1932-33 Famine in Ukraine (Documentary- 55 minutes (on YouTube)). Toronto: Ukrainian Canadian Research and Documentation Centre .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

(Script text.) Archived 17 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine "Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute's MAPA Digital Atlas of Ukraine focus on the history of the Holodomor" .

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

"Gareth Jones' international exposure of the Holodomor, plus many related background articles" .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2022 . Retrieved 5 July 2006 .

(in Ukrainian) Famine in Ukraine 1932–1933 Archived 7 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine at the Central State Archive of Ukraine ( photos , links ) Ukraine Famine Archived 21 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine Revelations from the Russian Archives at the Library of Congress Sergei Melnikoff, Photos of Holodomor Archived 16 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine gulag.ipvnews.org The General Committee decided this afternoon not to recommend the inclusion of an item on the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Great Famine (Holodomor) of 1932–1933 in Ukraine.

Archived 30 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine www.un.org Nicolas Werth Case Study: The Great Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933 Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine / CNRS – France Holodomor – Famine in Soviet Ukraine 1932–1933 archived from U.S. Embassy in Ukraine Famine in the Soviet Union 1929–1934 – collection of archive materials rusarchives.ru Holodomor: The Secret Holocaust in Ukraine – official site of the Security Service of Ukraine , www.sbu.gov.ua CBC program about the Great Hunger archived from www.cbc.ca Murphy, Caryle (1 October 1983).

"Ukrainian Americans Commemorate Famine in Homeland 50 Years Ago" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 15 March 2012.

People's war 1917–1932 by Kyiv city organization "Memorial" archived from www.narodnaviyna.org.ua Oksana Kis, Defying Death Women's Experience of the Holodomor, 1932–1933 Archived 30 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine www.academia.edu v t e Ukraine articles History Chronology Scythians Sarmatians Goths Early Slavs East Slavs Kuyaba Kievan Rus' Principality of Kiev Mongol invasion Galicia–Volhynia Grand Duchy of Lithuania Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Kiev Voivodeship Zaporozhian Cossacks Sich Hetmanate Pereiaslav Agreement Russian Empire Galicia Revolution and War of Independence Ukrainian People's Republic Ukrainian State West Ukrainian People's Republic Makhnovshchina Reichskommissariat Ukraine Ukrainian National Committee Ukrainian SSR Holodomor Eastern Front (World War II) Volhynia massacre Chernobyl disaster Independence Orange Revolution Euromaidan Revolution of Dignity Russo-Ukrainian War Outline 2014 pro-Russian unrest Annexation of Crimea by Russia War in Donbas 2022 Russian invasion By topic Christianity Economic Military Geography National parks Biosphere reserves Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine Nature reserves Populated places Cities Rivers Mountains Waterfalls Islands and sandbars World Heritage Sites Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Flag President Parliament Government Foreign relations Military Political parties Elections Judiciary Law Law enforcement Ukraine–European Union relations Ukraine–NATO relations Economy Hryvnia (currency) Banking Stock exchanges Energy Electricity Science and technology Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Education Corruption Gender inequality Health Abortion HIV/AIDS Swine flu pandemic (2009–10) COVID-19 pandemic Crime and suicide Human rights Freedom of the press LGBT Human trafficking Languages Minorities Prostitution Religion Culture Animation Architecture Kievan Rus' Baroque Art Nouveau Arts Icon painting Cinema Crafts Motanka Kosiv ceramics Petrykivka painting Pysanka Rushnyk Cuisine Borscht Wine Dance Dress Kobeniak Kozhukh / Kozhushanka Ochipok Sharovary Vyshyvanka Wreath Folklore Kazka Holidays New Year Day of Unity Butter Week Easter Green Week Kupala Night Independence Day Pokrova / Defenders Day Saint Nicholas Day Christmas Malanka Intangible Cultural Heritage Literature Media Music Bandura Duma / Dumka Kobzar Koliadka Shchedrivka Opera Photography Sport Demographics Ukrainian people Rus' people Ruthenians Gente Ruthenus, natione Polonus Diaspora Refugees Immigration to Ukraine Censuses Women Outline Category Portal v t e Soviet Union topics Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union History Index of Soviet Union–related articles Outline Russian Revolution February October Russian Civil War Russian SFSR Creation treaty New Economic Policy Stalinism Great Purge Great Patriotic War (World War II) Evacuation The Holocaust Cold War Khrushchev thaw Sino-Soviet split Soviet space program Caribbean Crisis Stagnation Soviet–Afghan War Perestroika Glasnost Chernobyl disaster Revolutions of 1989 August Coup Parade of sovereignties Dissolution Transition period and cessation of the existence Succession, continuity and legacy Post-Soviet states Nostalgia Geography Subdivisions Republics Autonomous Krais Oblasts Autonomous Autonomous okrugs Closed city Regions Baltic States Caspian Sea Caucasus Mountains Central Asia Crimea European Russia North Caucasus Russian Far East Siberia Transcaucasia Ural Mountains Volga Region West Siberian Plain Politics General Conscription Constitution 1924 1936 1977 Elections Foreign relations Brezhnev Doctrine Gun control Government List Ministries State Committees Human rights LGBT Law Capital punishment Leaders Collective leadership National delimitation Passport system Propiska Political parties State ideology Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Soviet anti-Zionism Bodies Communist Party organisation Congress Central Committee Presidium/Politburo Secretariat General Secretary Congress of Soviets (1922–1936) Supreme Soviet (1938–1991) Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991) Supreme Court Military Collegium All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions Creative unions Offices Heads of state President Premier Deputy Premier First Deputy Premier Security services Cheka GPU NKVD Destruction battalions MVD Militsiya MGB KGB Chairmen Soviet Border Troops Soviet Armed Forces Soviet Army / Spetsnaz GRU • Soviet Navy • Soviet Air Forces / Soviet Airborne Forces Political repression Red Terror Collectivization Great Purge Population transfer Forced labor Foreign forced labor POW labor Gulag List Holodomor Political abuse of psychiatry Anti-abuse struggle War crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war Ideological repression Persecution of Christians Eastern Catholics Science Censorship Censorship of images Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank State Labor Savings Banks System Economic planning Energy policy Enterprises Five-year plans Industrialization Internet domain Inventions Net material product OGAS Economic reforms 1956–1962 Wage reform 1957 1965 1973 1979 Rouble (currency) Monetary reforms 1947 1961 1991 Automotive industry Construction Transport Ministry of Railways Railway system Rail transport Railway electrification List of metro systems Vehicle registration plates Science Communist Academy Cybernetics Academy of Sciences Academy of Medical Sciences Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences Sharashkas Naukograds List Society Antisemitism Crime Demographics Soviet people Working class 1989 census Drug policy Ethnic conflicts Family Languages Linguistics Cyrillisation Prohibition Racism Culture Ballet Cinema Fashion Literature Music Opera Phraseology Printed media Propaganda Publishing houses Religion Islam Sports Stalinist architecture Broadcasting Radio Television Opposition Anti-Soviet agitation Soviet dissidents and their groups List Symbols Anthem Republics Emblem Republics Flag Republics Hammer and sickle Soviet Union portal Category v t e Joseph Stalin General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (1922–1952) Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union (1946–1953) Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union History and politics Overviews Early life Russian Revolution, Russian Civil War, Polish–Soviet War Rise Rule as Soviet leader Political views Cult of personality Death and state funeral Death toll Chronology August Uprising Anti-religious campaign (1921–1928) / (1928–1941) Collectivization Kolkhoz Sovkhoz Chinese Civil War First five-year plan Sino-Soviet conflict (1929) 16th / 17th Congress of the Communist Party 1931 Menshevik Trial Spanish Civil War Soviet invasion of Xinjiang Soviet–Japanese border conflicts 1937 Islamic rebellion in Xinjiang 1937 legislative election 18th Congress of the Communist Party Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact World War II Invasion of Poland Winter War Moscow Peace Treaty Occupation of the Baltic states German–Soviet Axis talks Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact Great Patriotic War Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Potsdam Conference Soviet atomic bomb project Ili Rebellion Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance 1946 legislative election Cold War 1946 Iran crisis Turkish Straits crisis First Indochina War Eastern Bloc Comecon Cominform Greek Civil War 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Berlin Blockade Korean War Sino-Soviet Treaty Tito–Stalin split 1950 legislative election 19th Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Stalinism Socialism in one country Neo-Stalinism Korenizatsiya Socialism in One Country Great Break Socialist realism Stalinist architecture Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Five-year plans Great Construction Projects of Communism Engineers of the human soul 1936 Soviet Constitution New Soviet man Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Backwardness brings on beatings by others Crimes, repressions, and controversies 1906 Bolshevik raid on the Tsarevich Giorgi 1907 Tiflis bank robbery National delimitation in the Soviet Union Georgian Affair Decossackization Dekulakization Wittorf affair Great Break Demolition of Cathedral of Christ the Saviour Soviet famine of 1932–33 Holodomor Gulag Murder of Sergey Kirov Great Purge Vasiliy Ulrikh NKVD prisoner massacres Berezhany Berezwecz Dubno Chortkiv Kurapaty Katyn Lutsk Lviv Medvedev Forest Sambir Valozhyn Vileyka Vinnytsia Zolochiv Moscow Trials Case of the Anti-Soviet "Bloc of Rightists and Trotskyites" Case of Trotskyist Anti-Soviet Military Organization Dewey Commission Hotel Lux Repressions in Azerbaijan Ideological repression in science Suppressed research Lysenkoism Japhetic theory , Slavists case 1937 Soviet Census 1941 Red Army purge Soviet offensive plans controversy Hitler Youth Conspiracy Soviet war crimes Allegations of antisemitism Population transfer ( German–Soviet ) Deportations Operation "Lentil" Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Koreans Operation "North" Operation "Priboi" Nazino affair Forced settlement Tax on trees 1946–1947 Soviet famine Leningrad Affair Mingrelian Affair Rootless cosmopolitan Night of the Murdered Poets Doctors' plot Censorship of images Mass graves in the Soviet Union Kommunarka shooting ground Stalin's shooting lists Works " Anarchism or Socialism?

" " Marxism and the National Question " " Foundations of Leninism " " Dizzy with Success " " Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia " "Ten Blows" speech Alleged 19 August 1939 speech Falsifiers of History Stalin Note The History of the Communist Party 1936 Soviet Constitution Stalin's poetry Dialectical and Historical Materialism Order No. 227 Order No. 270 " Marxism and Problems of Linguistics " Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Pospelov Commission Rehabilitation Khrushchev thaw On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences Gomulka thaw (Polish October) Soviet Nonconformist Art Shvernik Commission 22nd Congress of the Communist Party Era of Stagnation 1956 Georgian demonstrations Criticism and opposition Stalin Epigram Lenin's Testament Ryutin Affair Anti-Stalinist left Trotskyism Kremlin Plot True Communists Darkness at Noon Animal Farm Nineteen Eighty-Four Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism The Soviet Story Antisemitism Remembrance Iosif Stalin tank Iosif Stalin locomotive Generalissimo of the Soviet Union Stalin statues Pantheon, Moscow 1956 Georgian demonstrations List of awards and honours bestowed upon Joseph Stalin Statue of Joseph Stalin, Berlin Stalin Monument in Budapest Stalin Monument in Prague Joseph Stalin Museum, Gori Batumi Stalin Museum Places named after Stalin State Stalin Prize Stalin Peace Prize Stalin Society Stalin Bloc – For the USSR Cultural depictions Apocalypse: Stalin The Death of Stalin Mikheil Gelovani Family Besarion Jughashvili (father) Keke Geladze (mother) Kato Svanidze (first wife) Yakov Dzhugashvili (son) Konstantin Kuzakov (son) Artyom Sergeyev (adopted son) Nadezhda Alliluyeva (second wife) Vasily Stalin (son) Svetlana Alliluyeva (daughter) Yevgeny Dzhugashvili (grandson) Galina Dzhugashvili (granddaughter) Joseph Alliluyev (grandson) Sergei Alliluyev (second father-in-law) Alexander Svanidze (brother-in-law) Yuri Zhdanov (son-in-law) William Wesley Peters (son-in-law) Stalin's residences Stalin's house, Gori Tiflis Seminary Kureika Room at Kremlin Kuntsevo Stalin's bunker Category v t e Genocide Genocides ( chronological list ) Before 1490 Destruction of Carthage (146 BCE) Asiatic Vespers (88 BCE) Gauls (50s BCE) Eburones Bar Kokhba (132–136) Ancestral Puebloans (800s) Harrying of the North (1069–1070) Mongol conquests (1200s–1360s) Cathars (1209–1229) Mongols in the Delhi Sultanate (1311) Timurid conquests (1393–1394) Guanches (1402–1496) 1490 to 1912 Taíno (1493–1550) Jaragua massacre (1503) Ainu (1500s–) Indigenous peoples in Brazil 11th Parallel massacre (1963) Tanaru (1970s–2009) Helmet massacre (1988) Akuntsu (1990) Haximu (1993) Yanomami (2019–2023) Aztecs (1521) Kashmiri Shias (1548–1872) Huguenots (1572) Kalinago (1626) Indigenous peoples in the United States Pequots (1636–1638) Beaver Wars (1609–1701) Huron Sullivan Expedition (1779) Indian removal (1830–1847) Trail of Tears (1830–1850) California (1846–1873) Dakota (1862) Osage Indian murders (1918–1931) Cultural genocide Indigenous peoples in Canada Beaver Wars (1609–1701) Beothuk (1700s–1800s) Residential school system (1874–1996) Sixties Scoop (1951–1985) Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Jews in the Cossack Hetmanate (1648–1657) 1740 Batavia massacre (1740) Great Gypsy Round-up (1749) Dzungars (1750s) Rebellion of Túpac Amaru II (1780–1783) Chechens (1785–2017) French Hatians (1804) Meiteis (1819–1826) Indigenous peoples in Australia Black War (1825–1832) Stolen Generations (1869–1977) Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Pacification of Algeria (1830–1875) El Ouffia Charrúa (1831) Moriori (1835) Assyrians in Hakkari (1843–1846) Manchus (1850–1864) Circassians (1860s) Mapuche (1870s–1884) Indigenous peoples in Putumayo (1879–1913) Congolese (1885–1908) Hazaras (1888–1893) Selknam (1890s–1900s) Hamidian massacres (1894–1896) Herero and Nama (1904–1907) Ukame (1905–1907) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) 1913 to 1945 Late Ottoman genocides Greeks (1913–1923) Pontic Greeks Thracian Bulgarians (1913) Assyrians (1915–1919) Armenians (1915–1917) Christians in Diyarbekir (1915) Kurds (1916–1934) Indigenous peoples in Venezuela Pemon Kyrgyz (1916–1917) Jews during the Russian Civil War (1917–1920) Russian White Terror Cossacks (1919–1933) Ingrian Finns (1920s–1930s) Volga Tatars and Germans (1921–1922) Kantō Massacre (1923) Napalpí massacre (1924) Swiss Yenish, Sinti, and Manouche (1926–1973) Japanese war crimes in the Pacific War Manchukuo (1931–1945) Nanjing Massacre (1937–1938) Three Alls policy (1940–1942) Sook Ching (1942) Nanshitou massacre (1942–1945) Libyan Arabs (1929–1934) Kazakhs (1930–1933) La Matanza (1932) Holodomor (1932–1933) Simele massacre (1933) Romani Holocaust (1935–1945) Spanish White Terror (1936–1947) Yekatit 12 (1937) Polish Operation (1937–1938) Alevi Kurds (1937–1938) Parsley massacre (1937) Generalplan Ost (1939–1945) Poland Baltic lands Croatia Czech lands Ukraine Hunger Plan The Holocaust (1941–1945) German atrocities committed against Soviet POWs (1941–1945) Serbs in Croatia (1941–1945) Muslims and Croats in Serbia (1941–1945) Volhynian and Eastern Galician Poles (1943–1945) Chechens and Ingush (1944–1948) Crimean Tatars (1944–1948) 1946 to 1999 Hyderabadi Muslims (1948) Indigenous peoples in Paraguay (1956–1989) Maya (1962–1996) Papua (1962–) Arab and Indian Zanzibaris (1964) 1966 anti-Igbo pogrom (1966) Biafra (1966–1970) Equatoguinean (1969–1979) Feyli Kurds (1970–2003) Bangladesh (1971) Acholi and Lango (1972–1979) Burundi 1972 1993 East Timor (1974–1999) Cambodian (1975–1979) Jummas (1977–1997) Afghans (1979–1989) Baganda (1981–1985) 1982 Hama massacre (1982) Sabra and Shatila massacre (1982) Sri Lankan Tamils (1983–2009) Gukurahundi (1983–1987) Anfal (1986–1989) Isaaq (1987–1989) National Population Program (1987–2002) Amhara (1990–) Ahwaris (1991–2003) Bosnian (1992–1995) Srebrenica massacre Rwandan (1994) Hutus during the First Congo War (1996–1997) 21st century Effacer le tableau (2002–2003) Darfur (2003–) Masalit massacres Iraqi Sunni Arabs (2003–) Southern Kaduna (2011–2023) Iraqi Turkmen (2014–2017) Yazidis (2014–2017) Shias under ISIS (2014–) Christians under ISIS (2014–) Rohingyas, Kachins, and Burmese Muslims (2017–) Tigrayans, Kunamas, and Irobs (2020–2022) Bucha massacre (2022) Gazans (2023–) Terms Cultural genocide Democide Autogenocide Domicide Ecocide Ethnocide Eugenics Gendercide Androcide Transgender genocide Genocide of indigenous peoples Memoricide Policide Politicide Classicide Eliticide Utilitarian genocide War of annihilation Methods Cultural genocide Death marches Death squades Ethnic cleansing Extermination camp Forced adoption Forced assimilation Forced conversion Incitement Massacres Killing Fields Pogroms Mass killing Rape Settler colonialism Urbicide Denial The Holocaust Trivialization Armenian Japanese history textbook controversies Nanjing Serbian Bosnian Rwandan Holodomor Cambodian Indigenous Issues Definitions Names of the Holocaust Terminology of the Armenian genocide Holocaust terminology Genocide law Prevention Effects on young survivors Politics of recognition Justification Mass killings under communist regimes Anti-communist mass killings Legal proceedings Holocaust trials (1943–2022) Krasnodar trial (1943) Kharkov trial (1943) Épuration légale (1944–1951) Majdanek trials (1944–1989) Chełmno trials (1945–2001) Dachau trials (1945–1947) Belsen trials (1945–1948) Euthanasia trials (1945–1949) Nuremberg trial (1945–1946) Minsk trial (1945–1946) Riga trial (1946) Stutthof trials (1946–1947) Post–World War II Romanian war crime trials (1946–1953) Supreme National Tribunal (1946–1948) Hamburg Ravensbrück trials (1946–1948) Nuremberg Military Tribunals (1946–1949) Erich von Manstein (1949) Ulm Einsatzkommando trial (1958) War crimes trials in Soviet Estonia (1961–1962) Eichmann trial (1961) Belzec trial (1963–1965) Frankfurt Auschwitz trials (1963–1989) Treblinka trials (1964–1970) Sobibor trial (1965–1966) Fedorenko trial (1986) Finta trial (1994) 20th century Budak trial (1945) International Military Tribunal for the Far East (1946–1948) Belgrade Process (1946) Nanjing War Crimes Tribunal (1946–1948) Bosnian genocide case (1993–2007) International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (1993–2017) Slobodan Milošević (2002–2006) Radovan Karadžić (2008–2016) Ratko Mladić (2011–2017) Trials of the Derg members (1994–2008) International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (1994–2015) Khmer Rouge Tribunal (1997–2022) Croatia–Serbia genocide case (1999–2015) 21st century International Criminal Court investigation in Darfur (2005–) Permanent Peoples' Tribunal on Sri Lanka (2010–2023) International Crimes Tribunal of Bangladesh (2012–) Mohammad Salimullah v. Union of India (2017) Rohingya genocide case (2019–) International Criminal Court investigation in Bangladesh/Myanmar (2019–) Uyghur Tribunal (2020–2021) International Criminal Court investigation in Ukraine (2022–) Ukraine v. Russian Federation (2022–) South Africa v. Israel (2023–) Defense for Children International – Palestine et al v. Biden et al (2023–2024) Nicaragua v. Germany (2024) Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐sf4rm
Cached time: 20250817133555
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 5.347 seconds
Real time usage: 5.842 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 47199/1000000
Revision size: 286303/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1421378/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 91494/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 66/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1267295/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 3.502/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28430760/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4923.988      1 -total
 18.68%  919.651      2 Template:Reflist
 16.14%  794.641    257 Template:Sfn
 14.85%  731.323    111 Template:Cite_book
 14.60%  718.836    129 Template:Cite_web
  9.81%  482.951     60 Template:Cite_journal
  8.56%  421.344     66 Template:Cite_news
  5.17%  254.439      1 Template:Infobox_famine
  3.27%  160.900     22 Template:Efn
  3.26%  160.481      1 Template:Government_recognition_of_the_Holodomor Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1007688:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817133555 and revision id 1305297565. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holodomor&oldid=1305297565 " Categories : Holodomor Genocides in Europe 1932 disasters in Europe 1932 in the Soviet Union 1932 in Ukraine 1933 disasters in Europe 1932 disasters in the Soviet Union 1933 disasters in the Soviet Union 1933 in Ukraine 1930s famines Agriculture in the Soviet Union History of agriculture in Ukraine Anti-Ukrainian sentiment Crimes of the communist regime in Ukraine against Ukrainians Famines in Europe Famines in the Soviet Union Incidents of cannibalism Joseph Stalin Stalinism in Ukraine Famines in Ukraine Hidden categories: Articles containing Ukrainian-language text Pages with Ukrainian IPA CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 uses Ukrainian-language script (uk) CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2025 CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) CS1 Estonian-language sources (et) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Icelandic-language sources (is) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Slovak-language sources (sk) CS1 Slovenian-language sources (sl) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use British English from January 2013 Use dmy dates from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 CS1 interwiki-linked names Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2022 Articles with dead external links from April 2025 CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Ukrainian-language sources (uk) This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Holodomor 84 languages Add topic

