Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 American Compass 3 Political positions 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Oren Cass 1 language Català Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political commentator and advisor (born 1983 Oren Cass Cass in 2025 Personal details Born 1983 (age 41–42) Political party Republican Education Williams College ( BA ) Harvard University ( JD ) This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Oren M. Cass (born 1983) is an American public policy commentator and political advisor.

[ 1 ] In 2024, he named himself "chief economist" at American Compass, a conservative think tank which he founded in 2020.

[ 2 ] He previously worked on the presidential campaigns of Mitt Romney in 2008 and 2012. According to a 2015 article in Politico , he is a "general policy impresario of the emerging conservative consensus on fighting poverty." [ 3 ] From 2015 to 2019, he was a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research . He authored a book, The Once and Future Worker: A Vision for the Renewal of Work in America .

[ 4 ] In February 2020, Cass established American Compass, an organization aimed at the question of "what the post- Trump right-of-center is going to be." [ 5 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Cass is Jewish , and grew up outside Boston , Massachusetts.

[ 6 ] He attended Williams College , where he received a Bachelor of Arts in political economy .

[ 7 ] Career [ edit ] After graduating from Williams College, Cass joined Bain & Company as an associate consultant, [ 1 ] where he worked in the firm's Boston and New Delhi offices.

[ 7 ] He took a six-month leave to work on the Mitt Romney 2008 presidential campaign , in which Romney was defeated in the presidential primary.

[ 1 ] He then enrolled in Harvard Law School , where he said he sought "to deepen his understanding of public policy" and established contact with Romney's staff, which hired him as a domestic policy advisor when Romney again ran for president in 2012 .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 7 ] He worked for the next Romney operation in 2011 between his second and third years at Harvard, and ended up with so much in his portfolio that at the end of the summer "they sort of said, well, you have to stay". He became domestic-policy director while still in law school.

[ 1 ] After Romney was defeated in the 2012 election, Cass returned to Bain, where he became a manager, but also "started writing on environmental and labor policy for National Review .

[ 1 ] U.S. Senator Marco Rubio credited Cass for his 2014 poverty-fighting plan, according to Politico.

[ 3 ] [ 8 ] The following year, in 2015, he joined the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research as a senior fellow, and was named to Politico 's list of the top 50 "thinkers, doers and visionaries transforming American politics in 2015".

[ 3 ] In 2018, Cass published his book, The Once and Future Worker , which reevaluated American society, economics, and public policy, and introduces what he called "the Working Hypothesis: that a labor market in which workers can support strong families and communities is the central determinant of long-term prosperity and should be the central focus of public policy". He argues that the obsessive focus of policymakers and economists on "consumer welfare" is misguided because, as workers and productive contributors, people flourish and build strong families and communities.

National Affairs editor Yuval Levin called it "the essential policy book for our time".

[ 3 ] National Review wrote that, "[t]his book and its policy proposals mark Oren Cass as one of the nation's most original and forceful policy thinkers".

[ 9 ] Jason Furman , chairman of President Obama's Council of Economic Advisers, described it as "a thoughtful, provocative, carefully argued book that made me change my mind on some issues that I thought I'd thought about quite a lot".

[ 10 ] The book was reviewed in The New Yorker , [ 11 ] The Economist , [ 12 ] , Foreign Affairs [ 13 ] and by French anthropologist Emmanuel Todd .

[ 14 ] Donald J. Boudreaux of the American Institute for Economic Research disputed some of the book's positions, asserting that Cass focuses too heavily on the importance of production over consumption, to the point of extolling measures such as tariffs that coerce society into purchasing goods that would not be the first choice of uncoerced consumers.

[ 15 ] American Compass [ edit ] Cass speaking at a technology forum in New Orleans in 2017 In February 2020, Cass founded American Compass, a Washington, D.C.

-based think tank , [ 16 ] which is self-described as focusing on "what the post-Trump right-of-center is going to be." [ 5 ] Later, ahead of the 2024 election , American Compass laid out a set of economic policies intended for a second Trump administration.

[ 17 ] As of July 2024 [update] , American Compass is a member of the advisory board of Project 2025 , [ 18 ] a collection of conservative policy proposals from the Heritage Foundation to reshape the United States federal government and consolidate executive power should the Republican nominee win the 2024 presidential election .

[ 19 ] Cass is thanked for his contribution to Chapter 18: "Department of Labor and Related Agencies".

[ 20 ] Political positions [ edit ] Cass has argued for several changes to conservatism, including: Free markets and tariff Under Cass, the group has strongly questioned the belief that free markets should be given primacy when setting public policy. Cass has described this "free market fundamentalism" as "pathetically simplistic." [ 16 ] Cass and the grouping hold that it is not only absolutely proper for society to intervene in the market but also necessary for it to do so.

[ 16 ] Cass has strongly defended Trump tariffs and the resulting inflation , instability and trade wars .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] He was a guest speaker on ‘Interesting Times' with Ross Douthat and spoke about how he agrees with Trumps approaches to tariffs.

[ 24 ] However, Cass prefers a phase-in period because factories take time to build.

[ 25 ] Industry and trade Cass has advocated for unionization that enables workers to collectively bargain for sector-wide pay standards and working conditions.

[ 26 ] He argues that local industry should be protected by an across-the-board 10% tariff on imported goods, which would increase by 5% annually until trade deficits are brought to zero, while investment in local industry would be funded by a national development bank.

[ 26 ] Environment In 2017, Cass wrote an essay framing rejection of strong measures to combat climate change as a form of moderation, criticizing both those on the political right who question the validity of climate science and those on the political left he characterized as suffering from depression and misusing data to paint a picture of imminent catastrophe.

[ 27 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Willick, Jason (November 23, 2018).

"Conservatives and the Politics of Work" . The Wall Street Journal.

^ "About American Compass" . American Compass.

^ a b c d e "The Politico 50" .

Politico . 2015.

^ "The Once and Future Worker" . Manhattan Institute for Policy Research . Retrieved February 12, 2019 .

^ a b Butler, Jack (February 21, 2020).

"How New Is the Oren Cass Approach?" .

National Review .

^ Cass, Oren (September 12, 2024).

"Constructing Conservatism" .

First Things .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2025.

^ a b c "Biography for Oren M. Cass" (PDF) . United States House of Representatives. December 1, 2015.

^ Rubio, Marco (January 8, 2014).

"Rubio Delivers Address on 50th Anniversary of the "War on Poverty" " .

www.rubio.senate.gov .

^ Haskins, Ron (December 20, 2018).

"An Economy That Works" .

National Review .

^ Furman, Jason (November 2, 2018).

"Jason Furman's Reviews > The Once and Future Worker: A Vision for the Renewal of Work in America" .

Goodreads .

^ Lepore, Jill (March 4, 2019).

"Are Robots Competing for Your Job?" .

The New Yorker .

The economist Oren Cass, the author of "The Once and Future Worker: A Vision for the Renewal of Work in America" (Encounter), much of which originally appeared in National Review , is fed up with the robot hysteria. "Technological innovation and automation have always been integral to our economic progress, and in a well-functioning labor market, they should produce gains for all types of workers," he insists.

^ "Donald Trump is the main barrier to the revision of conservatism" .

The Economist . February 7, 2019.

Progress on the rethinking of Reaganite shibboleths that his campaign promised has been scattered and rare. The hoopla generated by a recent book on labour markets by Oren Cass of the Manhattan Institute, which made a conservative case for wage subsidies and other interventions to promote the dignity of work among strugglers, was both justified and indicative of this.

^ Galbraith, James K. (January 14, 2019).

"The Trouble With the "Working Hypothesis" " .

Foreign Affairs .

^ Todd, Emmanuel (19 March 2019).

"Civilized Originality" .

city-journal.org . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ Boudreaux, Donald J. (December 21, 2019).

"The Case Against Oren Cass" .

American Institute for Economic Research .

^ a b c Olsen, Henry (2020-05-05).

"Opinion | This new think tank wants to reform conservatism. Republicans ignore it at their peril" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2024-07-18 .

^ Javers, Eamon (May 21, 2024).

"Trump-allied Republicans are changing the GOP's approach to labor, free markets and regulation" .

CNBC .

^ "Advisory Board" .

The Heritage Foundation .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ Mascaro, Lisa (August 29, 2023).

"Conservative Groups Draw Up Plan to Dismantle the US Government and Replace It with Trump's Vision" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ Dans, Paul; Groves, Steven, eds. (2023).

Mandate for leadership: the conservative promise 2025 (PDF) . Washington, DC: The Heritage Foundation.

ISBN 978-0-89195-174-2 .

^ Hamid, Shadi; Araghchi, Seyed Abbas; Zito, Salena; Rampell, Catherine (2025-04-10).

"Opinion | Love it or hate it, you can't dismiss this Republican's defense of tariffs" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2025-04-10 .

^ Douthat, Ross (2025-04-10).

"Opinion | This Instability May Be Worth It. Here's Why" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2025-04-10 .

^ Sutton, Sam (2025-04-09).

"If Trump's Trade War Implodes, It May Be Knives Out for Republican Populists" .

POLITICO . Retrieved 2025-04-10 .

^ Nicol, Patricia (2025-04-15).

"Why are podcasters so fixated by Donald Trump?" .

www.thetimes.com . Retrieved 2025-07-04 .

^ Noel King; Miles Bryan (April 8, 2025).

"Would you pay more for an American-made TV? This influential thinker thinks you will" .

Vox .

^ a b Levitz, Eric (2023-09-18).

"The Nerd Trying to Turn the GOP Populist" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved 2024-07-18 .

^ Cass, Oren (March 21, 2017).

"The Problem With Climate Catastrophizing: The Case for Calm" .

Foreign Affairs .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-16.

External links [ edit ] Personal website Profile at American Legislative Exchange Council Biography at Manhattan Institute for Policy Research Profile at City Journal Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oren_Cass&oldid=1301133090 " Categories : 1983 births Living people 20th-century American Jews 21st-century American Jews 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers American male non-fiction writers Harvard Law School alumni Jewish American non-fiction writers Williams College alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 07:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oren Cass 1 language Add topic

