Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Revolutionary War (1775–1782) Toggle Revolutionary War (1775–1782) subsection 2.1 Early military career 2.2 George Washington's staff 2.3 Field command 3 Return to civilian life (1782–1789) Toggle Return to civilian life (1782–1789) subsection 3.1 Congress of the Confederation 3.2 Congress and the army 3.3 Return to New York 3.4 Constitution and The Federalist Papers 3.4.1 The Federalist Papers 4 First U.S. secretary of the treasury (1789–1795) Toggle First U.S. secretary of the treasury (1789–1795) subsection 4.1 Report on Public Credit 4.2 Report on a National Bank 4.3 Establishing the mint 4.4 Revenue Cutter Service 4.5 Whiskey as tax revenue 4.6 Manufacturing and industry 4.7 Jay Treaty 4.8 Resignation from public office 4.9 Emergence of political parties 5 1796 presidential election 6 Reynolds affair 7 Quasi-War 8 1800 presidential election 9 Duel with Burr and death 10 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 10.1 Religious faith 10.2 Relationship with Jews and Judaism 11 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 11.1 Constitution 11.2 Slavery 11.3 Economics 11.4 Public administration 12 In popular culture 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Notes 13.2 Citations 13.3 Bibliography 13.4 Studies 13.5 Sources 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexander Hamilton 79 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bislama Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia U.S. Founding Father (died 1804) For other uses, see Alexander Hamilton (disambiguation) .

Alexander Hamilton Posthumous portrait by John Trumbull , 1806, [ 1 ] from a life bust by Giuseppe Ceracchi , 1794 1st United States Secretary of the Treasury In office September 11, 1789 – January 31, 1795 President George Washington Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Oliver Wolcott Jr.

8th Senior Officer of the United States Army In office December 14, 1799 – June 15, 1800 President John Adams Preceded by George Washington Succeeded by James Wilkinson Delegate to the Congress of the Confederation from New York In office November 3, 1788 – March 2, 1789 Preceded by Egbert Benson Succeeded by Seat abolished In office November 4, 1782 – June 21, 1783 Preceded by Seat established Succeeded by Seat abolished Personal details Born ( 1755-01-11 ) January 11, 1755 or 1757 [ a ] Charlestown , Colony of Nevis , British Leeward Islands Died July 12, 1804 (aged 47 or 49) New York City, U.S.

Cause of death Gunshot wound Resting place Trinity Church Cemetery Nationality American Political party Federalist Spouse Elizabeth Schuyler ​ ( m.

1780 ) ​ Children Philip Angelica Alexander James John William Eliza Philip Relatives Hamilton family Education King's College Columbia College ( MA ) Signature Military service Allegiance New York (1775–1777) United States (1777–1800) Branch/service New York Provincial Company of Artillery Continental Army United States Army Years of service 1775–1776 (militia) 1776–1782 1798–1800 Rank Major general Commands U.S. Army Senior Officer Battles/wars American Revolutionary War Battle of Harlem Heights Battle of White Plains Battle of Trenton Battle of Princeton Battle of Brandywine Battle of Germantown Battle of Monmouth Siege of Yorktown Quasi-War Alexander Hamilton (January 11, 1755 or 1757 [ a ] – July 12, 1804) was an American military officer, statesman, and Founding Father who served as the first U.S. secretary of the treasury from 1789 to 1795 during the presidency of George Washington , the first president of the United States .

Born out of wedlock in Charlestown, Nevis , Hamilton was orphaned as a child and taken in by a prosperous merchant. He was given a scholarship and pursued his education at King's College (now Columbia University ) in New York City where, despite his young age, he was an anonymous but prolific and widely read pamphleteer and advocate for the American Revolution . He then served as an artillery officer in the American Revolutionary War , where he saw military action against the British Army in the New York and New Jersey campaign , served for four years as aide-de-camp to Continental Army commander in chief George Washington , and fought under Washington's command in the war's climactic battle, the Siege of Yorktown , which secured American victory in the war and with it the independence of the United States .

After the Revolutionary War, Hamilton served as a delegate from New York to the Congress of the Confederation in Philadelphia . He resigned to practice law and founded the Bank of New York . In 1786, Hamilton led the Annapolis Convention , which sought to strengthen the power of the loose confederation of independent states under the limited authorities granted it by the Articles of Confederation . The following year he was a delegate to the Philadelphia Convention , which drafted the U.S. Constitution creating a more centralized federal national government. He then authored 51 of the 85 installments of The Federalist Papers , which proved persuasive in securing its ratification by the states.

As a trusted member of President Washington's first cabinet , Hamilton served as the first U.S. secretary of the treasury. He envisioned a central government led by an energetic executive , a strong national defense, and a more diversified economy with significantly expanded industry. He successfully argued that the implied powers of the U.S. Constitution provided the legal basis to create the First Bank of the United States , and assume the states' war debts, which was funded by a tariff on imports and a whiskey tax . Hamilton opposed American entanglement with the succession of unstable French Revolutionary governments . In 1790, he persuaded the U.S. Congress to establish the U.S. Revenue Cutter service to protect American shipping. In 1793, he advocated in support of the Jay Treaty under which the U.S. resumed friendly trade relations with the British Empire . Hamilton's views became the basis for the Federalist Party , which was opposed by the Democratic-Republican Party , led by Thomas Jefferson . Hamilton and other Federalists supported the Haitian Revolution , and Hamilton helped draft Haiti 's constitution in 1801.

After resigning as the nation's Secretary of the Treasury in 1795, Hamilton resumed his legal and business activities and helped lead the abolition of the Atlantic slave trade . In the Quasi-War , fought at sea between 1798 and 1800, Hamilton called for mobilization against France , and President John Adams appointed him major general. The U.S. Army , however, did not see combat in the conflict. Outraged by Adams' response to the crisis, Hamilton opposed his 1800 presidential re-election . Jefferson and Aaron Burr tied for the presidency in the electoral college and, despite philosophical differences, Hamilton endorsed Jefferson over Burr, whom he found unprincipled. When Burr ran for Governor of New York in 1804 , Hamilton again opposed his candidacy, arguing that he was unfit for the office. Taking offense, Burr challenged Hamilton to a pistol duel , which took place in Weehawken, New Jersey , on July 11, 1804. Hamilton was mortally wounded and immediately transported back across the Hudson River in a delirious state to the home of William Bayard Jr.

in Greenwich Village , New York, for medical attention. The following day, on July 12, 1804, Hamilton succumbed to his wounds.

Scholars generally regard Hamilton as an astute and intellectually brilliant administrator, politician, and financier who was sometimes impetuous. His ideas are credited with influencing the founding principles of American finance and government . In 1997, historian Paul Johnson wrote that Hamilton was a "genius—the only one of the Founding Fathers fully entitled to that accolade—and he had the elusive, indefinable characteristics of genius." [ 6 ] Early life and education Hamilton was born on January 11, 1755, or 1757, [ a ] in Charlestown , the capital of Nevis in the British Leeward Islands , where he spent his childhood. Hamilton and his older brother, James Jr., [ 7 ] were born out of wedlock to Rachel Lavien ( née Faucette), [ b ] a married woman of half-British and half- Huguenot descent, [ c ] [ 16 ] and James A. Hamilton, a Scotsman and the fourth son of Alexander Hamilton, the laird of Grange, Ayrshire .

[ 17 ] Prior to Alexander's birth, in 1745, Rachel Lavien married Johann Lavien in Saint Croix .

[ 18 ] Together, they had one son, Peter. However, Rachel Lavien left her husband and first son in 1750, traveling to Saint Kitts , where she met James Hamilton.

[ 18 ] Hamilton and Lavien moved together to Nevis, her birthplace, where she had inherited a seaside lot in town from her father.

[ 2 ] While their mother was living, Alexander and James Jr. received individual tutoring [ 2 ] and classes in a private school led by a Jewish headmistress.

[ 19 ] Alexander supplemented his education with a family library of 34 books.

[ 20 ] James Hamilton later abandoned Rachel Lavien and their two sons, ostensibly to "spar[e] [her] a charge of bigamy ...after finding out that her first husband intend[ed] to divorce her under Danish law on grounds of adultery and desertion." [ 17 ] Lavien then moved with their two children back to Saint Croix, where she supported them by managing a small store in Christiansted . Both his mother and Hamilton contracted yellow fever . On February 19, 1768, Hamilton's mother died from the disease, leaving him orphaned.

[ 21 ] His mother's death may have had a severe emotional impact on Hamilton.

[ 22 ] In probate court , Lavien's "first husband seized her estate" [ 17 ] and obtained the few valuables that she had owned, including some household silver. Many items were auctioned off, and a friend purchased the family's books, returning them to Hamilton.

[ 23 ] The brothers were briefly taken in by their cousin Peter Lytton. However, Lytton took his own life in July 1769, leaving his property to his mistress and their son, and the propertyless Hamilton brothers were subsequently separated.

[ 23 ] James Jr. apprenticed with a local carpenter, while Alexander was given a home by Thomas Stevens, a merchant from Nevis.

[ 24 ] Hamilton became a clerk at Beekman and Cruger, a local import-export firm that traded with the Province of New York and New England .

[ 25 ] Though still a teenager, Hamilton proved capable enough as a trader to be left in charge of the firm for five months in 1771 while the owner was at sea.

[ 26 ] He remained an avid reader, and later developed an interest in writing and a life outside Saint Croix. He wrote a detailed letter to his father regarding a hurricane that devastated Christiansted on August 30, 1772.

[ 27 ] The Presbyterian Reverend Hugh Knox, a tutor and mentor to Hamilton, submitted the letter for publication in the Royal Danish-American Gazette.

Biographer Ron Chernow found the letter astounding because "for all its bombastic excesses, it does seem wondrous [that a] self-educated clerk could write with such verve and gusto" and that a teenage boy produced an apocalyptic "fire-and-brimstone sermon" viewing the hurricane as a "divine rebuke to human vanity and pomposity." [ 28 ] The essay impressed community leaders, who collected a fund to send Hamilton to the North American colonies for his education.

[ 29 ] In October 1772, Hamilton arrived by ship in Boston and then proceeded to New York City, where he boarded with Hercules Mulligan , the Irish -born brother of a trader known to Hamilton's benefactors. Mulligan assisted Hamilton in selling the cargo that Hamilton was to use to pay for his education and support.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Hamilton sought to fill gaps in his education in preparation for college, and later that year began to attend Elizabethtown Academy , a preparatory school run by Francis Barber in Elizabeth, New Jersey . While there, he was introduced to William Livingston , a local leading intellectual and revolutionary who influenced him, and he boarded with the Livingstons while studying.

[ 32 ] In fall 1773, Hamilton returned to New York and entered Mulligan's alma mater, King's College (now Columbia University ). Hamilton began as a private student and boarded again with Mulligan until he matriculated into the college the following year, in May 1774.

[ 33 ] His college roommate and lifelong friend Robert Troup spoke glowingly of Hamilton's clarity in concisely explaining Patriot case against the British during the American Revolution in what was Hamilton's first public appearance, on July 6, 1774.

[ 34 ] As King's College students, Hamilton, Troup, and four other undergraduates formed an unnamed literary society that is regarded as a precursor to what is now the Philolexian Society .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Later in 1774, Church of England clergyman Samuel Seabury in New York published a series of pamphlets promoting the Loyalist cause , seeking to provoke fear in the Thirteen Colonies , which he hoped would discourage them from uniting against the British.

[ 37 ] Hamilton countered anonymously with his first published political writings, A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress and The Farmer Refuted .

He published two additional pieces attacking the Quebec Act , [ 38 ] and may have also authored the 15 anonymous installments of "The Monitor" for Holt's New York Journal .

[ 39 ] Hamilton supported the revolutionary cause before the war began, but he disapproved of mob violence against the Loyalists. On May 10, 1775, he was credited with saving King College president Myles Cooper , a Loyalist, from an angry mob by speaking to the crowd long enough to allow Cooper to escape.

[ 40 ] Hamilton was forced to discontinue his studies before graduating when the college closed its doors during the British occupation of New York City and his subsequent military service.

[ 41 ] Revolutionary War (1775–1782) Early military career Further information: Hearts of Oak (New York militia) and New York and New Jersey campaign Alexander Hamilton in the Uniform of the New York Artillery , a portrait by Alonzo Chappel In 1775, following the outbreak of the Revolutionary War with the Battles of Lexington and Concord , Hamilton and other King's College students joined a New York volunteer militia company, the Corsicans , whose name reflected the Corsican Republic that was suppressed six years earlier and which young American patriots regarded as a political model to be emulated.

[ 42 ] Hamilton drilled with the company before classes in the graveyard of nearby St. Paul's Chapel , studied military history and tactics on his own, and was soon elected an officer.

[ 43 ] Under fire from HMS Asia , and coordinating with Hercules Mulligan and the Sons of Liberty , he led his newly renamed unit, the "Hearts of Oak," on a successful raid for British cannons in the Battery . The seizure of the cannons resulted in the unit being re-designated an artillery company.

[ 44 ] : 13 Through his connections with influential New York patriots, including Alexander McDougall and John Jay , Hamilton was commissioned by the revolutionary government to raise the New York Provincial Company of Artillery of 60 men in 1776, and was then appointed captain .

[ 45 ] The company took part in the campaign of 1776 in and around New York City; as rearguard of the Continental Army's retreat up Manhattan, serving at the Battle of Harlem Heights shortly after, and at the Battle of White Plains a month later. At the Battle of Trenton , the company was stationed at the high point of Trenton at the intersection of present-day Warren and Broad streets to keep the Hessians pinned in their Trenton barracks.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Hamilton participated in the Battle of Princeton on January 3, 1777. After an initial setback, Washington rallied the Continental Army troops and led them in a successful charge against the British forces. After making a brief stand, the British fell back, some leaving Princeton , and others taking up refuge in Nassau Hall . Hamilton transported three cannons to the hall, and had them fire upon the building as others rushed the front door and broke it down. The British subsequently put a white flag outside one of the windows; [ 47 ] 194 British soldiers walked out of the building and laid down their arms, ending the battle in an American victory.

[ 48 ] George Washington's staff Further information: Washington's aides-de-camp Hamilton was invited to become an aide to Continental Army general William Alexander, Lord Stirling , and another general, perhaps Nathanael Greene or Alexander McDougall .

[ 49 ] He declined these invitations, believing his best chance for improving his station in life was glory on the Revolutionary War 's battlefields. Hamilton eventually received an invitation he felt he could not refuse: to serve as George Washington 's aide with the rank of lieutenant colonel .

[ 50 ] Washington believed that "Aides de camp are persons in whom entire confidence must be placed and it requires men of abilities to execute the duties with propriety and dispatch." [ 51 ] Hamilton served four years as Washington's chief staff aide. He handled letters to the Continental Congress , state governors, and the most powerful generals of the Continental Army . He drafted many of Washington's orders and letters under Washington's direction, and he eventually issued orders on Washington's behalf over his own signature.

[ 52 ] Hamilton was involved in a wide variety of high-level duties, including intelligence , diplomacy, and negotiation with senior army officers as Washington's emissary.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] While stationed at the army's winter headquarters in Morristown, New Jersey from December 1779 to March 1780, Hamilton met Elizabeth Schuyler , a daughter of General Philip Schuyler and Catherine Van Rensselaer . They married on December 14, 1780, at the Schuyler Mansion in Albany, New York .

[ 55 ] They had eight children, Philip , [ 56 ] Angelica , Alexander , James , [ 57 ] John , William , Eliza , and another Philip .

[ 58 ] During the Revolutionary War, Hamilton became the close friend of several fellow officers. His letters to the Marquis de Lafayette [ 59 ] and to John Laurens , employing the sentimental literary conventions of the late 18th century and alluding to Greek history and mythology, [ 60 ] have been read by Jonathan Ned Katz as revelatory of a homosocial or even homosexual relationship.

[ 61 ] Biographer Gregory D. Massey amongst others, by contrast, dismisses all such speculation as unsubstantiated, describing their friendship as purely platonic camaraderie instead and placing their correspondence in the context of the flowery diction of the time.

[ 62 ] Field command Further information: Yorktown campaign While on Washington's staff, Hamilton long sought command and a return to active combat. As the war drew nearer to an end, he knew that opportunities for military glory were diminishing. On February 15, 1781, Hamilton was reprimanded by Washington after a minor misunderstanding. Although Washington quickly tried to mend their relationship, Hamilton insisted on leaving his staff.

[ 63 ] He officially left in March, and settled with his new wife Elizabeth Schuyler close to Washington's headquarters. He continued to repeatedly ask Washington and others for a field command. Washington continued to demur, citing the need to appoint men of higher rank. This continued until early July 1781, when Hamilton submitted a letter to Washington with his commission enclosed, "thus tacitly threatening to resign if he didn't get his desired command." [ 64 ] On July 31, Washington relented and assigned Hamilton as commander of a battalion of light infantry companies of the 1st and 2nd New York Regiments and two provisional companies from Connecticut.

[ 65 ] In the planning for the assault on Yorktown , Hamilton was given command of three battalions , which were to fight in conjunction with the allied French troops in taking Redoubts No. 9 and No. 10 of the British fortifications at Yorktown. Hamilton and his battalions took Redoubt No. 10 with bayonets alone so as not to risk accidental gunfire and discovery in a nighttime action, as planned. The French also suffered heavy casualties and took Redoubt No. 9. These actions forced the British surrender of an entire army at Yorktown, marking the de facto end of the war, although small battles continued for two more years until the signing of the Treaty of Paris and the departure of the last British troops.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Return to civilian life (1782–1789) Congress of the Confederation Main article: Congress of the Confederation After Yorktown, Hamilton returned to New York City and resigned his commission in March 1782. He passed the bar in July after six months of self-directed education and, in October, was licensed to argue cases before the Supreme Court of New York .

[ 68 ] He also accepted an offer from Robert Morris to become receiver of continental taxes for the New York state .

[ 69 ] Hamilton was appointed in July 1782 to the Congress of the Confederation as a New York representative for the term beginning in November 1782.

[ 70 ] Before his appointment to Congress in 1782, Hamilton was already sharing his criticisms of Congress. He expressed these criticisms in his letter to James Duane dated September 3, 1780: "The fundamental defect is a want of power in Congress ... the confederation itself is defective and requires to be altered; it is neither fit for war, nor peace." [ 71 ] While on Washington's staff, Hamilton had become frustrated with the decentralized nature of the wartime Continental Congress, particularly its dependence upon the states for voluntary financial support that was not often forthcoming. Under the Articles of Confederation , Congress had no power to collect taxes or to demand money from the states. This lack of a stable source of funding had made it difficult for the Continental Army both to obtain its necessary provisions and to pay its soldiers. During the war, and for some time after, Congress obtained what funds it could from subsidies from the King of France, European loans, and aid requested from the several states, which were often unable or unwilling to contribute.

[ 72 ] An amendment to the Articles had been proposed by Thomas Burke , in February 1781, to give Congress the power to collect a five percent impost, or duty on all imports, but this required ratification by all states; securing its passage as law proved impossible after it was rejected by Rhode Island in November 1782.

James Madison joined Hamilton in influencing Congress to send a delegation to persuade Rhode Island to change its mind. Their report recommending the delegation argued the national government needed not just some level of financial autonomy, but also the ability to make laws that superseded those of the individual states. Hamilton transmitted a letter arguing that Congress already had the power to tax, since it had the power to fix the sums due from the several states; but Virginia's rescission of its own ratification of this amendment ended the Rhode Island negotiations.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Congress and the army Further information: Newburgh Conspiracy While Hamilton was in Congress, discontented soldiers began to pose a danger to the young United States. Most of the army was then posted at Newburgh, New York . Those in the army were funding much of their own supplies, and they had not been paid in eight months. Furthermore, after Valley Forge , the Continental officers had been promised in May 1778 a pension of half their pay when they were discharged.

[ 75 ] By the early 1780s, due to the structure of the government under the Articles of Confederation, it had no power to tax to either raise revenue or pay its soldiers.

[ 76 ] In 1782, after several months without pay, a group of officers organized to send a delegation to lobby Congress, led by Captain Alexander McDougall. The officers had three demands: the army's pay, their own pensions, and commutation of those pensions into a lump-sum payment if Congress were unable to afford the half-salary pensions for life. Congress rejected the proposal.

[ 76 ] Several congressmen, including Hamilton, Robert Morris , and Gouverneur Morris , attempted to use the so-called Newburgh Conspiracy as leverage to secure support from the states and in Congress for funding of the national government. They encouraged MacDougall to continue his aggressive approach, implying unknown consequences if their demands were not met, and defeated proposals designed to end the crisis without establishing general taxation: that the states assume the debt to the army, or that an impost be established dedicated to the sole purpose of paying that debt.

[ 77 ] Hamilton suggested using the Army's claims to prevail upon the states for the proposed national funding system.

[ 78 ] The Morrises and Hamilton contacted General Henry Knox to suggest he and the officers defy civil authority, at least by not disbanding if the army were not satisfied. Hamilton wrote Washington to suggest that Hamilton covertly "take direction" of the officers' efforts to secure redress, to secure continental funding but keep the army within the limits of moderation.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Washington wrote Hamilton back, declining to introduce the army.

[ 81 ] After the crisis had ended, Washington warned of the dangers of using the army as leverage to gain support for the national funding plan.

[ 79 ] [ 82 ] On March 15, Washington defused the Newburgh situation by addressing the officers personally.

[ 77 ] Congress ordered the Army officially disbanded in April 1783. In the same month, Congress passed a new measure for a 25-year impost—which Hamilton voted against [ 83 ] —that again required the consent of all the states; it also approved a commutation of the officers' pensions to five years of full pay. Rhode Island again opposed these provisions, and Hamilton's robust assertions of national prerogatives in his previous letter were widely held to be excessive.

[ 84 ] In June 1783, a different group of disgruntled soldiers from Lancaster, Pennsylvania , sent Congress a petition demanding their back pay. When they began to march toward Philadelphia, Congress charged Hamilton and two others with intercepting the mob.

[ 79 ] Hamilton requested militia from Pennsylvania's Supreme Executive Council, but was turned down. Hamilton instructed Assistant Secretary of War William Jackson to intercept the men. Jackson was unsuccessful. The mob arrived in Philadelphia, and the soldiers proceeded to harangue Congress for their pay. Hamilton argued that Congress ought to adjourn to Princeton, New Jersey . Congress agreed, and relocated there.

[ 85 ] Frustrated with the weakness of the national government, Hamilton while in Princeton, drafted a call to revise the Articles of Confederation. This resolution contained many features of the future Constitution of the United States, including a strong federal government with the ability to collect taxes and raise an army. It also included the separation of powers into the legislative , executive , and judicial branches.

[ 85 ] Return to New York Further information: Annapolis Convention (1786) Hamilton resigned from Congress in 1783.

[ 86 ] When the British left New York in 1783 , he practiced there in partnership with Richard Harison . He specialized in defending Tories and British subjects, as in Rutgers v. Waddington , in which he defeated a claim for damages done to a brewery by the Englishmen who held it during the military occupation of New York. He pleaded for the mayor's court to interpret state law consistent with the 1783 Treaty of Paris, which had ended the Revolutionary War.

[ 87 ] [ 44 ] : 64–69 In 1784, Hamilton founded the Bank of New York .

[ 88 ] Long dissatisfied with the Articles of Confederation as too weak to be effective, Hamilton played a major leadership role at the 1786 Annapolis Convention . He drafted its resolution for a constitutional convention, and in doing so brought one step closer to reality his longtime desire to have a more effectual, more financially self-sufficient federal government.

[ 89 ] As a member of the legislature of New York, Hamilton argued forcefully and at length in favor of a bill to recognize the sovereignty of the State of Vermont , against numerous objections to its constitutionality and policy. Consideration of the bill was deferred to a later date. From 1787 to 1789, Hamilton exchanged letters with Nathaniel Chipman , a lawyer representing Vermont. After the Constitution of the United States went into effect, Hamilton said, "One of the first subjects of deliberation with the new Congress will be the independence of Kentucky, for which the southern states will be anxious. The northern will be glad to send a counterpoise in Vermont." [ 90 ] Vermont was admitted to the Union in 1791.

[ 91 ] In 1788, he was awarded a Master of Arts degree from his alma mater , the former King's College, now reconstituted as Columbia College.

[ 92 ] It was during this post-war period that Hamilton served on the college's board of trustees , playing a part in the reopening of the college and placing it on firm financial footing.

[ 93 ] Constitution and The Federalist Papers Main articles: United States Constitution and The Federalist Papers Portrait of Hamilton authoring the first draft of the U.S. Constitution in 1787 In 1787, Hamilton served as assemblyman from New York County in the New York State Legislature and was chosen as a delegate at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia by his father-in-law Philip Schuyler .

[ 94 ] : 191 [ 95 ] Even though Hamilton had been a leader in calling for a new Constitutional Convention, his direct influence at the Convention itself was quite limited. Governor George Clinton 's faction in the New York legislature had chosen New York's other two delegates, John Lansing Jr.

and Robert Yates , and both of them opposed Hamilton's goal of a strong national government.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Thus, whenever the other two members of the New York delegation were present, they decided New York's vote, to ensure that there were no major alterations to the Articles of Confederation.

[ 94 ] : 195 Early in the convention, Hamilton made a speech proposing a president-for-life; it had no effect upon the deliberations of the convention.

He proposed to have an elected president and elected senators who would serve for life, contingent upon "good behavior" and subject to removal for corruption or abuse; this idea contributed later to the hostile view of Hamilton as a monarchist sympathizer, held by James Madison.

[ 98 ] According to Madison's notes, Hamilton said in regards to the executive, "The English model was the only good one on this subject. The hereditary interest of the king was so interwoven with that of the nation, and his personal emoluments so great, that he was placed above the danger of being corrupted from abroad... Let one executive be appointed for life who dares execute his powers." [ 99 ] Hamilton argued, "And let me observe that an executive is less dangerous to the liberties of the people when in office during life than for seven years. It may be said this constitutes as an elective monarchy ... But by making the executive subject to impeachment , the term 'monarchy' cannot apply ..." [ 99 ] In his notes of the convention, Madison interpreted Hamilton's proposal as claiming power for the "rich and well born". Madison's perspective all but isolated Hamilton from his fellow delegates and others who felt they did not reflect the ideas of revolution and liberty.

[ 100 ] During the convention, Hamilton constructed a draft for the Constitution based on the convention debates, but he never presented it. This draft had most of the features of the actual Constitution. In this draft, the Senate was to be elected in proportion to the population, being two-fifths the size of the House, and the president and senators were to be elected through complex multistage elections, in which chosen electors would elect smaller bodies of electors; they would hold office for life, but were removable for misconduct. The president would have an absolute veto. The Supreme Court was to have immediate jurisdiction over all lawsuits involving the United States, and state governors were to be appointed by the federal government.

[ 101 ] At the end of the convention, Hamilton was still not content with the final Constitution, but signed it anyway as a vast improvement over the Articles of Confederation, and urged his fellow delegates to do so also.

[ 102 ] Since the other two members of the New York delegation, Lansing and Yates, had already withdrawn, Hamilton was the only New York signer to the United States Constitution.

[ 94 ] : 206 He then took a highly active part in the successful campaign for the document's ratification in New York in 1788, which was a crucial step in its national ratification. He first used the popularity of the Constitution by the masses to compel George Clinton to sign, but was unsuccessful. The state convention in Poughkeepsie in June 1788 pitted Hamilton, Jay, James Duane , Robert Livingston , and Richard Morris against the Clintonian faction led by Melancton Smith , Lansing, Yates, and Gilbert Livingston .

[ 103 ] Clinton's faction wanted to amend the Constitution, while maintaining the state's right to secede if their attempts failed, and members of Hamilton's faction were against any conditional ratification, under the impression that New York would not be accepted into the Union. During the state convention, New Hampshire and Virginia becoming the ninth and tenth states to ratify the Constitution, respectively, had ensured any adjournment would not happen and a compromise would have to be reached.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Hamilton's arguments used for the ratifications were largely iterations of work from The Federalist Papers , and Smith eventually went for ratification, though it was more out of necessity than Hamilton's rhetoric.

[ 104 ] The vote in the state convention was ratified 30 to 27, on July 26, 1788.

[ 105 ] The Federalist Papers Hamilton recruited John Jay and James Madison to write The Federalist Papers , a series of essays, to defend the proposed Constitution. He made the largest contribution to that effort, writing 51 of the 85 essays published. Hamilton supervised the entire project, enlisted the participants, wrote the majority of the essays, and oversaw the publication. During the project, each person was responsible for their areas of expertise. Jay covered foreign relations. Madison covered the history of republics and confederacies, along with the anatomy of the new government. Hamilton covered the branches of government most pertinent to him: the executive and judicial branches, with some aspects of the Senate, as well as covering military matters and taxation.

[ 106 ] The papers first appeared in The Independent Journal on October 27, 1787.

[ 106 ] Hamilton wrote the first paper signed as Publius , and all of the subsequent papers were signed under the name.

[ 94 ] : 210 Jay wrote the next four papers to elaborate on the confederation's weakness and the need for unity against foreign aggression and against splitting into rival confederacies, and, except for No. 64 , was not further involved.

[ 107 ] [ 94 ] : 211 Hamilton's highlights included discussion that although republics have been culpable for disorders in the past, advances in the "science of politics" had fostered principles that ensured that those abuses could be prevented, such as the division of powers, legislative checks and balances, an independent judiciary, and legislators that were represented by electors (No. 7–9).

[ 107 ] Hamilton also wrote an extensive defense of the constitution (No. 23–36), and discussed the Senate and executive and judicial branches (No. 65–85). Hamilton and Madison worked to describe the anarchic state of the confederation (No. 15–22), and the two have been described as not being significantly different in thought during this time period—in contrast to their stark opposition later in life.

[ 107 ] Subtle differences appeared with the two when discussing the necessity of standing armies.

[ 107 ] First U.S. secretary of the treasury (1789–1795) A statue of Hamilton on the south patio of the Treasury Building in Washington, D.C.

In 1789, Washington—who had become the first president of the United States —appointed Hamilton to be his cabinet's Secretary of the Treasury on the advice of Robert Morris , Washington's initial pick.

[ 108 ] On September 11, 1789, Hamilton was nominated and confirmed in the Senate [ 109 ] and sworn in the same day as the first United States secretary of the treasury .

[ 110 ] Report on Public Credit Main article: First Report on the Public Credit Before the adjournment of the House in September 1789, they requested Hamilton to make a report on suggestions to improve the public credit by January 1790.

[ 111 ] Hamilton had written to Morris as early as 1781, that fixing the public credit will win their objective of independence.

[ 111 ] The sources that Hamilton used ranged from Frenchmen such as Jacques Necker and Montesquieu to British writers such as Hume , Hobbes , and Malachy Postlethwayt .

[ 112 ] While writing the report he also sought out suggestions from contemporaries such as John Witherspoon and Madison. Although they agreed on additional taxes such as distilleries and duties on imported liquors and land taxes, Madison feared that the securities from the government debt would fall into foreign hands.

[ 113 ] [ 94 ] : 244–245 Hamilton divided the debt into national and state, and further divided the national debt into foreign and domestic debt. While there was agreement on how to handle the foreign debt, especially with France, there was not with regards to the national debt held by domestic creditors. During the Revolutionary War, affluent citizens had invested in bonds, and war veterans had been paid with promissory notes and IOUs that plummeted in price during the Confederation. In response, the war veterans sold the securities to speculators for as little as fifteen to twenty cents on the dollar.

[ 112 ] [ 114 ] Hamilton felt the money from the bonds should not go to the soldiers who had shown little faith in the country's future, but the speculators that had bought the bonds from the soldiers. The process of attempting to track down the original bondholders along with the government showing discrimination among the classes of holders if the war veterans were to be compensated also weighed in as factors for Hamilton. As for the state debts, Hamilton suggested consolidating them with the national debt and label it as federal debt, for the sake of efficiency on a national scale.

[ 112 ] In the report, Hamilton felt that the securities should be paid at full value to their legitimate owners, including those who took the financial risk of buying government bonds that most experts thought would never be redeemed. He argued that liberty and property security were inseparable, and that the government should honor the contracts, as they formed the basis of public and private morality. To Hamilton, the proper handling of the government debt would also allow America to borrow at affordable interest rates and would also be a stimulant to the economy.

[ 112 ] The last portion of the report dealt with eliminating the debt by utilizing a sinking fund that would retire five percent of the debt annually until it was paid off. Due to the bonds being traded well below their face value, the purchases would benefit the government as the securities rose in price.

[ 115 ] : 300 When the report was submitted to the House of Representatives, detractors soon began to speak against it. Some of the negative views expressed in the House were that the notion of programs that resembled British practice were wicked, and that the balance of power would be shifted away from the representatives to the executive branch.

William Maclay suspected that several congressmen were involved in government securities, seeing Congress in an unholy league with New York speculators.

[ 115 ] : 302 Congressman James Jackson also spoke against New York, with allegations of speculators attempting to swindle those who had not yet heard about Hamilton's report.

[ 115 ] : 303 The involvement of those in Hamilton's circle such as Schuyler, William Duer , James Duane , Gouverneur Morris, and Rufus King as speculators was not favorable to those against the report, either, though Hamilton personally did not own or deal a share in the debt.

[ 115 ] : 304 [ 94 ] : 250 Madison eventually spoke against it by February 1790. Although he was not against current holders of government debt to profit, he wanted the windfall to go to the original holders. Madison did not feel that the original holders had lost faith in the government but sold their securities out of desperation.

[ 115 ] : 305 The compromise was seen as egregious to both Hamiltonians and their dissidents such as Maclay, and Madison's vote was defeated 36 votes to 13 on February 22.

[ 115 ] : 305 [ 94 ] : 255 The fight for the national government to assume state debt was a longer issue and lasted over four months. During the period, the resources that Hamilton was to apply to the payment of state debts was requested by Alexander White , and was rejected due to Hamilton's not being able to prepare information by March 3, and was even postponed by his own supporters in spite of configuring a report the next day, which consisted of a series of additional duties to meet the interest on the state debts.

[ 94 ] : 297–298 Duer resigned as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, and the vote of assumption was voted down 31 votes to 29 on April 12.

[ 94 ] : 258–259 During this period, Hamilton bypassed the rising issue of slavery in Congress, after Quakers petitioned for its abolition, returning to the issue the following year.

[ 116 ] Another issue in which Hamilton played a role was the temporary location of the capital from New York City.

Tench Coxe was sent to speak to Maclay to bargain about the capital being temporarily located to Philadelphia, as a single vote in the Senate was needed and five in the House for the bill to pass.

[ 94 ] : 263 Thomas Jefferson wrote years afterward that Hamilton had a discussion with him, around this time period, about the capital of the United States being relocated to Virginia by means of a "pill" that "would be peculiarly bitter to the Southern States, and that some concomitant measure should be adopted to sweeten it a little to them".

[ 94 ] : 263 The bill passed in the Senate on July 21 and in the House 34 votes to 28 on July 26, 1790.

[ 94 ] : 263 Report on a National Bank Further information: History of central banking in the United States The First Bank of the United States in Philadelphia , commissioned by Hamilton when the nation adopted a single currency Hamilton's Report on a National Bank was a projection from the first Report on the Public Credit . Although Hamilton had been forming ideas of a national bank as early as 1779, [ 94 ] : 268 he had gathered ideas in various ways over the past eleven years. These included theories from Adam Smith, [ 117 ] extensive studies on the Bank of England , the blunders of the Bank of North America and his experience in establishing the Bank of New York.

[ 118 ] He also used American records from James Wilson , Pelatiah Webster, Gouverneur Morris, and from his assistant treasury secretary Tench Coxe.

[ 118 ] He thought that this plan for a National Bank could help in any sort of financial crisis.

[ 119 ] Hamilton suggested that Congress should charter the national bank with a capitalization of $10 million, one-fifth of which would be handled by the government. Since the government did not have the money, it would borrow the money from the bank itself, and repay the loan in ten even annual installments.

[ 44 ] : 194 The rest was to be available to individual investors.

[ 120 ] The bank was to be governed by a twenty-five-member board of directors that was to represent a large majority of the private shareholders, which Hamilton considered essential for his being under a private direction.

[ 94 ] : 268 Hamilton's bank model had many similarities to that of the Bank of England, except Hamilton wanted to exclude the government from being involved in public debt , but provide a large, firm, and elastic money supply for the functioning of normal businesses and usual economic development, among other differences.

[ 44 ] : 194–195 The tax revenue to initiate the bank was the same as he had previously proposed, increases on imported spirits: rum, liquor, and whiskey.

[ 44 ] : 195–196 The bill passed through the Senate practically without a problem, but objections to the proposal increased by the time it reached the House of Representatives. It was generally held by critics that Hamilton was serving the interests of the Northeast by means of the bank, [ 121 ] and those of the agrarian lifestyle would not benefit from it.

[ 94 ] : 270 Among those critics was James Jackson of Georgia, who also attempted to refute the report by quoting from The Federalist Papers .

[ 94 ] : 270 Madison and Jefferson also opposed the bank bill. The potential of the capital not being moved to the Potomac if the bank was to have a firm establishment in Philadelphia was a more significant reason, and actions that Pennsylvania members of Congress took to keep the capital there made both men anxious.

[ 44 ] : 199–200 The Whiskey Rebellion also showed how in other financial plans, there was a distance between the classes as the wealthy profited from the taxes.

[ 122 ] Madison warned the Pennsylvania congress members that he would attack the bill as unconstitutional in the House, and followed up on his threat. Madison argued his case of where the power of a bank could be established within the Constitution, but he failed to sway members of the House, and his authority on the constitution was questioned by a few members.

[ 44 ] : 200–201 The bill eventually passed in an overwhelming fashion 39 to 20, on February 8, 1791.

[ 94 ] : 271 Washington hesitated to sign the bill, as he received suggestions from Attorney General Edmund Randolph and Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson dismissed the Necessary and Proper Clause as reasoning for the creation of a national bank, stating that the enumerated powers "can all be carried into execution without a bank." [ 94 ] : 271–272 Along with Randolph and Jefferson's objections, Washington's involvement in the movement of the capital from Philadelphia is also thought to be a reason for his hesitation.

[ 44 ] : 202–203 In response to the objection of the clause, Hamilton stated that "Necessary often means no more than needful, requisite, incidental, useful, or conductive to", and the bank was a "convenient species of medium in which [taxes] are to be paid." [ 94 ] : 272–273 Washington would eventually sign the bill into law.

[ 94 ] : 272–273 Hamilton's push for a national bank was not an isolated event but a broader, long-running effort to establish a central banking system in the United States—one that would ultimately result in the Federal Reserve .

[ 123 ] While Hamilton's vision laid the groundwork for a structured financial system, the concept of centralized banking has remained one of the most polarizing economic debates in American history, garnering both staunch criticism and fervent support from economists and the public alike.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Establishing the mint Main article: United States Mint The Turban Head eagle was one of the first gold coins minted under the Coinage Act of 1792 .

In 1791, Hamilton submitted the Report on the Establishment of a Mint to the House of Representatives. Many of Hamilton's ideas for this report were from European economists, resolutions from the 1785 and 1786 Continental Congress meetings, and people such as Robert Morris, Gouverneur Morris and Thomas Jefferson.

[ 44 ] : 197 [ 126 ] Because the most circulated coins in the United States at the time were Spanish currency , Hamilton proposed that minting a United States dollar weighing almost as much as the Spanish peso would be the simplest way to introduce a national currency.

[ 127 ] Hamilton differed from European monetary policymakers in his desire to overprice gold relative to silver, on the grounds that the United States would always receive an influx of silver from the West Indies.

[ 44 ] : 197 Despite his own preference for a monometallic gold standard , [ 128 ] he ultimately issued a bimetallic currency at a fixed 15:1 ratio of silver to gold.

[ 44 ] : 197 [ 129 ] [ 130 ] Hamilton proposed that the U.S. dollar should have fractional coins using decimals, rather than eighths like the Spanish coinage.

[ 131 ] This innovation was originally suggested by Superintendent of Finance Robert Morris , with whom Hamilton corresponded after examining one of Morris's Nova Constellatio coins in 1783.

[ 132 ] He also desired the minting of small value coins, such as silver ten-cent and copper cent and half-cent pieces, for reducing the cost of living for the poor.

[ 44 ] : 198 [ 118 ] One of his main objectives was for the general public to become accustomed to handling money on a frequent basis.

[ 44 ] : 198 By 1792, Hamilton's principles were adopted by Congress, resulting in the Coinage Act of 1792 , and the creation of the mint. There was to be a ten-dollar gold Eagle coin, a silver dollar, and fractional money ranging from one-half to fifty cents.

[ 128 ] The coining of silver and gold was issued by 1795.

[ 128 ] Revenue Cutter Service Main article: United States Revenue Cutter Service A 19th-century portrait of a Revenue Marine cutter, which may be of either the USRC Massachusetts or its replacement, the Massachusetts II Smuggling off American coasts was an issue before the Revolutionary War, and after the Revolution it was more problematic. Along with smuggling, lack of shipping control, pirating, and a revenue imbalance were also major problems.

[ 133 ] In response, Hamilton proposed to Congress to enact a naval police force called revenue cutters in order to patrol the waters and assist the custom collectors with confiscating contraband.

[ 134 ] This idea was also proposed to assist in tariff controlling, boosting the American economy, and promote the merchant marine.

[ 133 ] It is thought that his experience obtained during his apprenticeship with Nicholas Kruger was influential in his decision-making.

[ 135 ] Concerning some of the details of the System of Cutters, [ 136 ] Hamilton wanted the first ten cutters in different areas in the United States, from New England to Georgia.

[ 134 ] [ 137 ] Each of those cutters was to be armed with ten muskets and bayonets, twenty pistols, two chisels, one broad-ax and two lanterns. The fabric of the sails was to be domestically manufactured; [ 134 ] and provisions were made for the employees' food supply and etiquette when boarding ships.

[ 134 ] Congress established the Revenue Cutter Service on August 4, 1790, which is viewed as the birth of the United States Coast Guard .

[ 133 ] Whiskey as tax revenue See also: Whiskey Rebellion Hamilton in 1792, painted by John Trumbull One of the principal sources of revenue Hamilton prevailed upon Congress to approve was an excise tax on whiskey. In his first Tariff Bill in January 1790, Hamilton proposed to raise the three million dollars needed to pay for government operating expenses and interest on domestic and foreign debts by means of an increase on duties on imported wines, distilled spirits, tea, coffee, and domestic spirits. It failed, with Congress complying with most recommendations excluding the excise tax on whiskey. The same year, Madison modified Hamilton's tariff to involve only imported duties; it was passed in September.

[ 138 ] In response of diversifying revenues, as three-fourths of revenue gathered was from commerce with Great Britain, Hamilton attempted once again during his Report on Public Credit when presenting it in 1790 to implement an excise tax on both imported and domestic spirits.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] The taxation rate was graduated in proportion to the whiskey proof, and Hamilton intended to equalize the tax burden on imported spirits with imported and domestic liquor.

[ 140 ] In lieu of the excise on production citizens could pay 60 cents by the gallon of dispensing capacity, along with an exemption on small stills used exclusively for domestic consumption.

[ 140 ] He realized the loathing that the tax would receive in rural areas, but thought of the taxing of spirits more reasonable than land taxes.

[ 139 ] Opposition initially came from Pennsylvania's House of Representatives protesting the tax. William Maclay had noted that not even the Pennsylvanian legislators had been able to enforce excise taxes in the western regions of the state.

[ 139 ] Hamilton was aware of the potential difficulties and proposed inspectors the ability to search buildings that distillers were designated to store their spirits, and would be able to search suspected illegal storage facilities to confiscate contraband with a warrant.

[ 141 ] Although the inspectors were not allowed to search houses and warehouses, they were to visit twice a day and file weekly reports in extensive detail.

[ 139 ] Hamilton cautioned against expedited judicial means, and favored a jury trial with potential offenders.

[ 141 ] As soon as 1791, locals began to shun or threaten inspectors, as they felt the inspection methods were intrusive.

[ 139 ] Inspectors were also tarred and feathered , blindfolded, and whipped. Hamilton had attempted to appease the opposition with lowered tax rates, but it did not suffice.

[ 142 ] Strong opposition to the whiskey tax by cottage producers in remote, rural regions erupted into the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794; in Western Pennsylvania and western Virginia , whiskey was the basic export product and was fundamental to the local economy. In response to the rebellion, believing compliance with the laws was vital to the establishment of federal authority, Hamilton accompanied to the rebellion's site President Washington, General Henry "Light Horse Harry" Lee , and more federal troops than Washington had usually commanded during the Revolution.

[ 143 ] This overwhelming display of force intimidated the leaders of the insurrection, ending the rebellion virtually without bloodshed.

[ 144 ] Manufacturing and industry Further information: Report on Manufactures The Great Falls of the Passaic River in Paterson, New Jersey , which Hamilton envisioned using to power new factories Hamilton's next report was his Report on Manufactures . Although he was requested by Congress on January 15, 1790, for a report for manufacturing that would expand the United States' independence, the report was not submitted until December 5, 1791.

[ 94 ] : 274, 277 In the report, Hamilton quoted from The Wealth of Nations and used the French physiocrats as an example for rejecting agrarianism and the physiocratic theory, respectively.

[ 44 ] : 233 Hamilton also refuted Smith's ideas of government noninterference, as it would have been detrimental for trade with other countries.

[ 44 ] : 244 Hamilton also thought that the United States, being a primarily agrarian country, would be at a disadvantage in dealing with Europe.

[ 145 ] In response to the agrarian detractors, Hamilton stated that the agriculturists' interest would be advanced by manufactures, and that agriculture was just as productive as manufacturing.

[ 44 ] : 233 [ 94 ] : 276 Hamilton argued for industrial policy to support a modern manufacturing industry in the United States.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Among the ways that the government should assist manufacturing, Hamilton argued for government assistance to " infant industries " so they can achieve economies of scale , by levying protective duties on imported foreign goods that were also manufactured in the United States, [ 148 ] for withdrawing duties levied on raw materials needed for domestic manufacturing, [ 94 ] : 277 [ 148 ] and pecuniary boundaries.

[ 94 ] : 277 He also encouraged immigration as a way to improve the American work force.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] Congress shelved the report without much debate, except for Madison's objection to Hamilton's formulation of the general welfare clause , which Hamilton construed liberally as a legal basis for his extensive programs.

[ 150 ] In 1791, Hamilton, along with Coxe and several entrepreneurs from New York City and Philadelphia formed the Society for the Establishment of Useful Manufactures , a private industrial corporation. In May 1792, the directors decided to examine the Great Falls of the Passaic River in New Jersey as a possible location for a manufacturing center. On July 4, 1792, the society directors met Philip Schuyler at Abraham Godwin 's hotel on the Passaic River, where they led a tour prospecting the area for the national manufactory. It was originally suggested that they dig mile-long trenches and build the factories away from the falls, but Hamilton argued that it would be too costly and laborious.

[ 151 ] The location at Great Falls of the Passaic River in New Jersey was selected due to access to raw materials, it being densely inhabited, and having access to water power from the falls of the Passaic.

[ 44 ] : 231 The factory town was named Paterson after New Jersey's Governor William Paterson , who signed the charter.

[ 44 ] : 232 [ 152 ] The profits were to derive from specific corporates rather than the benefits to be conferred to the nation and the citizens, which was unlike the report.

[ 153 ] Hamilton also suggested the first stock to be offered at $500,000 and to eventually increase to $1 million, and welcomed state and federal government subscriptions alike.

[ 94 ] : 280 [ 153 ] The company was never successful, with numerous shareholders reneged on stock payments and some going bankrupt.

William Duer , the governor of the program, was sent to debtors' prison, where he died.

[ 154 ] In spite of Hamilton's efforts to mend the disaster, the company folded.

[ 152 ] Jay Treaty Main article: Jay Treaty When France and Britain went to war in early 1793, all four members of the Cabinet were consulted on what to do. They and Washington unanimously agreed to remain neutral, and to have the French ambassador who was raising privateers and mercenaries on American soil, Edmond-Charles Genêt , recalled.

[ 155 ] : 336–341 However, in 1794, policy toward Britain became a major point of contention between the two parties. Hamilton and the Federalists wished for more trade with Britain, the largest trading partner of the newly formed United States. The Republicans saw monarchist Britain as the main threat to republicanism and proposed instead to start a trade war.

[ 94 ] : 327–328 To avoid war, Washington sent Chief Justice John Jay to negotiate with the British, with Hamilton largely writing Jay's instructions. The result was a treaty denounced by the Republicans, but Hamilton mobilized support throughout the land.

[ 156 ] The Jay Treaty passed the Senate in 1795 by exactly the required two-thirds majority. The treaty resolved issues remaining from the Revolution, averted war, and made possible ten years of peaceful trade between the United States and Britain.

[ 155 ] : Ch 9 Historian George Herring notes the "remarkable and fortuitous economic and diplomatic gains" produced by the Treaty.

[ 157 ] Several European states had formed the Second League of Armed Neutrality against incursions on their neutral rights; the cabinet was also consulted on whether the United States should join the alliance and decided not to. It kept that decision secret, but Hamilton revealed it in private to George Hammond, the British minister to the United States, without telling Jay or anyone else. His act remained unknown until Hammond's dispatches were read in the 1920s. This revelation may have had limited effect on the negotiations; Jay did threaten to join the League at one point, but the British had other reasons not to view the alliance as a serious threat.

[ 155 ] : 411–412 [ 158 ] Resignation from public office See also: Second Report on Public Credit Hamilton's wife suffered a miscarriage [ 159 ] while he was absent during his armed repression of the Whiskey Rebellion.

[ 160 ] In the wake of this, Hamilton tendered his resignation from office on December 1, 1794, giving Washington two months' notice, [ 161 ] Before leaving his post on January 31, 1795, Hamilton submitted the Report on a Plan for the Further Support of Public Credit to Congress to curb the debt problem. Hamilton grew dissatisfied with what he viewed as a lack of a comprehensive plan to fix the public debt. He wished to have new taxes passed with older ones made permanent and stated that any surplus from the excise tax on liquor would be pledged to lower public debt. His proposals were included in a bill by Congress within slightly over a month after his departure as treasury secretary.

[ 162 ] Some months later, Hamilton resumed his law practice in New York to remain closer to his family.

[ 163 ] Emergence of political parties Further information: Federalist Party and Democratic-Republican Party A 1791 portrait of Hamilton's political rival Thomas Jefferson Hamilton's vision was challenged by Virginia agrarians Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, who formed the Democratic-Republican Party . They favored strong state governments based in rural America and protected by state militias as opposed to a strong national government supported by a national army and navy. They denounced Hamilton as insufficiently devoted to republicanism, too friendly toward corrupt Britain and the monarchy in general, and too oriented toward cities, industry and banking.

[ 164 ] The two-party system began to emerge as political parties coalesced around competing interests. A congressional caucus, led by Madison, Jefferson, and William Branch Giles , began as an opposition group to Hamilton's financial programs. Hamilton and his allies began to call themselves the Federalists .

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Hamilton assembled a nationwide coalition to garner support for the administration, including the expansive financial programs Hamilton had made administration policy and especially the president's policy of neutrality in the European war between Britain and France. Hamilton publicly denounced French minister Genêt, who commissioned American privateers and recruited Americans for private militias to attack British ships and colonial possessions of British allies. Eventually, even Jefferson joined Hamilton in seeking Genêt's recall.

[ 167 ] If Hamilton's administrative republic was to succeed, Americans had to see themselves first as citizens of a nation and experience an administration that proved firm and demonstrated the concepts found within the Constitution.

[ 168 ] The Federalists did impose some internal direct taxes, but they departed from most implications of Hamilton's administrative republic as risky.

[ 169 ] The Republicans opposed banks and cities and favored the series of unstable revolutionary governments in France. They built their own national coalition to oppose the Federalists. Both sides gained the support of local political factions, and each side developed its own partisan newspapers.

Noah Webster , John Fenno , and William Cobbett were energetic editors for the Federalists, while Benjamin Franklin Bache and Philip Freneau were fiery Republican editors. All of their newspapers were characterized by intense personal attacks, major exaggerations, and invented claims. In 1801, Hamilton established a daily newspaper, the New York Evening Post , and brought in William Coleman as its editor.

[ 170 ] Hamilton's and Jefferson's incompatibility was heightened by the unavowed wish of each to be Washington's principal and most trusted advisor.

[ 171 ] An additional partisan irritant to Hamilton was the 1791 United States Senate election in New York , which resulted in the election of Democratic-Republican candidate Aaron Burr over Federalist candidate Philip Schuyler, the incumbent and Hamilton's father-in-law. Hamilton blamed Burr personally for this outcome, and negative characterizations of Burr began to appear in his correspondence thereafter. The two men did work together from time to time thereafter on various projects, including Hamilton's army of 1798 and the Manhattan Water Company .

[ 172 ] 1796 presidential election Main article: 1796 United States presidential election Hamilton's resignation as secretary of the treasury in 1795 did not remove him from public life. With the resumption of his law practice, he remained close to Washington as an advisor and friend. Hamilton influenced Washington in the composition of his farewell address by writing drafts for Washington to compare with the latter's draft, although when Washington contemplated retirement in 1792, he had consulted Madison for a draft that was used in a similar manner to Hamilton's.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] In the election of 1796 , under the Constitution as it stood then, each of the presidential electors had two votes, which they were to cast for different men from different states. The one who received the most votes would become president, the second-most, vice president. This system was not designed with the operation of parties in mind, as they had been thought disreputable and factious. The Federalists planned to deal with this by having all their electors vote for John Adams , then vice president, and all but a few for Thomas Pinckney .

[ 175 ] Adams resented Hamilton's influence with Washington and considered him overambitious and scandalous in his private life; Hamilton compared Adams unfavorably with Washington and thought him too emotionally unstable to be president.

[ 176 ] Hamilton took the election as an opportunity: he urged all the northern electors to vote for Adams and Pinckney, lest Jefferson get in; but he cooperated with Edward Rutledge to have South Carolina's electors vote for Jefferson and Pinckney. If all this worked, Pinckney would have more votes than Adams, Pinckney would become president, and Adams would remain vice president, but it did not work. The Federalists found out about it and northern Federalists voted for Adams but not for Pinckney, in sufficient numbers that Pinckney came in third and Jefferson became vice president.

[ 177 ] Adams resented the intrigue since he felt his service to the nation was much more extensive than Pinckney's.

[ 178 ] Reynolds affair Main article: Hamilton–Reynolds affair James Monroe , a Democratic-Republican congressman and Hamilton's political rival In summer 1797, Hamilton became the first major American politician publicly involved in a sex scandal.

[ 179 ] Six years earlier, in  summer 1791, 34-year-old Hamilton became involved in an affair with 23-year-old Maria Reynolds . According to Hamilton, Maria approached him at his house in Philadelphia , claiming that her husband James Reynolds was abusive and had abandoned her, and she wished to return to her relatives in New York but lacked the means.

[ 94 ] : 366–369 Hamilton recorded her address and subsequently delivered $30 personally to her boarding house, where she led him into her bedroom and "Some conversation ensued from which it was quickly apparent that other than pecuniary consolation would be acceptable". The two began an intermittent illicit affair that lasted approximately until June 1792.

[ 180 ] James Reynolds was aware of his wife's infidelity, and likely orchestrated it from the beginning. He continually supported their relationship to extort blackmail money regularly from Hamilton. The common practice of the day for men of equal social standing was for the wronged husband to seek retribution in a duel. But Reynolds, of a lower social status and realizing how much Hamilton had to lose if his activity was made public, resorted to extortion.

[ 181 ] After an initial request of $1,000, [ 182 ] with which Hamilton complied, Reynolds invited Hamilton to renew his visits to his wife "as a friend" [ 183 ] only to extort forced "loans" after each visit that, most likely in collusion, Maria solicited with her letters. In the end, the blackmail payments totaled over $1,300 including the initial extortion.

[ 94 ] : 369 Hamilton at this point may have been aware of both spouses being involved in the blackmail, [ 184 ] and he welcomed and strictly complied with James Reynolds' eventual request to end the affair.

[ 180 ] [ 185 ] In November 1792, James Reynolds and his associate Jacob Clingman were arrested for counterfeiting and speculating in Revolutionary War veterans' unpaid back wages. Clingman was released on bail and relayed information to Democratic-Republican congressman James Monroe that Reynolds had evidence incriminating Hamilton in illicit activity as Treasury Secretary. Monroe consulted with congressmen Muhlenberg and Venable on what actions to take and the congressmen confronted Hamilton on December 15, 1792.

[ 180 ] Hamilton refuted the suspicions of financial speculation by exposing his affair with Maria and producing as evidence the letters by both of the Reynolds, proving that his payments to James Reynolds related to blackmail over his adultery, and not to treasury misconduct. The trio agreed on their honor to keep the documents privately with the utmost confidence.

[ 94 ] : 366–369 Five years later however, in the summer of 1797, the "notoriously scurrilous" journalist James T. Callender published A History of the United States for the Year 1796 .

[ 44 ] : 334 The pamphlet contained accusations based on documents from the confrontation of December 15, 1792, taken out of context, that James Reynolds had been an agent of Hamilton. On July 5, 1797, Hamilton wrote to Monroe, [ 186 ] Muhlenberg, [ 187 ] and Venable, [ 188 ] asking them to confirm that there was nothing that would damage the perception of his integrity while Secretary of Treasury. All but Monroe complied with Hamilton's request. This led to Hamilton and Monroe engaging in an argument that almost culminated in a duel, before the conflict was averted by Aaron Burr.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Hamilton then published a 100-page booklet, later usually referred to as the Reynolds Pamphlet , and discussed the affair in indelicate detail for the time. Hamilton's wife Elizabeth eventually forgave him, but never forgave Monroe.

[ 191 ] Although Hamilton faced ridicule from the Democratic-Republican faction, he maintained his availability for public service.

[ 44 ] : 334–336 Quasi-War Main article: Quasi-War During the military build-up preceding the Quasi-War with France, and with the strong endorsement of Washington, Adams reluctantly appointed Hamilton a major general of the army. At Washington's insistence, Hamilton was made the senior major general prompting Henry Knox, who had served as United States Secretary of War and years earlier in wartime as a Continental Army major general, to decline the appointment to serve as Hamilton's junior believing it would be degrading to rank beneath him.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] Hamilton served as inspector general of the United States Army from July 18, 1798, to June 15, 1800. Because Washington was unwilling to leave Mount Vernon unless it were to command an army in the field, Hamilton was the de facto head of the army, to Adams's considerable displeasure. If full-scale war broke out with France, Hamilton argued that the army should conquer the North American colonies of France's ally, Spain, bordering the United States.

[ 194 ] Hamilton was prepared to march the army through the Southern United States if necessary.

[ 195 ] To fund the army, Hamilton wrote regularly to Oliver Wolcott Jr.

, his successor at the treasury, Representative William Loughton Smith , and U.S. senator Theodore Sedgwick . He urged them to pass a direct tax to fund the war. Smith resigned in July 1797, as Hamilton complained to him for slowness, and urged Wolcott to tax houses instead of land.

[ 196 ] The eventual program included taxes on land, houses, and slaves, calculated at different rates in different states and requiring assessment of houses, and a stamp act like that of the British before the Revolution, though this time Americans were taxing themselves through their own representatives.

[ 197 ] This provoked resistance in southeastern Pennsylvania nevertheless, led primarily by men such as John Fries who had marched with Washington against the Whiskey Rebellion.

[ 198 ] Hamilton aided in all areas of the army's development, and after Washington's death he was by default the senior officer of the United States Army from December 14, 1799, to June 15, 1800. The army was to guard against invasion from France. Adams, however, derailed all plans for war by opening negotiations with France that led to peace.

[ 199 ] There was no longer a direct threat for the army Hamilton was commanding to respond to.

[ 200 ] Adams discovered that key members of his cabinet, namely Secretary of State Timothy Pickering and Secretary of War James McHenry , were more loyal to Hamilton than himself; Adams fired them in May 1800.

[ 201 ] 1800 presidential election Main article: 1800 United States presidential election Prior to running for Governor of New York , Hamilton's foe Aaron Burr was shut out of President Jefferson's administration and the Democratic-Republican Party.

In November 1799, the Alien and Sedition Acts had left one Democratic-Republican newspaper functioning in New York City. When the last newspaper, the New Daily Advertiser , reprinted an article saying that Hamilton had attempted to purchase the Philadelphia Aurora to close it down, and said the purchase could have been funded by "British secret service money". Hamilton urged the New York Attorney General to prosecute the publisher for seditious libel , and the prosecution compelled the owner to close the paper.

[ 202 ] In the 1800 presidential election , Hamilton worked to defeat both the Democratic-Republicans and also his party's own nominee, John Adams.

[ 94 ] : 392–399 Aaron Burr had won New York for Jefferson in May via the New York City legislative elections, as the legislature was to choose New York's electors; now Hamilton proposed a direct election, with carefully drawn districts where each district's voters would choose an elector—such that the Federalists would split the electoral vote of New York. Jay, who had resigned from the Supreme Court to become Governor of New York, wrote on the back of a letter, "Proposing a measure for party purposes which it would not become me to adopt," and declined to reply.

[ 203 ] Adams was running this time with Charles Cotesworth Pinckney , the elder brother of former vice presidential candidate Thomas. Hamilton toured New England, again urging northern electors to hold firm for Pinckney in the renewed hope of making Pinckney president; and he again intrigued in South Carolina.

[ 44 ] : 350–351 Hamilton's ideas involved coaxing middle-state Federalists to assert their non-support for Adams if there was no support for Pinckney and writing to more of the modest supports of Adams concerning his supposed misconduct while president.

[ 44 ] : 350–351 Hamilton expected to see southern states such as the Carolinas cast their votes for Pinckney and Jefferson, and would result in the former being ahead of both Adams and Jefferson.

[ 94 ] : 394–395 In accordance with these plans, and a recent personal rift with Adams, [ 44 ] : 351 Hamilton wrote a pamphlet called Letter from Alexander Hamilton, Concerning the Public Conduct and Character of John Adams, Esq. President of the United States that was highly critical of him, though it closed with a tepid endorsement.

[ 94 ] : 396 Jefferson defeated Adams. But both he and Aaron Burr received 73 votes in the Electoral College. With Jefferson and Burr tied, the U.S. House of Representatives , under electoral laws of the time, had to choose between the two candidates.

[ 44 ] : 352 [ 94 ] : 399 Several Federalists who opposed Jefferson supported Burr, and for the first 35 ballots, Jefferson was denied a majority. Before the 36th ballot, Hamilton threw his weight behind Jefferson, supporting the arrangement reached by James A. Bayard of Delaware, in which five Federalist representatives from Maryland and Vermont abstained from voting, allowing those states' delegations to go for Jefferson, ending the impasse and electing Jefferson president rather than Burr.

[ 44 ] : 350–351 Even though Hamilton disliked Jefferson and disagreed with him on many issues, he viewed Jefferson as the lesser of two evils . Hamilton spoke of Jefferson as being "by far not so a dangerous man" and of Burr as a "mischievous enemy" to the principal measure of the past administration.

[ 204 ] It was for that reason, along with the fact that Burr was a northerner and not a Virginian, that many Federalist representatives voted for him.

[ 205 ] [ contradictory ] Hamilton wrote many letters to friends in Congress to convince the members to see otherwise.

[ 44 ] : 352 [ 94 ] : 401 In the end, Burr would become vice president after losing to Jefferson.

[ 206 ] However, according to several historians, the Federalists had rejected Hamilton's diatribe as reasons to not vote for Burr.

[ 44 ] : 353 [ 94 ] : 401 In his book American Machiavelli: Alexander Hamilton and the Origins of US Foreign Policy , historian John Lamberton Harper stated Hamilton could have "perhaps" contributed "to a degree" in Burr's defeat.

[ 207 ] Ron Chernow, alternatively, claimed that Hamilton "squelched" Burr's chance at becoming president.

[ 208 ] When it became clear that Jefferson had developed his own concerns about Burr and would not support his return to the vice presidency, [ 206 ] Burr sought the New York governorship in 1804 with Federalist support, against the Jeffersonian Morgan Lewis , but was defeated by forces including Hamilton.

[ 209 ] Duel with Burr and death Main article: Burr–Hamilton duel A 1901 illustration of Burr fatally wounding Hamilton in their 1804 duel in Weehawken, New Jersey Hamilton's tomb in Trinity Church Cemetery in Lower Manhattan Soon after Lewis' gubernatorial victory, the Albany Register published Charles D. Cooper 's letters, citing Hamilton's opposition to Burr and alleging that Hamilton had expressed "a still more despicable opinion" of the vice president at an Upstate New York dinner party.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Cooper claimed that the letter was intercepted after relaying the information, but stated he was "unusually cautious" in recollecting the information from the dinner.

[ 212 ] Sensing an attack on his honor, and recovering from his defeat, Burr demanded an apology in the form of a letter. Hamilton wrote a letter in response and ultimately refused because he could not recall the instance of insulting Burr. Hamilton was also accused of recanting Cooper's letter out of cowardice.

[ 94 ] : 423–424 After a series of attempts to reconcile differences between the two failed, a duel was arranged through liaisons on June 27, 1804.

[ 94 ] : 426 The concept of honor was fundamental to Hamilton's vision of himself and of the nation.

[ 213 ] As evidence of the importance that honor held in Hamilton's value system, historians observe that Hamilton previously was a party to seven "affairs of honor" as a principal, and to three as an advisor or second.

[ 214 ] Such affairs of honor were often concluded prior to reaching the final stage of a duel.

[ 214 ] Before the duel, Hamilton wrote an explanation of his decision to participate while at the same time intending to " throw away " his shot.

[ 215 ] His desire to be available for future political matters also played a factor.

[ 210 ] A week before the duel, Hamilton and Burr both attended an annual Independence Day dinner held by the Society of the Cincinnati . Separate accounts confirm that Hamilton was uncharacteristically effusive while Burr was, by contrast, uncharacteristically withdrawn. Accounts also agree that Burr became roused when Hamilton, again uncharacteristically, sang a favorite song, which recent scholarship indicates was " How Stands the Glass Around ", an anthem sung by military troops about fighting and dying in war.

[ 216 ] The duel began at dawn on July 11, 1804, along the west bank of the Hudson River on a rocky ledge in Weehawken, New Jersey .

[ 217 ] Both opponents were rowed over from Manhattan separately from different locations, since the location of the duel was not accessible from the west due to the steepness of the adjoining cliffs. Coincidentally, the duel took place relatively close to the location of the duel that had ended the life of Hamilton's eldest son, Philip Hamilton , three years earlier.

[ 218 ] Lots were cast for the choice of position and which second should start the duel. Both were won by Hamilton's second, who chose the upper edge of the ledge for Hamilton facing the city and the rising sun to the east.

[ 219 ] After the seconds measured the paces, Hamilton, according to both William P. Van Ness and Burr, raised his pistol "as if to try the light" and had to wear his glasses to prevent his vision from being obscured.

[ 220 ] Hamilton also refused the more sensitive hairspring setting for the dueling pistols offered by Nathaniel Pendleton , and Burr was unaware of the option.

[ 221 ] Burr shot Hamilton, delivering what proved to be a fatal wound, while Hamilton apparently " deloped ", as he had indicated was his intention in his letter beforehand; and his shot went well above Burr's head, breaking a tree branch. The seconds, Pendleton and Van Ness, [ 222 ] disagreed on which man fired first in the duel.

[ 221 ] Soon after, they measured and triangulated the shooting, but could not determine from which angle Hamilton had fired. Biographer Ron Chernow contends that, after taking deliberate aim, Burr fired second.

[ 223 ] Biographer James Earnest Cooke, however, believes that Burr took careful aim and shot first, and Hamilton fired while falling after being struck by Burr's bullet.

[ 224 ] The shot hit Hamilton in the lower abdomen above his right hip. The ball ricocheted off Hamilton's second or third false rib , fracturing it and causing considerable damage to his internal organs, particularly his liver and diaphragm, before becoming lodged in his first or second lumbar vertebra .

[ 94 ] : 429 [ 225 ] The paralyzed Hamilton was immediately attended by the same surgeon who tended to Hamilton's son Philip. Hamilton was ferried to Greenwich Village and the boarding house of his friend William Bayard Jr.

, who was waiting on the dock.

[ 226 ] On his deathbed, Hamilton asked the Episcopal Bishop of New York , Benjamin Moore , to give him holy communion .

[ 227 ] Moore initially declined to do so on the grounds that participating in a duel was a mortal sin and that Hamilton, although undoubtedly sincere in his faith, was not a member of the Episcopalian denomination.

[ 228 ] After leaving, Moore was persuaded to return that afternoon by the urgent pleas of Hamilton's friends. After hearing Hamilton's solemn assurance that he repented his role in the duel, Moore gave him communion.

[ 228 ] After final visits from his family, friends, and considerable suffering for at least 31 hours, Hamilton died at two o'clock the following afternoon, July 12, 1804, [ 226 ] [ 229 ] at Bayard's home just below present-day Gansevoort Street in Greenwich Village, New York City.

[ 230 ] The city fathers halted all business at noon two days later for Hamilton's funeral. The procession route of about two miles organized by the Society of the Cincinnati had so many participants of every class of citizen that it took hours to complete and was widely reported nationwide by newspapers.

[ 231 ] Moore conducted Hamilton's funeral service at Trinity Church at present-day 89 Broadway in Manhattan .

[ 227 ] Gouverneur Morris gave the eulogy and secretly established a fund to support his widow and children.

[ 232 ] Hamilton was buried in the church's cemetery .

[ 233 ] Religion Religious faith As a youth in the West Indies , Hamilton was an Orthodox and conventional Presbyterian of the New Lights ; he was mentored there by a former student of John Witherspoon , a moderate of the New School.

[ 234 ] He wrote two or three hymns , which were published in the local newspaper.

[ 235 ] Robert Troup , his college roommate, noted that Hamilton was "in the habit of praying on his knees night and morning".

[ 236 ] : 10 During the American Revolution , however, Hamilton became less religious and instead became "a conventional liberal with theistic inclinations who was an irregular churchgoer at best," according to Brown University historian Gordon S. Wood . In his final years of life, though, Hamilton returned to his Protestant faith, [ 237 ] and was Episcopalian . Historian Ron Chernow wrote: [H]e was not clearly affiliated with the denomination and did not seem to attend church regularly or take communion. Like Adams, Franklin, and Jefferson, Hamilton had probably fallen under the sway of deism , which sought to substitute reason for revelation and dropped the notion of an active God who intervened in human affairs. At the same time, he never doubted God's existence, embracing Christianity as a system of morality and cosmic justice.

[ 238 ] When the Constitutional Convention opened in Philadelphia in May 1787, stories circulated that Hamilton made two quips about God at the convention. Asked by a Presbyterian minister why God was not referenced in the Constitution, Hamilton responded "Indeed, Doctor, we forgot it." When Benjamin Franklin asked that each session of the Constitutional Convention be opened with prayer, Hamilton is reported to have replied that there was no need for "foreign aid".

[ 239 ] During the French Revolution , Hamilton displayed a utilitarian approach to using religion for political ends, including maligning Thomas Jefferson as "the atheist", and insisting that Christianity and Jeffersonian democracy were incompatible.

[ 239 ] : 316 After 1801, Hamilton expressed his belief in Christianity, proposing a Christian Constitutional Society in 1802 to take hold of "some strong feeling of the mind" to elect "fit men" to office, and advocating "Christian welfare societies" for the poor.

After being shot in his duel with Aaron Burr on July 11, 1804, Hamilton spoke of his belief in God's mercy.

[ d ] On his deathbed, Hamilton asked the Episcopal Bishop of New York , Benjamin Moore, to give him holy communion .

[ 227 ] Moore initially declined to do so, on two grounds: that to participate in a duel was a mortal sin, and that Hamilton, although undoubtedly sincere in his faith, was not a member of the Episcopalian denomination.

[ 228 ] After leaving, Moore was persuaded to return that afternoon following urgent pleas of Hamilton's friends. After receiving Hamilton's solemn assurance that he never intended to shoot Burr and repented for his part in the duel, Moore gave him communion.

[ 228 ] Bishop Moore returned the next morning, stayed with Hamilton for several hours until his death, and conducted his subsequent funeral service at Trinity Church .

[ 227 ] Relationship with Jews and Judaism Hamilton's birthplace had a large Jewish community, comprising roughly a quarter of Charlestown 's white population by the 1720s.

[ 2 ] He came into contact with Jews on a regular basis; as a small boy, he was tutored by a Jewish schoolmistress, and had learned to recite the Ten Commandments in the original Hebrew .

[ 236 ] Hamilton exhibited a respect for Jews, which was described as "a lifelong reverence." [ 240 ] He believed that Jewish achievement was a result of divine providence : The state and progress of the Jews, from their earliest history to the present time, has been so entirely out of the ordinary course of human affairs, is it not then a fair conclusion, that the cause also is an extraordinary one—in other words, that it is the effect of some great providential plan? The man who will draw this conclusion, will look for the solution in the Bible. He who will not draw it ought to give us another fair solution.

[ 241 ] Based primarily on the phonetic similarity of Lavien to a common Jewish surname, it has been suggested that Johann Lavien , the first husband of Hamilton's mother, was Jewish or of Jewish descent.

[ 242 ] On this contested foundation, it was rumored that Hamilton himself was born Jewish, a claim that gained some popularity early in the 20th century [ 243 ] and which was given serious consideration by one present-day historian.

[ 244 ] The belief that Lavien was Jewish was popularized by Gertrude Atherton in her 1902 novel The Conqueror , a fictionalized biography of Hamilton which made the earliest known written assertion that Hamilton was Jewish.

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] The consensus of mainstream scholars and historians, however, is that Hamilton was not Jewish.

[ 247 ] Legacy See also: List of things named after Alexander Hamilton and Cultural depictions of Alexander Hamilton Constitution See also: History of the United States Constitution Hamilton's interpretations of the Constitution , which are set forth in The Federalist Papers , remain highly influential, and continue to be cited in scholarly studies and court decisions.

[ 248 ] Although the Constitution was ambiguous as to the exact balance of power between national and state governments, Hamilton consistently took the side of greater federal power at the expense of the states, which placed him at odds with Thomas Jefferson and other Founding Fathers .

[ 249 ] Jefferson especially opposed Hamilton's support of a de facto central bank, which Hamilton believed was permissible under Congress 's constitutional authority to issue currency, regulate interstate commerce, and do anything else that would be "necessary and proper" to enact the provisions of the Constitution.

[ 250 ] Jefferson, however, took a differing view. Parsing text carefully, Jefferson argued that no specific authorization for the establishment of a national bank existed. The controversy between the two was addressed in McCulloch v. Maryland , which largely adopted Hamilton's view, granting the federal government broad freedom to select the best means to execute its constitutionally enumerated powers and confirmed the doctrine of implied powers .

[ 250 ] The American Civil War and the Progressive Era , Hamilton's defenders argue, demonstrated the sorts of crises and politics that Hamilton's administrative republic sought to avoid.

[ 251 ] [ how?

] Hamilton's policies have proven greatly influential on the development of the U.S. government . His constitutional interpretation, particularly of the Necessary and Proper Clause , set precedents for federal authority that are still cited by courts and are considered an authority on constitutional interpretation. French diplomat Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord , who spent 1794 in the United States, wrote, "I consider Napoleon , Fox , and Hamilton the three greatest men of our epoch, and if I were forced to decide between the three, I would give without hesitation the first place to Hamilton," adding that Hamilton understood the problems of European conservatives trying to adapt to a liberalizing world.

[ 252 ] Both John Adams and Jefferson, however, viewed Hamilton as unprincipled and dangerously aristocratic. Hamilton's reputation was mostly negative in the Jeffersonian democracy and Jacksonian democracy eras. During the Jeffersonian era, Hamilton was criticized as a centralizer, sometimes to the point of accusing him of being a proponent of monarchy .

[ 253 ] Conversely, during the later Progressive Era , such figures as Herbert Croly , Henry Cabot Lodge , and Theodore Roosevelt praised Hamilton's leadership as a proponent of a strong national government. In the 19th and 20th centuries several Republicans wrote laudatory biographies on Hamilton prior to entering politics.

[ 254 ] According to Princeton University historian Sean Wilentz , Hamilton and has been generally viewed favorably among contemporary scholars, who portray him as a visionary architect of a modern liberal capitalist economy and of a dynamic federal government headed by an energetic executive.

[ 255 ] Conversely, these modern scholars favoring Hamilton portray Jefferson and his allies as relatively naïve and  dreamy idealists.

[ 255 ] Slavery Hamilton is not known to have ever owned slaves, although members of his family did. At the time of her death, Hamilton's mother owned two slaves and wrote a will leaving them to her sons. Due to their illegitimacy, however, Hamilton and his brother were held ineligible to inherit her property and never took ownership of the slaves.

[ 256 ] : 17 As a youth in Saint Croix, Hamilton later worked for a company that traded slaves as well as sugar and other staples of the Transatlantic economy .

[ 256 ] : 17 Historians have discussed whether Hamilton personally owned slaves later in life.

[ 257 ] Ron Chernow , in his 2004 biography of Hamilton , argued that, while there is "no definite proof" that Hamilton personally owned slaves, "oblique hints" in Hamilton's papers suggest "he and Eliza may have owned one or two household slaves." [ 258 ] Hamilton handled slave transactions as the legal representative of his own family members, and his grandson, Allan McLane Hamilton , interpreted some of these journal entries as being purchases for himself.

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] In 1840, however, his son John maintained that his father "never owned a slave; but on the contrary, having learned that a domestic whom he had hired was about to be sold by her master, he immediately purchased her freedom." [ 261 ] Hamilton expressed support for limited emancipation during the American Revolutionary War , when he endorsed a plan to recruit enslaved men to serve in the Continental Army . As a necessary inducement, Hamilton wrote, the Black soldiers should be promised their freedom upon enlistment. He dismissed objections that enslaved men were "too stupid" to fight well, arguing that their "want of cultivation" and "habit of subordination" made them ideal soldiers. Whereas officers should be "men of sense and sentiment," good enlisted men were unthinking "machines," a role to which white men, unaccustomed to a "life of servitude," were comparatively less suited than Blacks.

[ 262 ] In 1785, he joined his close associate John Jay and more than 30 fellow New Yorkers in founding the New York Manumission Society . The Society lobbied successfully for legislation to gradually abolish slavery in New York.

[ 256 ] Rather than legally emancipate all enslaved people in the state, the 1799 act declared all children born after July 4, 1799 free pending a period of apprenticeship lasting 28 years for men and 25 years for women. Enslaved people born prior to that date were not emancipated, and the final end of slavery in New York did not occur until 1827.

[ 263 ] In his letter recommending the enlistment of Black soldiers in the Continental Army, Hamilton rejected the racial essentialism found in the contemporaneous writings of Jefferson and other leading white intellectuals, asserting "their natural faculties are as good as ours." [ 264 ] He never advocated for the colonization of free people of color outside the United States, which many contemporaries considered essential to any plan for emancipation.

[ 256 ] : 22 In the 1790s, Hamilton's political agenda sometimes came into conflict with proslavery interests. When the enslaved population of Saint-Domingue rose up against their French enslavers, Hamilton and other Federalists supported the revolutionaries and urged closer economic and diplomatic ties with new nation of Haiti .

[ 256 ] : 23 His suggestions shaped the Haitian constitution , promulgated the year after his death.

[ 256 ] : 23 At other times, political expediency led Hamilton to form close relationships with slaveholders like William Loughton Smith whose support was critical to the strength of the Federalist Party in South Carolina.

[ 265 ] Economics Further information: Economic history of the United States Hamilton has appeared on the United States ten-dollar bill since 1928.

Hamilton has been portrayed as the patron saint [ 266 ] of the American School economic philosophy that, according to historian Michael Lind , later dominated American economic policy after 1861.

[ 266 ] Hamilton's ideas and work influenced 19th century German economist Friedrich List [ 267 ] and Henry Charles Carey , who served as Abraham Lincoln 's chief economic advisor during the Lincoln administration .

[ 268 ] In fall 1781, Hamilton firmly supported government intervention in favor of business after the manner of Jean-Baptiste Colbert .

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] [ 271 ] In contrast to the British policy of international mercantilism , which he believed skewed benefits to colonial and imperial powers, Hamilton was a pioneering advocate of protectionism .

[ 272 ] He is credited with the idea that industrialization was only possible with tariffs that protected the " infant industries " of an emerging nation.

[ 147 ] Public administration Main article: Public administration Political theorists credit Hamilton with the creation of the modern administrative state, citing his arguments in favor of a strong executive, linked to the electoral support of the people, as the linchpin of an administrative republic.

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] The dominance of executive leadership in the formulation and carrying out of policy was, in Hamilton's view, essential to resist the deterioration of a republican government.

[ 275 ] As evidence of Hamilton's global influence, some scholars have compared Hamilton's recommendations to the development of Meiji Japan .

[ 276 ] In popular culture Main article: Cultural depictions of Alexander Hamilton Lin-Manuel Miranda performing the title role in the musical Hamilton in April 2016 Hamilton has appeared as a significant figure in popular works of historical fiction, including many that focused on other American political figures of his time. In comparison to other Founding Fathers , however, Hamilton attracted relatively little attention in American popular culture in the 20th century.

[ 277 ] In 2015, he gained significant mainstream attention with the debut of the Broadway musical Hamilton , which is based on a biography by Ron Chernow .

Lin-Manuel Miranda played Hamilton in the Original Broadway Cast.  The musical was described by The New Yorker in February 2015 as "an achievement of historical and cultural reimagining. In Miranda's telling, the headlong rise of one self-made immigrant becomes the story of America." [ 278 ] The Off-Broadway production of Hamilton won the 2015 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Musical and seven other Drama Desk Awards . In 2016, Hamilton received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama , and set a record for Tony Award nominations with 16, [ 279 ] winning 11, including Best Musical .

[ 280 ] During the Obama administration , a plan to replace Hamilton on the ten-dollar bill was shelved due partly to the musical's popularity.

[ 281 ] On July 3, 2020, Disney+ released the movie Hamilton , an authorized film of the Broadway stage production performed by the original cast.

[ 282 ] References Notes ^ a b c It is unclear whether he was born in 1755 or 1757.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Most historical evidence supports the idea that he was born in 1757.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Hamilton celebrated his birthday on January 11. In his later life, he tended to give his age in round figures. Historians accepted 1757 as his birth year until the 1930s when additional documentation was published, including a 1768 probate paper from Saint Croix listing him as 13. Since then, some historians favored 1755.

[ 2 ] If he was born in 1757, the probate paper may have included an error or Hamilton may have given his age as thirteen to appear older and more employable. Historians have pointed out other inaccuracies in the paper, demonstrating its unreliability.

[ 4 ] ^ Primary sources disagree on the spelling of Hamilton's mother's surname.

[ 8 ] Hamilton's grandfather signed his name "John Faucett" on a legal document dated May 31, 1720, which some historians consider authoritative.

[ 9 ] Hamilton himself spelled the surname as Faucette in a letter dated August 26, 1800, which was corrected to Faucett in a footnote by the editor of Hamilton's papers.

[ 10 ] Hamilton's son, John , wrote Faucette.

[ 11 ] Ron Chernow and many early historians followed Hamilton by writing Faucette, [ 12 ] while another group of historians adopted the anglicized name Fawcett, reflecting an absence of consensus.

[ 13 ] ^ Although there are persistent claims that Hamilton's mother was of mixed race, this is not substantiated by any verifiable evidence. Rachel Faucette was listed as white on tax rolls.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] ^ Adair and Harvey, "Christian Statesman?"; Quotes on the Christian Constitutional Society are from Hamilton's letter to James A. Bayard of April 1802, quoted by Adair and Harvey. McDonald, says p. 356, that Hamilton's faith "had not entirely departed" him before the crisis of 1801.

Citations ^ "Alexander Hamilton" .

National Portrait Gallery .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2023 . Retrieved February 2, 2023 .

^ a b c d e Chernow, p. 17 .

^ Logan, Erin B. (July 12, 2018).

"Alexander Hamilton, immigrant and statesman, dies at 47 – or 49" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 9, 2018 . Retrieved September 5, 2018 .

^ a b Brookhiser, Richard (2000).

Alexander Hamilton, American . Simon and Schuster. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-4391-3545-7 .

^ Newton (2015), pp. 19–30 .

^ Johnson, Paul (1997).

A History of the American People (PDF) . New York: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. p. 151.

ISBN 978-0-06-093034-9 .

^ Ramsing, Holger Utke (1939). "Alexander Hamilton".

Personalhistorisk Tidsskrift (in Danish): 225– 270.

^ Newton, Michael E. (2019).

Discovering Hamilton: New Discoveries in the Lives of Alexander Hamilton, His Family, Friends, and Colleagues, from Various Archives Around the World . Eleftheria Publishing. p. 115.

ISBN 978-0-9826040-4-5 .

^ Newton (2019), p. 28 .

^ Hamilton, Alexander (August 26, 1800).

"From Alexander Hamilton to William Jackson" .

Founders Online (Letter). National Archives.

Archived from the original on March 31, 2021 . Retrieved February 4, 2021 .

Archived from Syrett, Harold C.

, ed. (1977) [July 1800 – April 1802].

The Papers of Alexander Hamilton . Vol. 25. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 88–91 & n.4.

ISBN 9780231089241 .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2021 .

^ Hamilton, John Church (1879).

Life of Alexander Hamilton: A History of the Republic of the United States of America, as Traced in His Writings and in Those of His Contemporaries . Houghton, Osgood and Company. p. 41.

^ Chernow, pp.

8–9 ^ Newton, Michael E. (2015).

Alexander Hamilton: The Formative Years . Eleftheria. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-9826040-3-8 .

^ Chernow, pp.

9 , 734–35 .

^ Owens, Mitchell (January 8, 2004).

"Surprises in the Family Tree" .

The New York Times . Appended correction dated January 15, 2004.

Archived from the original on January 20, 2017 . Retrieved November 15, 2016 .

While there have been suggestions that the mother, Rachel Faucett or Fawcett—and therefore Hamilton himself—was of mixed ancestry, it is not an established fact.

^ Chernow, 2005 , p. 8.

^ a b c Randall, Willard Sterne (2004). Foreword.

Practical Proceedings in the Supreme Court of the State of New York . By Hamilton, Alexander. New York Law Journal. p. ix.

^ a b Chernow, pp. 10–12 .

^ Lewisohn, Florence; American Revolution Bicentennial Commission of the Virgin Islands (1975).

'What so proudly we hail': the Danish West Indies and the American Revolution . [St. Thomas, U.S.V.I.]: American Revolution Bicentennial Commission of the Virgin Islands. pp.

17– 30.

OCLC 2150775 .

^ Chernow, p. 24 .

^ Brockenbrough, Martha (2017).

Alexander Hamilton, Revolutionary . Feiwel & Friends. p. 19.

ISBN 978-1-250-12319-0 .

^ e.g., Flexner, passim .

^ a b Chernow, pp. 25–30 .

^ Cissel, William.

" The West Indian Founding Father, 2004 " (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

^ Chernow, p. 29 .

^ "To Alexander Hamilton from Walton and Cruger, [19 October 1771]" .

Founders Online (Letter). National Archives. fn. 1.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

Archived from Syrett, Harold C.

, ed. (1961) [1768–1778].

The Papers of Alexander Hamilton . Vol. 1. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 8 n.1.

^ "Letter on the hurricane of August 1772" .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 8, 2022 .

^ Chernow, p. 37 .

^ Gordon, John Steele (April–May 2004).

"The Self Made Founder" .

American Heritage . Archived from the original on November 19, 2008.

^ O'Brien, Michael J. (1916) [October 30, 1915].

"Field Day of the American Irish Historical Society Held in New York City" .

The Journal of the American Irish Historical Society (transcript of address).

1 (1): 144.

^ Newton (2015), p. 64 .

^ Newton (2019), pp. 227–228 . "Thus, when Alexander Hamilton arrived in Elizabethtown in October 1772 and moved in with the Livingstons, they lived in this house rented from Jacob De Hart." ^ Newton (2015), p. 69 .

^ Randall, p. 78.

^ Chernow, p. 53 .

^ Cardozo, Ernest Abraham (1902).

A History of the Philolexian Society of Columbia University from 1802–1902 . New York: Philolexian Society. p. 23.

^ Miller, p. 9.

^ Mitchell 1:65–73; Miller, p. 19.

^ Newton (2015), pp.

116 , 117 , 573.

^ Mitchell, I:74–75.

^ Robert Troup "Memoir of General Hamilton", March 22, 1810 ^ Chernow, Ron.

Alexander Hamilton . Penguin Press, (2004) ( ISBN 1-59420-009-2 ).

^ Newton (2015), pp.

127–128 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa McDonald, Forrest (1982).

Alexander Hamilton: A Biography . W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-30048-2 .

^ Chernow, p. 72 .

^ Stryker, William S. (1898).

The Battles of Trenton and Princeton (page image). Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co. pp.

158– 159.

^ a b Ketchum, Richard (1999).

The Winter Soldiers: The Battles for Trenton and Princeton (1st Owl Books ed.). Holt Paperbacks. p. 310.

ISBN 978-0-8050-6098-0 .

^ Stryker, William S. (1898).

The Battles of Trenton and Princeton (page image). Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co. p. 290.

^ Newton (2015), pp. 189–190 .

^ Lefkowitz, Arthur S., George Washington's Indispensable Men: The 32 Aides-de-Camp Who Helped Win the Revolution , Stackpole Books, 2003, pp. 15, 108.

^ Hendrickson, Robert (1976).

Hamilton I (1757–1789) . New York: Mason/Charter. p.

119 .

ISBN 978-0-88405-139-8 .

^ Chernow, p. 90 .

^ Lodge, pp. 1:15–20 ^ Miller, pp. 23–26.

^ Chernow, pp. 128–129 .

^ Chernow, pp. 654–655 .

^ James Alexander Hamilton obituary Archived February 25, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , September 26, 1878.

^ "The Rundown on Alexander Hamilton's 8 Children" .

Mental Floss . March 7, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2023 . Retrieved January 13, 2023 .

^ Flexner, Young Hamilton , p. 316.

^ Trees, Andrew S., "The Importance of Being Alexander Hamilton", Reviews in American History 2005, pp. 33(1):8–14, finding Chernow's inferences to be overreading the contemporary style.

^ Katz, Jonathan Ned , Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the U.S.A.

, Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1976, ISBN 978-0-690-01164-7 , p. 445.

^ Gregory D. Massey, John Laurens and the American Revolution ; University of South Carolina Press, 2000.

[ page needed ] ^ Chernow 2004, pp. 151–152 ^ Chernow 2004, pp. 153–159 ^ Murray, p. 69.

^ Mitchell, pp. I:254–260.

^ Morris, Richard Brandon (1970).

The Peacemakers: The Great Powers and American Independence . Harper & Row.

^ Murray, Joseph A. (2007).

Alexander Hamilton: America's Forgotten Founder . Algora Publishing. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-87586-502-7 .

^ Chernow, pp. 165–171 ^ Syrett, p. III:117; for a one-year term beginning the "first Monday in November next", arrived in Philadelphia between November 18 and 25, and resigned July 1783.

^ Hamilton, Alexander.

Alexander Hamilton: Writings . Compiled by Joanne B. Freeman . New York: Literary Classics of the United States, Inc., 2001. pp. 70–71 ^ Kohn; Brant, p. 45; Rakove, p. 324.

^ Chernow, p. 176 .

^ Brant, p. 100 ^ Martin and Lender, pp. 109, 160: at first for seven years, increased to life after Arnold's treason.

^ a b Tucker, p. 470.

^ a b Kohn; Ellis 2004, pp. 141–144.

^ Kohn, p. 196.

^ a b c Chernow, pp. 177–180 .

^ Hamilton's letter of February 13, 1783; Syrett, pp. III:253–255.

^ Washington to Hamilton, March 4 and 12, 1783; Kohn; Martin and Lender, pp. 189–190.

^ "To Alexander Hamilton from George Washington, 4 April 1783" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2016 . Retrieved June 25, 2018 .

^ Rakove, pp. 322, 325.

^ Brant, p. 108.

^ a b Chernow, pp. 182–183 .

^ "Alexander Hamilton Papers" .

Library of Congress .

Archived from the original on July 4, 2020 . Retrieved July 4, 2020 .

^ Chernow, pp. 197–199 .

^ Wallack, Todd (December 20, 2011).

"Which bank is the oldest? Accounts vary" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2017 .

^ Morris, Richard B. (1988).

The Forging of the Union, 1781–1789 . Harper & Row. p.

255 .

ISBN 978-0-06-015733-3 .

^ "Founders Online: From Alexander Hamilton to Nathaniel Chipman, 22 July 1788" .

founders.archives.gov .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2023 . Retrieved January 25, 2023 .

^ "Vermont" .

History.com . October 31, 2019.

Archived from the original on January 25, 2023 . Retrieved January 25, 2023 .

^ Catalogue of Columbia College in the City of New-York : embracing the names of its trustees, officers, and graduates, together with a list of all academical honours conferred by the institution from A.D. 1758 to A.D. 1826, inclusive . U.S. National Library of Medicine. T. and J. Swords. 1826.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Alexander Hamilton CC 1778" .

Columbia College Alumni Association . December 14, 2016.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am Schachner, Nathan (1946).

Alexander Hamilton . New York: D. Appleton Century.

ASIN B0006AQUG2 .

^ Morton, p. 169.

^ Chernow, pp. 227–228 .

^ Morton, p. 131.

^ Chernow, p. 232 .

^ a b Madison, James (2005). Larson, Edward J.; Winship, Michael P. (eds.).

The Constitutional Convention: A Narrative History from the Notes of James Madison . New York: Modern Library. pp.

50– 51.

ISBN 978-0-8129-7517-8 .

^ Stewart, 2016 , p. 33 ^ Mitchell, pp. I:397–398.

^ Brant, p. 195.

^ a b Denboer, p. 196.

^ a b Kaplan, p. 75.

^ Denboer, p. 197.

^ a b Chernow, pp. 247–248 .

^ a b c d Chernow, pp. 252–257 .

^ Chernow, 2005, pp. 286–287.

^ Chernow, 2005, p. 288.

^ White, 1944, p. 156 .

^ a b Murray, p. 121.

^ a b c d Chernow, pp. 296–299 .

^ Chernow, p. 121 .

^ Murray, p. 124.

^ a b c d e f Chernow, pp. 300–305 .

^ Chernow, p. 307 .

^ Kaplan, p. 21.

^ a b c Cooke , p. 88.

^ Sylla, Richard ; Wright, Robert E.; Cowen, David J. (2009).

"Alexander Hamilton, Central Banker: Crisis Management during the U.S. Financial Panic of 1792" .

Business History Review .

83 (1): 61– 86.

doi : 10.1017/s0007680500000209 .

ISSN 0007-6805 .

S2CID 153842455 .

^ Cooke, p. 89.

^ Cooke, p. 90.

^ Bogin, Ruth (July 1988).

"Petitioning and the New Moral Economy of Post-Revolutionary America" .

The William and Mary Quarterly .

45 (3): 392– 425.

ISSN 0043-5597 .

JSTOR 1923642 .

^ Johnson, Roger (December 1999).

"Historical Beginnings... The Federal Reserve" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 25, 2010.

^ Taylor, John B. (January 11, 2010).

"Taylor: Federal Reserve Monetary and the Financial Crisis: A Reply to Chairman Ben Bernanke" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "Born of a Panic: Forming the Fed System | Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis" .

www.minneapolisfed.org . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ Mitchell, p. 118.

^ Engerman; Gallman, p. 644.

^ a b c Studentski; Krooss, p. 62.

^ Nussbaum, Arthur (November 1937). "The Law of the Dollar".

Columbia Law Review (citing 2 Annals of Cong. 2115 (1789–1791)).

37 (7): 1057– 1091.

ISSN 0010-1958 .

JSTOR 1116782 .

^ Cooke, p. 87.

^ Engerman; Gallman, pp. 644–645.

^ James Ferguson, John Catanzariti, Elizabeth M. Nuxoll and Mary Gallagher, eds.

The Papers of Robert Morris , University of Pittsburgh Press, 1973–1999 (Volume 7, pp. 682–713) ^ a b c Gibowicz, p. 256.

^ a b c d Chernow, p. 340 .

^ Chernow, p. 32 .

^ Gibowicz, pp. 256–257.

^ Storbridge, p. 2.

^ Stockwell, p. 357.

^ a b c d e Chernow, pp. 342–343 .

^ a b c Murray, p. 141.

^ a b Murray, pp. 141–142.

^ Chernow, p. 468 .

^ Chernow, 2005 , pp. 475–476.

^ Mitchell, I:308–331.

^ Cooke, p. 100.

^ Sylla, Richard (2024).

"Alexander Hamilton's Report on Manufactures and Industrial Policy" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

38 (4): 111– 130.

doi : 10.1257/jep.38.4.111 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

^ a b Bairoch, Paul [in German] (1995).

Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes . University of Chicago Press. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-226-03463-8 .

^ a b c Cooke, p. 101.

^ Mitchell, p. 145.

^ Stephen F. Knott, Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth (2002), pp. 43, 54, 56, 83, 108.

^ Shriner, Charles Anthony (1919).

"Four Chapters of Paterson History" . Lont & Overkamp. p. 59.

^ a b Cooke, p. 103.

^ a b Cooke, p. 102.

^ Matson, Cathy (2010).

"Flimsy Fortunes: Americans' Old Relationship with Paper Speculation and Panic" .

Common-place .

10 (4). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016 . Retrieved May 2, 2018 .

^ a b c Elkins, Stanley M.; McKitrick, Eric (1994).

The Age of Federalism: The Early American Republic, 1788–1800 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-506890-0 .

^ Estes, Todd (2000). "Shaping the Politics of Public Opinion: Federalists and the Jay Treaty Debate".

Journal of the Early Republic .

20 (3): 393– 422.

JSTOR 3125063 .

^ Herring, George C. (2008).

From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations since 1776 . p.

80 .

ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0 .

^ Bemis, Samuel Flagg (April 1922).

"Jay's Treaty and the Northwest Boundary Gap" .

The American Historical Review .

27 (3): 465– 484.

hdl : 2027/hvd.32044020001764 .

JSTOR 1837800 .

^ Knox, Henry.

"Letter from Henry Knox to Alexander Hamilton, 24 November 1794" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2017 . Retrieved February 5, 2017 .

^ Chernow, p. 478 .

^ Hamilton, Alexander.

"Letter from Alexander Hamilton to George Washington, 1 December 1794" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on September 22, 2022 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Chernow, p. 480 .

^ Hamilton, Alexander.

"Letter from Alexander Hamilton to Angelica Schuyler Church, 6 March 1795" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on September 20, 2022 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Henretta, James A.; et al. (2011).

America's History, Volume 1: To 1877 . Macmillan. pp.

207– 208.

ISBN 978-0-312-38791-4 .

^ "Madison to Jefferson" . March 2, 1794.

Archived from the original on November 14, 2017 . Retrieved October 14, 2006 .

I see by a paper of last evening that even in New York a meeting of the people has taken place, at the instance of the Republican party, and that a committee is appointed for the like purpose ^ See also Smith (2004), p. 832.

^ Young, Christopher J. (Fall 2011). "Connecting the President and the People: Washington's Neutrality, Genet's Challenge, and Hamilton's Fight for Public Support".

Journal of the Early Republic .

31 (3): 435– 466.

doi : 10.1353/jer.2011.0040 .

S2CID 144349420 .

^ Cook, Brian J. (2014).

Bureaucracy and Self-Government . JHU Press. pp.

56– 57.

ISBN 978-1-4214-1552-9 .

^ Balogh 2009, 72–110 ^ Allan Nevins, The Evening Post: A Century of Journalism (1922) ch. 1 online ^ Cooke, pp. 109–110 ^ Lomask, pp. 139–140, 216–217, 220.

^ Garrity and Spalding, pp. 47, 50–55.

^ Murray, p. 207.

^ Chernow, p. 117 .

^ Chernow, p. 510 .

^ Elkins and McKitrick; Age of Federalism , pp. 523–528, 859. Rutledge had his own plan, to have Pinckney win with Jefferson as Vice President.

^ Elkins and McKitrick, p. 515.

^ Brookhiser, Richard (2011).

Alexander Hamilton, American . Simon and Schuster. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-4391-3545-7 .

^ a b c Hamilton, Alexander.

"Printed Version of the "Reynolds Pamphlet", 1797" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on July 10, 2016 . Retrieved July 17, 2016 .

^ Freeman 2001 ^ Reynolds, James.

"Letter from James Reynolds to Alexander Hamilton, 19 December 1791" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on July 25, 2020 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Reynolds, James.

"Letter from James Reynolds to Alexander Hamilton, 17 January 1792" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ Murray, p. 165.

^ Reynolds, James.

"Letter from James Reynolds to Alexander Hamilton, 2 May 1792" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on July 25, 2020 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ "From Alexander Hamilton to James Monroe" . July 5, 1797 . Retrieved April 28, 2025 – via Founders Online .

^ "From Alexander Hamilton to Frederick A. C. Muhlenberg" . July 5, 1797 . Retrieved April 28, 2025 – via Founders Online .

^ "From Alexander Hamilton to Abraham B. Venable" . July 5, 1797 . Retrieved April 28, 2025 – via Founders Online .

^ "That Time Alexander Hamilton Almost Dueled James Monroe" . October 26, 2015 . Retrieved May 6, 2025 – via Smithsonian Magazine .

^ Stello, Heidi (September 3, 2015).

"The Near Duel Between James Monroe and Alexander Hamilton" . Retrieved May 6, 2025 – via University of Mary Washington .

^ Chernow (December 26, 2004). "Epilogue".

Alexander Hamilton (Audiobook).  Event occurs at 12:58.

^ Chernow, pp. 558–560 .

^ Kaplan, pp. 147–149 ^ Morison and Commager, p. 327; Mitchell II:445.

^ Ellis, Joseph J.

(2004).

His Excellency . Vintage Books. pp.

250– 255.

ISBN 978-1-4000-3253-2 .

^ Newman, pp. 72–73.

^ Kaplan, p. 155.

^ Newman, pp. 44, 76–78.

^ Hamilton, Neil A. (2010).

Presidents: A Biographical Dictionary . Infobase. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-4381-2751-4 .

^ Mitchell II:483 ^ Parsons, Lynn H. (2011).

The Birth of Modern Politics: Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, and the Election of 1828 . Oxford University Press. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-19-975424-3 .

^ James Morton Smith, Freedom's Fetters: The Alien and Sedition Laws and American Civil Liberties (Ithaca, repr. 1966), pp. 400–417.

^ Monaghan, pp. 419–421.

^ Harper, p. 259.

^ Isenberg, Nancy.

Fallen Founder: The Life of Aaron Burr , New York: Penguin Books, 2007, pp. 211–112.

^ a b Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia.

"Aaron Burr" .

Monticello.org . Thomas Jefferson Foundation.

Archived from the original on December 3, 2019 . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ Harper, John Lamberton (2004).

American Machiavelli: Alexander Hamilton and the Origins of US Foreign Policy . Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.

260– 261.

ISBN 978-0-521-83485-8 . p. 260: The result could be seen as a moral victory for Hamilton, but had he actually contributed to it? The answer is perhaps and to a degree. Bayard wrote him afterward, "Your views in relation to the election, differed very little from my own, but I was obliged to yield to a torrent [of anti-Jefferson sentiment] which I perceived might be diverted, but could not be opposed." Bayard was no doubt familiar with the terms of the deal Hamilton had wished to make with Jefferson. In fact, though Jefferson would later deny it, before changing his vote Bayard had received assurances through Jefferson's friend, Congressman Samuel Smith of Maryland, similar to those Hamilton had proposed. But Bayard, as he recounted to things Hamilton, had also sought assurances from Burr.

^ Chernow, p. 638.

^ ANB, "Aaron Burr".

^ a b Freeman, Joanne B. (April 1996).

"Dueling as Politics: Reinterpreting the Burr–Hamilton Duel" .

William and Mary Quarterly (subscription). Third Series.

53 (2): 289– 318.

JSTOR 2947402 .

^ Kennedy, Burr, Hamilton, and Jefferson , p. 72.

^ Chernow, pp. 680–681 .

^ Trees, Andrew S. (2004).

The Founding Fathers and the Politics of Character . Princeton University Press. p. 169.

^ a b Jackson, Kenneth T.; Paley, Virginia (Spring 2004).

"An Interview with Ron Chernow" (PDF) .

The New-York Journal of American History : 59– 65.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved April 12, 2017 .

^ Hamilton, Alexander.

"Statement on Impending Duel with Aaron Burr, (28 June – 10 July 1804)" .

Founders Online . National Archives.

Archived from the original on February 8, 2017 . Retrieved February 7, 2017 .

^ Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture, ed. (April 1955), "What Was Hamilton's "Favorite Song"?", The William and Mary Quarterly (in German), vol. 12, no. 2, Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture, pp.

298– 307, JSTOR 1920510 ^ Adams, pp. 93–94.

^ Roberts, Warren (2010).

A Place In History: Albany In The Age Of Revolution . Albany, NY: Excelsior Editions/State University of New York Press. p. 135.

ISBN 978-1-4384-3329-5 .

^ Winfield, Charles H. (1874).

History of the County of Hudson, New Jersey from Its Earliest Settlement to the Present Time . New York: Kennard and Hay. Chapter 8, " Duels ". pp. p.219 ^ Fleming, p. 323 ^ a b Brookhiser, Richard (2000).

Alexander Hamilton, American . Simon and Schuster. p. 212.

ISBN 978-1-4391-3545-7 – via Google Books.

^ Fleming, p. 345 ^ Chernow, p. 704 .

^ Cooke, p. 242 ^ Emery, p. 243 ^ a b Chernow, pp. 705–708 .

^ a b c d Moore, Benjamin (1979) [July 12, 1804]. "Letter to William Coleman (Editor, New-York Evening Post )". In Syrett, Harold Coffin (ed.).

The Papers of Alexander Hamilton . Vol. 26. Columbia University Press. pp.

314– 316, 328.

ISBN 978-0-231-08925-8 .

^ a b c d Fleming, Thomas (1999).

Duel: Alexander Hamilton, Aaron Burr and the Future of America . New York: Basic Books. pp.

328 –329.

ISBN 978-0-465-01736-2 .

^ Hamilton, John Church (1879).

Life of Alexander Hamilton: A History of the Republic of the United States of America, as Traced in His Writings and in Those of His Contemporaries, Volume VII . Boston: Houghton, Osgood and Company. p. 836.

At two in the afternoon, my father died.

^ Miller, Terry (1990).

Greenwich Village and How It Got That Way . Crown Publishers. p. 164.

ISBN 978-0-517-57322-8 .

Cited in Pollak, Michael (July 8, 2011).

"F.Y.I.: Answers to Questions About New York" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2017.

^ "Founders Online: The Funeral, [14 July 1804]" .

founders.archives.gov .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ Chernow, pp.

712–713 , 725 .

^ Keister, Doug (2011).

Stories in Stone New York: A Field Guide to New York City Area Cemeteries & Their Residents . Gibbs Smith. p. 127.

ISBN 978-1-4236-2102-7 .

^ McDonald, Alexander Hamilton p. 11; Adair and Harvey (1974) ^ Chernow, p. 38 .

^ a b Hamilton, John Church (1834).

The Life of Alexander Hamilton, Vol. 1 . New York: Halsted & Voorhies. p.

3 .

^ Wood, Gordon.

Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815 (2009) pp. 589–590 ^ Chernow, p. 205 .

^ a b Adair, Douglass; Harvey, Marvin (April 1955). "Was Alexander Hamilton a Christian Statesman?".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

12 (2). pp. 308–329 at 315 n.8.

JSTOR 1920511 .

The first story alleges [that he was asked] why God had not been suitably recognized in the Constitution. 'Indeed, Doctor,' Hamilton is supposed to have replied, 'we forgot it.' ... The second story [is of a] purported remark on the Convention floor, when Franklin moved that each session in the future be opened with prayer. Hamilton is supposed to have replied that there was no need for calling in 'foreign aid.' ^ Chernow, p. 18 .

^ Hamilton, John Church (1879).

Life of Alexander Hamilton: A History of the Republic of the United States of America, as Traced in His Writings and in Those of His Contemporaries, Volume VII . Boston: Houghton, Osgood and Company. p. 711.

^ Chernow, pp.

10 , 26 .

^ Newton (2015), p. 34 .

^ Porwancher, Andrew (2021).

The Jewish World of Alexander Hamilton . Princeton University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-691-21115-2 .

^ Newton (2015), p. 14 ^ Newton (2019), p. 18 Archived December 26, 2022, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Chernow, pp.

10–12 , 26 .

^ Susan Welch, John Gruhl and John Comer, Understanding American Government (2011) p. 70 ^ Melvyn R. Durchslag, State sovereign immunity: a reference guide to the United States Constitution (2002) p xix ^ a b Wilson, Thomas Frederick (1992).

The Power "to Coin" Money: The Exercise of Monetary Powers by the Congress . M. E. Sharpe. p. 94.

ISBN 978-0-87332-795-4 .

^ Tulis, Jeffrey (1987).

The Rhetorical Presidency . Princeton University Press. p.

31 .

ISBN 978-0-691-02295-6 .

^ Kaplan, Lawrence S. (1998).

Thomas Jefferson: Westward the Course of Empire . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 284.

ISBN 978-1-4616-4618-1 .

^ Chernow, pp. 397–398 .

^ Before they became senators , for instance, Henry Cabot Lodge and Arthur H. Vandenberg wrote highly favorable biographies of Hamilton.

Peterson, Merrill D.

(1960).

The Jefferson Image in the American Mind . University of Virginia Press. pp. 114, 278– 280.

ISBN 978-0-8139-1851-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Wilentz, Sean (September 2010).

"Book Reviews" .

Journal of American History .

97 (2): 476.

^ a b c d e f Horton, James Oliver (2004).

"Alexander Hamilton: slavery and race in a revolutionary generation" (PDF) .

New-York Journal of American History .

65 : 16– 24.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 8, 2021 . Retrieved April 2, 2017 .

^ Multiple sources: Miller, John Chester (1959).

Alexander Hamilton and the Growth of the New Nation . New York: Harper Torchbooks. p. 122 ( note ).

Although Hamilton was a member of the New York Manumission Society, he held slaves throughout his life.

Hendrickson, Robert A. (1976).

Hamilton I, 1757-1789 . New York: Mason/Charter. p. 432.

It is not known whether either Betsy or Hamilton owned a slave.

McDonald, Forrest (1982).

Alexander Hamilton: A Biography . W. W. Norton. p.

373 ( Footnotes ).

ISBN 978-0-393-30048-2 .

Historians have sometimes asserted that Hamilton, despite his activities in behalf of emancipation, did personally own slaves, though his family stoutly denied it.

Davis, David Brion (1999).

The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770-1823 . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 172.

Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay were figures of prominence who either owned or had owned Negro slaves.

Sterne, William Randall (2003).

Alexander Hamilton: A Life . New York: HarperCollins. p. 293.

ISBN 9780060195496 .

Hamilton himself never owned a slave, but he could never convince his wife to free her one slave, her body servant.

Hogeland, William (2018).

"From Ron Chernow's 'Alexander Hamilton' to 'Hamilton: An American Musical' " . In Romano, Renee C.; Potter, Claire Bond (eds.).

Historians on Hamilton: How a Blockbuster Musical Is Restaging America's Past . New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0-8135-9033-2 .

Many in both the North and South had deep concerns, no doubt often sincere, about the vileness of the institution [of slavery]. Many of those same people also held people in bondage, including Hamilton himself.

^ Chernow, p.

210 .

^ Hamilton, Allan McLane (1910).

"Friends and Enemies" .

The Intimate Life of Alexander Hamilton: Based Chiefly Upon Original Family Letters and Other Documents, Many of Which Have Never Been Published . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 268 . Retrieved October 13, 2016 .

It has been stated that Hamilton never owned a negro slave, but this is untrue. We find that in his books there are entries showing that he purchased them for himself and for others.

^ McDonald, Forrest (1982).

Alexander Hamilton: A Biography . W. W. Norton. p.

373 ( Footnotes ).

ISBN 978-0-393-30048-2 .

^ Hamilton, John C., The Life of Alexander Hamilton, D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1834–1840, vol. 2, p. 280 ^ Hamilton, Alexander (1850). "Hamilton to President of Congress". In Hamilton, John C. (ed.).

The Works of Alexander Hamilton [...] . Vol. 1. New York. pp.

76– 77.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Zilversmit, Arthur (1969).

The First Emancipation . Chicago: University of Chicago. pp. 182, 214.

^ Miller, John Chester (1964).

Alexander Hamilton and the Growth of the New Nation . Transaction. pp.

41– 42.

ISBN 978-1-4128-1675-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Cooke, Jacob Ernest (1982).

Alexander Hamilton . New York: Scribner's. p. 45.

^ a b Lind, Michael, Hamilton's Republic , 1997, pp. xiv–xv, 229–230.

^ Notz, William (1926).

"Friedrich List in America" .

American Economic Review .

16 (2): 248– 265.

JSTOR 1805356 .

^ Levermore, Charles H. (1890). "Henry C. Carey and his Social System".

Political Science Quarterly .

5 (4). The Academy of Political Science: 561.

JSTOR 2139529 .

^ Chernow, p. 170 .

^ Continentalist V, April 1782 (but written in fall 1781).

^ Syrett, p. 3:77.

^ Bairoch, pp.

17 , 33 .

^ Green, Richard T. (November 2002).

"Alexander Hamilton: Founder of the American Public Administration" .

Administration & Society .

34 (5): 541– 562.

doi : 10.1177/009539902237275 .

S2CID 145232233 .

^ Derthick 1999 , p. 122.

^ Harvey Flaumenhaft, "Hamilton's Administrative Republic and the American Presidency", in Joseph M. Bessette and Jeffrey Tulis, The Presidency in the Constitutional Order (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1981) ^ Austin, pp. 261–262.

^ Hamilton was not mentioned in standard reference guides to popular culture. See, e.g., Browne, Ray Broadus; Browne, Pat, eds. (2001).

The Guide to United States Popular Culture (index). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. p. 971.

ISBN 978-0-87972-821-2 .

^ Mead, Rebecca (February 9, 2015).

"All About the Hamiltons" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2018.

^ Paulson, Michael (May 3, 2016).

" Hamilton Makes History With 16 Tony Nominations" .

The New York Times .

^ Viagas, Robert (June 12, 2016).

" Hamilton Tops Tony Awards With 11 Wins" .

Playbill . Archived from the original on January 30, 2017.

^ White, Ben; McCaskill, Nolan D. (April 20, 2016).

"Tubman replacing Jackson on the $20, Hamilton spared" .

Politico . Retrieved January 11, 2019 .

^ "Hamilton film to be released a year early on Disney+" . May 12, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2024 .

Bibliography Ambrose, Douglas; Martin, Robert W. T. (2006).

The Many Faces of Alexander Hamilton: The Life & Legacy of America's Most Elusive Founding Father .

NYU Press .

ISBN 978-0-8147-0714-2 .

Bailey, Ralph Edward (1933).

An American Colossus: The Singular Career of Alexander Hamilton . Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co.

Brookhiser, Richard (2000).

Alexander Hamilton, American . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-86331-3 .

Chernow, Ron (2005).

Alexander Hamilton .

Penguin Press .

ISBN 978-0-14-303475-9 .

OL 35261741M .

Cooke, Jacob Ernest (1982).

Alexander Hamilton .

Charles Scribner's Sons .

ISBN 978-0-684-17344-3 .

Ellis, Joseph J.

(2002).

Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation . Vintage.

ISBN 978-0-375-70524-3 .

Ellis, Joseph J. (2005).

His Excellency: George Washington . Vintage.

ISBN 978-1-4000-3253-2 .

Emery, Noemie (1982).

Alexander Hamilton: An intimate portrait . Putnam.

ISBN 978-0-399-12681-9 .

Flaumenhaft, Harvey (1980).

The Administrative Republic of Alexander Hamilton . University of Chicago, Department of Political Science.

Fleming, Thomas (2000).

Duel: Alexander Hamilton, Aaron Burr, and the Future of America . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-01737-9 .

Flexner, James Thomas (1997).

The Young Hamilton: A Biography (2nd ed.).

Fordham University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8232-1790-8 .

Hendrickson, Robert (1976).

Hamilton I (1757–1789) . Mason/Charter.

ISBN 978-0-88405-139-8 .

McDonald, Forrest (1982).

Alexander Hamilton: A Biography .

W. W. Norton Company .

ISBN 978-0-393-30048-2 .

Miller, John Chester (1959).

Alexander Hamilton: Portrait in Paradox .

Harper & Row .

ISBN 978-0-06-012975-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Mitchell, Broadus (1957).

Alexander Hamilton: Youth to Maturity (1755–1788), Volume 1 . Macmillan.

Mitchell, Broadus (1957).

Alexander Hamilton: The National Adventure (1788–1804), Volume 2 . Macmillan.

Murray, Joseph A. (2007).

Alexander Hamilton: America's Forgotten Founder . Algora.

ISBN 978-0-87586-501-0 .

Newton, Michael E. (2015).

Alexander Hamilton: The Formative Years . Eleftheria Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9826040-3-8 .

OL 28143176M .

Randall, William Sterne (2015).

Alexander Hamilton: A Life .

HarperCollins .

ISBN 978-0-06-201532-7 .

OL 35758376M .

Schachner, Nathan (1946).

Alexander Hamilton . New York City: D. Appleton Century Co.

ASIN B0006AQUG2 .

Studies Adair, Douglas & Harvey, Marvin (1955).

"Was Alexander Hamilton a Christian Statesman?" .

William and Mary Quarterly .

12 (2): 308– 329.

JSTOR 1920511 .

Austin, Ian Patrick (2009).

Common Foundations of American and East Asian Modernisation: From Alexander Hamilton to Junichero Koizumi . Singapore: Select Books.

ISBN 978-981-4022-52-1 .

Bailey, Jeremy D. (2008).

"The New Unitary Executive and Democratic Theory: The Problem of Alexander Hamilton" .

American Political Science Review .

102 (4): 453– 465.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055408080337 .

Balogh, Brian. 2009.

A Government out of Sight: The Mystery of National Authority in Nineteenth Century American . New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bordewich, Fergus M.

The First Congress: How James Madison, George Washington, and a Group of Extraordinary Men Invented the Government (2016) on 1789–91.

Brant, Irving (1970).

The Fourth President: a Life of James Madison . Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merill.

A one-volume recasting of Brant's six-volume life.

Burns, Eric (2007).

Infamous Scribblers: The Founding Fathers and the Rowdy Beginnings of American Journalism . New York: PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1-58648-428-6 .

Chan, Michael D. (2004).

"Alexander Hamilton on Slavery" .

Review of Politics .

66 (2): 207– 231.

doi : 10.1017/s003467050003727x .

JSTOR 1408953 .

Denboer, Gordon R. (1987).

The Documentary History of the First Federal Elections, 1788–1790, Volume III . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-10650-8 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Derthick, Martha (1999).

Dilemmas of Scale in America's Federal Democracy . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-64039-8 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved March 6, 2015 .

Elkins, Stanley; McKitrick, Eric (1993).

Age of Federalism (Online ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on May 4, 2012 . Retrieved August 24, 2017 .

Detailed political history of the 1790s; online free Engerman, Stanley L.; Gallman, Robert E. (2000).

The Cambridge Economic History of the United States . Cambridge University Books.

ISBN 978-0-521-55307-0 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Fatovic, Clement (2004).

"Constitutionalism and Presidential Prerogative: Jeffersonian and Hamiltonian Perspectives" .

American Journal of Political Science .

48 (3): 429– 444.

doi : 10.1111/j.0092-5853.2004.00079.x .

Federici, Michael P. (2012).

The Political Philosophy of Alexander Hamilton . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4214-0539-1 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Flaumenhaft, Harvey (1992).

The Effective Republic: Administration and Constitution in the Thought of Alexander Hamilton . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8223-1214-7 .

Flexner, James Thomas (1965–1972).

George Washington . Little Brown.

. Four volumes, with various subtitles, cited as "Flexner, Washington ". Vol. IV.

ISBN 978-0-316-28602-2 .

Garrity, Patrick J.; Spalding, Matthew (2000).

A Sacred Union of Citizens: George Washington's Farewell Address and the American Character . Rowman and Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8476-8262-1 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Gaspar, Vitor. "The making of a continental financial system: Lessons for Europe from early American history." Journal of European Integration 37.7 (2015): 847–859, summarizes Hamilton's achievements in Atlantic perspective.

Gibowicz, Charles J. (2007).

Mess Night Traditions . Author House.

ISBN 978-1-4259-8446-5 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Harper, John Lamberton (2004).

American Machiavelli: Alexander Hamilton and the Origins of US Foreign Policy . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-83485-8 .

Hogeland, William (2024).

The Hamilton Scheme: An Epic Tale of Money and Power in the American Founding . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 9780374167837 .

OCLC 1393205277 .

Reviewed in Reason , July 2024, https://reason.com/2024/06/16/the-dark-side-of-alexander-hamilton/ Horton, James Oliver (2004).

"Alexander Hamilton: Slavery and Race in a Revolutionary Generation" (PDF) .

New York Journal of American History .

65 (3): 16– 24.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 8, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2011 .

Kaplan, Edward (1999).

The Bank of the United States and the American Economy . Westport, CT: Praeger.

ISBN 978-0-313-30866-6 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Kaplan, Lawrence S. (2001).

Alexander Hamilton: Ambivalent Anglophile . Rowman and Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8420-2878-3 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Keister, Doug (2011).

Stories in Stone New York: A Field Guide to New York City Area Cemeteries & Their Residents . Gibbs Smith.

ISBN 978-1-4236-2102-7 .

Kennedy, Roger G. (2000).

Burr, Hamilton, and Jefferson: A Study in Character . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-513055-3 .

Knott, Stephen F. "The Four Faces of Alexander Hamilton: Jefferson's Hamilton, Hollywood's Hamilton, Miranda's Hamilton, and the Real Hamilton." American Political Thought 7.4 (2018): 543–564.

Knott, Stephen F. (2002).

Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-1157-7 .

Kohn, Richard H. (1970).

"The Inside History of the Newburgh Conspiracy: America and the Coup d'Etat" .

The William and Mary Quarterly .

27 (2): 188– 220.

JSTOR 1918650 .

A review of the evidence on Newburgh; despite the title, Kohn is doubtful that a coup d'état was ever seriously attempted.

Larsen, Harold (1952). "Alexander Hamilton: The Fact and Fiction of His Early Years".

William and Mary Quarterly .

9 (2): 139– 151.

JSTOR 1925345 .

Levine, Yitzchok (May 2, 2007).

"The Jews of Nevis And Alexander Hamilton" .

Glimpses into American Jewish History . The Jewish Press. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011.

Lind, Michael (1994).

"Hamilton's Legacy" .

The Wilson Quarterly .

18 (3): 40– 52.

JSTOR 40258878 .

Littlefield, Daniel C. (2000).

"John Jay, the Revolutionary Generation, and Slavery" .

New York History .

81 (1): 91– 132.

ISSN 0146-437X .

Lomask, Milton (1979).

Aaron Burr, the Years from Princeton to Vice President, 1756–1805 . New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

ISBN 978-0-374-10016-2 .

First volume of two, contains Hamilton's lifetime.

Martin, Robert W. T. (2005).

"Reforming Republicanism: Alexander Hamilton's Theory of Republican Citizenship and Press Liberty" .

Journal of the Early Republic .

25 (1): 21– 46.

doi : 10.1353/jer.2005.0012 .

S2CID 143255588 .

Matson, Cathy (2010).

"Flimsy Fortunes: Americans' Old Relationship with Paper Speculation and Panic" .

Common-place .

10 (4). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016 . Retrieved May 2, 2018 .

Summarizes speculations of William Duer and others in the context of the national economy.

McCraw, Thomas K. (2012).

The Founders and Finance: How Hamilton, Gallatin, and Other Immigrants Forged a New Economy .

McManus, Edgar J. (1966).

History of Negro Slavery in New York . Syracuse University Press.

Mitchell, Broadus (1951). "The man who 'discovered' Alexander Hamilton".

Proceedings of the New Jersey Historical Society .

69 : 88– 115.

Monaghan, Frank (1972) [1935].

John Jay: Defender of Liberty Against Kings & Peoples, Author of the Constitution & Governor of New York, President of the Continental Congress, Co-Author of the Federalist, Negotiator of the Peace of 1783 & the Jay Treaty of 1794, First Chief Justice of the United States (Reprint ed.). New York: AMS Press.

ISBN 0404046479 .

LCCN 74-153339 .

OCLC 424884 .

Morgan, Philip D. & O'Shaughnessy, A. J. (2006). "Arming Slaves in the American Revolution". In Brown, Christopher Leslie & Morgan, Philip D. (eds.).

Arming Slaves: From Classical Times to the Modern Age . New York: Yale University Press. pp.

180 –208.

ISBN 978-0-300-10900-9 .

Nester, William (June 2012).

The Hamiltonian Vision, 1789–1800: The Art of American Power During the Early Republic . U of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-1-59797-675-6 .

Nettels, Curtis P. (1962).

The Emergence of a National Economy, 1775–1815 . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Newman, Paul Douglas (2004).

Fries's Rebellion: The Enduring Struggle for the American Revolution . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3815-0 .

Newton, Michael E. (2019).

Discovering Hamilton: New Discoveries in the Lives of Alexander Hamilton, His Family, Friends, and Colleagues, from Various Archives Around the World . Eleftheria Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9826040-4-5 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2021 .

Northup, Cynthia Clark; Turney, Elaine C. Prange; Stockwell, Mary (2003).

Encyclopedia of Tariffs and Trade in U.S. History . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-313-31943-3 .

Norton, Joseph (2005).

Shapers of the Great Debate at the Constitutional Convention of 1787: A Biographical Dictionary (Shapers of the Great American Debates) . Greenwood; annotated edition.

ISBN 978-0-313-33021-6 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Rakove, Jack N.

(1979).

The beginnings of National Politics: an interpretive history of the Continental Congress . New York: Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-394-42370-8 .

Rossiter, Clinton (1964).

Alexander Hamilton and the Constitution . New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

Sharp, James (1995).

American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-06519-0 .

Survey of politics in the 1790s.

Sheehan, Colleen (2004). "Madison v. Hamilton: The Battle Over Republicanism and the Role of Public Opinion".

American Political Science Review .

98 (3): 405– 424.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055404001248 .

S2CID 145693742 .

Smith, Robert W. (2004).

Keeping the Republic: Ideology and Early American Diplomacy . DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87580-326-5 .

Staloff, Darren (2005).

Hamilton, Adams, Jefferson: The Politics of Enlightenment and the American Founding . New York: Hill and Wang.

ISBN 978-0-8090-7784-7 .

Steward, David O. (2016).

Madison's Gift: Five Partnerships That Built America . imon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4516-8859-7 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

Storbridge, Truman R.; Noble, Dennis L. (1999).

Alaska and the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service: 1867–1915 . Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-845-4 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

Stourzh, Gerald (1970).

Alexander Hamilton and the Idea of Republican Government . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0724-4 .

Stryker, William S. (1898).

The Battles of Trenton and Princeton . Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co.

Studenski, Paul; Krooss, Herman Edward (2003).

Financial History of the United States (5th ed.). Frederick, MD: Beard Books.

ISBN 978-1-58798-175-3 .

Sylla, Richard ; Wright, Robert E. & Cowen, David J. (2009).

"Alexander Hamilton, Central Banker: Crisis Management during the US Financial Panic of 1792" .

Business History Review .

83 (1): 61– 86.

doi : 10.1017/s0007680500000209 .

S2CID 153842455 .

Thomas, Charles Marion (1931).

American neutrality in 1793; a study in cabinet government . New York: Columbia University Press.

Trees, Andrew S. (2005). "The Importance of Being Alexander Hamilton".

Reviews in American History .

33 (1): 8– 14.

doi : 10.1353/rah.2005.0019 .

S2CID 143944159 .

Trees, Andrew S. (2004).

The Founding Fathers and the Politics of Character . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-11552-8 .

Tucker, Spencer C.

(2014).

The Encyclopedia of the Wars of the Early American Republic, 1783–1812 [three volumes]: A Political, Social, and Military History . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-59884-156-5 .

Wallace, David Duncan (1915).

Life of Henry Laurens, with a sketch of the life of Lieutenant-Colonel John Laurens . New York: Putnam.

Weston, Rob N. (1994). "Alexander Hamilton and the Abolition of Slavery in New York".

Afro-Americans in New York Life and History .

18 (1): 31– 45.

ISSN 0364-2437 .

An undergraduate paper, which concludes that Hamilton was ambivalent about slavery.

White, Leonard D.

(1944).

"Public Administration Under the Federalists" .

Boston University Law Review .

24 : 144– 187 – via HeinOnline .

White, Leonard D.

(1949).

The Federalists . New York: Macmillan.

Coverage of how the Treasury and other departments were created and operated.

White, Richard D. (2000). "Exploring the Origins of the American Administrative State: Recent Writings on the Ambiguous Legacy of Alexander Hamilton".

Public Administration Review .

60 (2): 186– 190.

doi : 10.1111/0033-3352.00077 .

Wood, Gordon S. (2009).

Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815 . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503914-6 .

The most recent synthesis of the era.

Wright, Robert E. (2002).

Hamilton Unbound: Finance and the Creation of the American Republic . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-313-32397-3 .

——— (2008).

One Nation Under Debt: Hamilton, Jefferson, and the History of What We Owe . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-154393-4 .

James, Davida Siwisa (April 2, 2024).

Hamilton Heights and Sugar Hill: Alexander Hamilton's Old Harlem Neighborhood Through the Centuries .

Fordham University Press .

ISBN 9781531506155 .

Sources Cooke, Jacob E., ed.

Alexander Hamilton: A Profile . 1967. (Short excerpts from Hamilton and his critics.) Cunningham, Noble E.

Jefferson vs. Hamilton: Confrontations that Shaped a Nation . 2000. (Short collection of primary sources, with commentary.) Freeman, Joanne B., ed. (2001).

Alexander Hamilton: Writings . The Library of America. p.

1108 .

ISBN 978-1-931082-04-4 .

(All of Hamilton's major writings and many of his letters.) Freeman, Joanne B., ed., The Essential Hamilton: Letters & Other Writings (abridged ed.) (Library of America, 2017) Frisch, Morton J., ed.

Selected Writings and Speeches of Alexander Hamilton.

1985.

Goebel, Julius Jr., and Joseph H. Smith, eds.

The Law Practice of Alexander Hamilton . 5 vols. Columbia University Press, 1964–80. (Comprehensive edition of Hamilton's legal papers.) Hamilton, Alexander.

Report on Manufactures . (Economic program for the United States.) Hamilton, Alexander.

Report on Public Credit . (Financial program for the United States.) Hamilton, Alexander; Hamilton, John Church .

The Works of Alexander Hamilton: Miscellanies, 1789–1795: France; Duties on imports; National bank; Manufactures; Revenue circulars; Reports on claims . 1850. John F. Trow, printer. ( free online e-book edition Archived April 5, 2023, at the Wayback Machine ) Hamilton, Alexander; Madison, James ; Jay, John .

The Federalist Papers . (Published under the shared pseudonym "Publius".) Lodge, Henry Cabot , ed. (1904).

The Works of Alexander Hamilton, 10 vols . New York; London: G. P. Putnam's Sons.

Morris, Richard, ed.

Alexander Hamilton and the Founding of the Nation . 1957. (Excerpts from Hamilton's writings.) National Archives, Founders Online Archived April 13, 2021, at the Wayback Machine – searchable edition Sylla, Richard and David J. Cowen, eds.

Alexander Hamilton on Finance, Credit, and Debt (Columbia UP, 2018) 346 pp. (partly abridged version of key documents; online review Archived August 5, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ) Syrett, Harold C.

, Jacob E. Cooke, and Barbara Chernow , eds.

The Papers of Alexander Hamilton . 27 vols. Columbia University Press, 1961–87. (Includes all letters and writings by Hamilton, and all important letters written to him; the definitive edition of Hamilton's works, intensively annotated.) Taylor, George Rogers , ed.

Hamilton and the National Debt . 1950. (Excerpts from 1790s writings representing all sides.) External links Listen to this article ( 1 hour and 43 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 11 July 2020 ( 2020-07-11 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Alexander Hamilton at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Library resources about Alexander Hamilton Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Alexander Hamilton Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Alexander Hamilton: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Works by or about Alexander Hamilton at the Internet Archive Works by Alexander Hamilton at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Alexander Hamilton 8th Senior Officer of the United States Army (1799–1800) 1st Secretary of the Treasury (1789–1795) Delegate to the Congress of the Confederation (1782–1783, 1788–1789) United States founding events A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress (1774) The Farmer Refuted (1775) Delegate, 1786 Annapolis Convention Delegate, 1787 Constitutional Convention The Federalist Papers New York Circular Letter Secretary of the Treasury First Bank of the United States Revenue Marine (U.S. Coast Guard) U.S. Customs Service Hamiltonian economic program Residence Act Compromise of 1790 Funding Act of 1790 Tariff of 1790 Bank Bill of 1791 Tariff of 1791 Tariff of 1792 Coinage Act of 1792 U.S. Mint Whiskey Rebellion Jay Treaty Reports "First Report on the Public Credit" "Second Report on Public Credit" "Report On Manufactures" "Report on a Plan for the Further Support of Public Credit" Society for Establishing Useful Manufactures Military career New York Provincial Company of Artillery Washington's aide-de-camp Battles Harlem Heights White Plains Trenton Princeton Brandywine Germantown Monmouth Siege of Yorktown Other events Founder, Federalist Party Federalist Era Founder, Bank of New York Bank of North America Pacificus-Helvidius Debates Advisor, George Washington's Farewell Address President General of the Society of the Cincinnati Founder, New-York Evening Post Hamilton College Hamilton–Reynolds affair Rutgers v. Waddington Relationship with slavery Burr–Hamilton duel Depictions Trumbull portrait Ceracchi bust Central Park statue U.S. Treasury statue Columbia University statue Boston statue Chicago statue U.S. postage stamps Greenbacks U.S. $10 bill Memorials Boyhood home and museum Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom House Alexander Hamilton Bridge Alexander Hamilton High School (Los Angeles) Fort Hamilton Hamilton Grange National Memorial Hamilton Hall (Columbia University) Hamilton Hall (Salem) Hamilton Heights, Manhattan Hamilton, Ohio Hamilton College USS Alexander Hamilton PS Alexander Hamilton Trinity Church Cemetery Popular culture Hamilton (1917 play) Alexander Hamilton (1931 film) Liberty!

(1997 documentary series) Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series) Alexander Hamilton (2004 book) John Adams (2008 miniseries) Hamilton (2015 musical, 2020 film ) Washington (2020 miniseries) Related Founders Online Age of Enlightenment American Enlightenment American Philosophical Society Liberty Hall (New Jersey) New York Manumission Society African Free School "American System" economic plan American School American Revolution patriots Family Elizabeth Schuyler Hamilton (wife) Philip Hamilton (son) Angelica Hamilton (daughter) Alexander Hamilton Jr.

(son) James Alexander Hamilton (son) John Church Hamilton (son) William S. Hamilton (son) Eliza Hamilton Holly (daughter) Philip Hamilton (son) Schuyler Hamilton (grandson) Alexander Hamilton Jr.

(grandson) Allan McLane Hamilton (grandson) Category v t e The Federalist Papers Authors Alexander Hamilton (papers) James Madison (papers) John Jay (papers) Papers 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 Related Constitution timeline The Independent Journal Publius Valerius Publicola Anti-Federalist Papers complete Category Portal:History The Federalist v t e Constitution of the United States Articles Preamble I II III IV V VI VII Amendments Bill of Rights 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1795–1804 11 12 Reconstruction 13 14 15 20th century 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Unratified Congressional Apportionment Titles of Nobility Corwin Amendment Child Labor Equal Rights District of Columbia Voting Rights Proposed Balanced budget Blaine amendment Bricker amendment Campaign finance reform Christian amendment Crittenden Compromise Electoral College abolition Equal Opportunity to Govern Federal Marriage Flag Desecration Human Life "Liberty" amendment Ludlow amendment Parental Rights amendment School Prayer Single subject Victims' Rights Convention to propose amendments State ratifying conventions Formation History Articles of Confederation Mount Vernon Conference Annapolis Convention Philadelphia Convention Virginia Plan New Jersey Plan Connecticut Compromise Three-fifths Compromise Committee of Detail List of Framers Signing Printing Independence Hall Syng inkstand The Federalist Papers Anti-Federalist Papers Massachusetts Compromise Virginia Ratifying Convention New York Circular Letter Hillsborough Convention Fayetteville Convention Rhode Island ratification Drafting and ratification timeline Clauses Admission to the Union Appointments Appropriations Assemble and Petition Clause Assistance of Counsel Case or Controversy Citizenship Commerce Compact Compulsory Process Confrontation Congressional enforcement Contingent Elections Contract Copyright and Patent Double Jeopardy Due Process Elections Engagements Equal Protection Establishment Exceptions Excessive Bail Ex Post Facto Extradition Free Exercise Freedom of the Press Freedom of Speech Fugitive Slave Full Faith and Credit General Welfare Guarantee House Apportionment Impeachment Import-Export Ineligibility Militia Natural-born citizen Necessary and Proper No Religious Test Oath or Affirmation Original Jurisdiction Origination Pardon Postal Presentment Presidential Electors Presidential succession Privileges and Immunities Privileges or Immunities Recess appointment Recommendation Self-Incrimination Speech or Debate Speedy Trial State of the Union Supremacy Suspension Take Care Takings Taxing and Spending Territorial Title of Nobility ( Foreign Emoluments ) Treaty Trial by Jury Vesting ( Legislative / Executive / Judicial ) Vicinage War Powers Interpretation Balance of powers Concurrent powers Constitutional law Criminal procedure Criminal sentencing Dormant Commerce Clause Enumerated powers Equal footing Executive privilege Implied powers Incorporation of the Bill of Rights Judicial review Nondelegation doctrine Plenary power Preemption Reserved powers Saxbe fix Separation of church and state Separation of powers Symmetric federalism Taxation power Unitary executive theory Signatories Convention President George Washington New Hampshire John Langdon Nicholas Gilman Massachusetts Nathaniel Gorham Rufus King Connecticut William Samuel Johnson Roger Sherman New York Alexander Hamilton New Jersey William Livingston David Brearley William Paterson Jonathan Dayton Pennsylvania Benjamin Franklin Thomas Mifflin Robert Morris George Clymer Thomas Fitzsimons Jared Ingersoll James Wilson Gouverneur Morris Delaware George Read Gunning Bedford Jr.

John Dickinson Richard Bassett Jacob Broom Maryland James McHenry Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer Daniel Carroll Virginia John Blair James Madison North Carolina William Blount Richard Dobbs Spaight Hugh Williamson South Carolina John Rutledge Charles Cotesworth Pinckney Charles Pinckney Pierce Butler Georgia William Few Abraham Baldwin Convention Secretary William Jackson Related Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Jacob Shallus William Lambert Bibliography of the United States Constitution Founding Fathers of the United States Display and legacy National Archives Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom Independence Mall Constitution Day and Citizenship Day Constitution Gardens Constitution Week National Constitution Center Scene at the Signing of the Constitution (painting) A More Perfect Union (film) Worldwide influence Offices and distinctions Political offices New office United States Secretary of the Treasury 1789–1795 Succeeded by Oliver Wolcott Military offices Preceded by Thomas Cushing Acting Inspector General of the United States Army 1798–1800 Succeeded by Thomas Cushing Acting Preceded by George Washington Senior Officer of the United States Army 1799–1800 Succeeded by James Wilkinson Non-profit organization positions Preceded by George Washington President General of the Society of the Cincinnati 1800–1804 Succeeded by Charles Pinckney Articles related to Alexander Hamilton v t e Federalist Party Federalist Era American School First Party System Presidency of George Washington Presidency of John Adams Presidential tickets 1796 : Adams / T. Pinckney 1800 : Adams / C. Pinckney 1804 : C. Pinckney / King 1808 : C. Pinckney / King 1812 : Clinton / Ingersoll 1816 : King / Howard U.S. House speakers Frederick Muhlenberg (1789–1791) Jonathan Trumbull Jr.

(1791–1793) Jonathan Dayton (1795–1799) Theodore Sedgwick (1799–1801) U.S. Cabinet State John Jay (1789–1790) Edmund Randolph (1794–1795) Timothy Pickering (1795–1800) Charles Lee (1800) John Marshall (1800–1801) Richard Rush (1817) Treasury Alexander Hamilton (1789–1795) Oliver Wolcott Jr.

(1795–1801) Samuel Dexter (1801) War Henry Knox (1789–1795) Timothy Pickering (1795) James McHenry (1796–1800) Samuel Dexter (1800–1801) Attorney General Edmund Randolph (1789–1794) William Bradford (1794–1795) Charles Lee (1795–1801) Richard Rush (1814–1817) Navy Benjamin Stoddert (1798–1801) v t e United States secretaries of the treasury Hamilton Wolcott Dexter Gallatin Campbell Dallas Crawford Rush Ingham McLane Duane Taney Woodbury Ewing Forward Spencer Bibb Walker Meredith Corwin Guthrie Cobb Thomas Dix Chase Fessenden McCulloch Boutwell Richardson Bristow Morrill Sherman Windom Folger Gresham McCulloch Manning Fairchild Windom Foster Carlisle Gage Shaw Cortelyou MacVeagh McAdoo Glass Houston Mellon Mills Woodin Morgenthau Vinson Snyder Humphrey Anderson Dillon Fowler Barr Kennedy Connally Shultz Simon Blumenthal Miller Regan Baker Brady Bentsen Rubin Summers O'Neill Snow Paulson Geithner Lew Mnuchin Yellen Bessent v t e Cabinet of President George Washington (1789–1797) Secretary of State John Jay (1789–1790) Thomas Jefferson (1790–1793) Edmund Randolph (1794–1795) Timothy Pickering (1795–1797) Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton (1789–1795) Oliver Wolcott Jr.

(1795–1797) Secretary of War Henry Knox (1789–1794) Timothy Pickering (1795) James McHenry (1796–1797) Attorney General Edmund Randolph (1789–1794) William Bradford (1794–1795) Charles Lee (1795–1797) v t e Leaders of the United States Army Senior officers / commanding generals Washington Knox Doughty Harmar St. Clair Wayne Hamilton Wilkinson Dearborn J. Brown Macomb W. Scott McClellan Halleck Grant Sherman Sheridan Schofield Miles Chiefs of staff Young Chaffee Bates Bell Wood Wotherspoon H. Scott Bliss March Pershing Hines Summerall MacArthur Craig Marshall Eisenhower Bradley Collins Ridgway Taylor Lemnitzer Decker Wheeler Johnson Westmoreland B. Palmer Abrams Weyand Rogers Meyer Wickham Vuono Sullivan Reimer Shinseki Schoomaker Casey Dempsey Odierno Milley McConville George Vice chiefs of staff Collins Haislip Hull Bolte W. Palmer Lemnitzer Decker Eddleman Hamlett Abrams Haines B. Palmer Haig Weyand Kerwin Kroesen Vessey Wickham Thurman A. Brown RisCassi Sullivan Reimer Peay Tilelli Griffith Crouch Shinseki Keane Casey Cody Chiarelli Austin Campbell Allyn McConville Martin George Mingus v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Inspectors general of the United States Army La Balme du Coudray Conway von Steuben North De Butts Rudolph Butler Mills Haskell Butler Cushing Hamilton Cushing Nickoll Smyth Pike Winder Parker Hayne Gadsden Archer Wool Croghan Churchill McCall Mansfield Scott Marcy Sackett Van Rensselaer Schriver Hardie Davis Baird Jones Breckinridge Vroom Burton Garlington Chamberlain Helmick Rivers Drum Preston Reed Peterson Sultan Wyche Craig Noce Zimmerman Ogden Pierson McDaniel Ives Richardson Garrison Enemark Woodward Maples Fuller Trefry Thompson Doctor Corns Griffith Jordan Ackerman Mikolashek Green Whitcomb Vangjel Quantock Smith Martin Brady v t e American Revolutionary War Origins of the American Revolution Philosophy American Enlightenment John Locke Colonial history Liberalism Republicanism Freedom of religion Rights of Englishmen No taxation without representation Common Sense Spirit of '76 " All men are created equal " " Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness " " Consent of the governed " Expansionism Settler colonialism Royalists Pitt–Newcastle ministry Bute ministry Grenville ministry First Rockingham ministry Chatham ministry Grafton ministry North ministry Second Rockingham ministry Shelburne ministry Fox–North coalition Loyalists Black Loyalist Related British acts of Parliament Navigation Iron Molasses Royal Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Currency Quartering Stamp up i.p.o Declaratory Townshend Tea Quebec Intolerable Conciliatory Resolution Restraining Proclamation of Rebellion Prohibitory Colonials Loyal Nine Stamp Act Congress Declaration of Rights and Grievances Virginia Association Daughters of Liberty Sons of Liberty Patriots Black Patriots Committees of correspondence Committees of safety Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania Massachusetts Circular Letter Suffolk Resolves Continental Congress First Continental Congress Continental Association Minutemen Provincial Congress Second Continental Congress United Colonies Olive Branch Petition Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms Committee of Secret Correspondence Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Model Treaty Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Confederation Congress Events French and Indian War Treaty of Paris (1763) Boston Massacre British credit crisis of 1772–1773 Gaspee affair Hutchinson letters affair Boston Tea Party Philadelphia Tea Party Powder Alarm Combatants Campaigns Theaters Battles Events Colonies Combatants United Colonies / Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Board of War Army Navy Marines Kingdom of Great Britain Parliament British Army Royal Navy European allies of King George III Colonial allies France Franco-American Treaty Army Navy Hortalez et Cie German supporters of Congress Campaigns and theaters Boston Quebec Nova Scotia New York and New Jersey Saratoga Philadelphia Northern Northern after Saratoga Southern Western Yorktown Naval battles Major battles Lexington and Concord Boston Capture of Fort Ticonderoga Bunker Hill Quebec Valcour Island Long Island Harlem Heights Fort Washington Trenton Assunpink Creek Princeton Siege of Fort Ticonderoga Bennington Saratoga Oriskany Brandywine Germantown Monmouth St. Lucia Grenada Stony Point Sullivan Expedition Savannah Gibraltar Cape St. Vincent Charleston Connecticut Farms Springfield Camden Kings Mountain Cowpens Pensacola Guilford Court House Lochry's Defeat Chesapeake Yorktown The Saintes Other events Staten Island Peace Conference "First Salute" Washington's crossing of the Delaware River Conway Cabal Valley Forge Entry of France into war Carlisle Peace Commission Gordon Riots Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1781 Sint Eustatius Newburgh Conspiracy Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 Related conflicts Cherokee–American wars Fourth Anglo-Dutch War Second Anglo-Mysore War Involvement (by colony or location) Rebel colonies Connecticut Delaware Georgia Maryland Massachusetts New Hampshire New Jersey New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Virginia Loyal colonies East Florida Nova Scotia Quebec West Florida Leaders British Military Arbuthnot Brant Burgoyne Campbell Carleton Clinton Cornwallis Fraser Gage Graves Richard Howe William Howe Knyphausen Rodney Civilian King George III Amherst Barrington Germain North Rockingham Sandwich Shelburne Colonial Military Washington Alexander Allen Arnold Barry Claghorn Clark Duportail Gates Greene Hamilton Hopkins Jones de Kalb Knox Lafayette Charles Lee Lincoln Mercer Montgomery Nicholson Putnam Rodney St. Clair Schuyler von Steuben Sullivan Ward Wayne Civilian John Adams Samuel Adams Carroll Dickinson Franklin Hancock Hanson Henry Huntington Jay Jefferson Laurens Richard Henry Lee McKean Morris Revere Rush Witherspoon Colonial allies French Louis XVI Beaumarchais d'Estaing de Grasse de Guichen Luzerne de Rochambeau Suffren Vergennes Aftermath Society of the Cincinnati Treaty of Paris (1783) Evacuation Day (1783) Ratification Day (1784) Constitutional Convention The Federalist Papers Constitution Bill of Rights Shays's Rebellion Jay Treaty Related topics Military Prisoners The Turtle Tomb of the Unknown Revolutionary War Soldier Political Founding Fathers Diplomacy Liberty Tree Yankee Doodle Other topics Timeline of the American Revolution African Americans in the Revolutionary War Dogs in the American Revolutionary War Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War Women in the American Revolution Financial costs of the war Continental currency banknotes Continental Currency dollar coin Libertas Americana Commemoration films television theater Independence Day Patriots' Day Pulaski Memorial Day Washington's Birthday Jefferson's Birthday Von Steuben Day Minor holidays Centennial Sesquicentennial Bicentennial Semiquincentennial Children of the American Revolution Daughters of the American Revolution Sons of the American Revolution Sons of the Revolution Washington D.C. statuary Charters of Freedom Rotunda Museum of the American Revolution v t e BNY Founders Alexander Hamilton Aaron Burr Thomas Mellon Notable executives Former Gerald Hassell Tom Renyi Subsidiaries BNY Investments Dreyfus Insight Investment Newton Walter Scott CIBC Mellon Eagle Investment Systems Pershing LLC Historical components Irving Trust Mechanics' and Farmers' Bank of Albany Mellon Financial Buildings 1 Wall Street BNY Mellon Center (Philadelphia) BNY Mellon Center (Pittsburgh) Mellon National Bank Building Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tgjcq
Cached time: 20250817235944
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.700 seconds
Real time usage: 4.158 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 49490/1000000
Revision size: 201377/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1000549/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 144286/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 876563/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.062/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16824982/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3434.739      1 -total
 27.89%  957.888      2 Template:Reflist
 24.63%  845.862    132 Template:Cite_book
 11.73%  402.762     82 Template:Rp
 11.50%  395.002      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 11.20%  384.810     82 Template:R/superscript
  7.31%  251.153      2 Template:Navboxes
  6.72%  230.678     38 Template:Cite_journal
  6.59%  226.269     30 Template:Cite_web
  5.76%  197.855    246 Template:R/where Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40597:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817235944 and revision id 1306481978. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_Hamilton&oldid=1306481978 " Categories : Alexander Hamilton Founding Fathers of the United States 1750s births 1804 deaths 18th-century American philosophers 18th-century United States Army personnel 19th-century American politicians 19th-century American philosophers 19th-century American lawyers 19th-century United States Army personnel Age controversies Aides-de-camp of George Washington American company founders American nationalists American people of English descent American people of Saint Kitts and Nevis descent American people of Scottish descent American people of French descent American political party founders American political philosophers American politicians killed in duels BNY Mellon Burials at Trinity Church Cemetery Columbia College (New York) alumni Columbia University alumni Commanding Generals of the United States Army Continental Army officers from New York (state) Continental Congressmen from New York (state) Deaths by firearm in New Jersey Social scientists from New York City Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Hamilton family Huguenot participants in the American Revolution Inspectors general of the United States Army Members of the American Philosophical Society Abolitionists from New York City New York (state) Federalists New York (state) militiamen in the American Revolution New York Post people New York (state) lawyers People from Nevis People from New York City People from Saint Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands People of the American Enlightenment People of the Quasi-War Philosophers from New York (state) Saint Kitts and Nevis emigrants to the United States Signers of the United States Constitution The Federalist Papers United States secretaries of the treasury Washington administration cabinet members Hidden categories: CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2024 CS1 maint: others CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from November 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2025 All self-contradictory articles Self-contradictory articles from October 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2020 Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 23:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexander Hamilton 79 languages Add topic

