Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Personal life 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Theodor Kaluza 27 languages বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Ślůnski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician and physicist Theodor F. E. Kaluza Born ( 1885-11-09 ) 9 November 1885 Wilhelmsthal , Silesia , Prussia , German Empire Died 19 January 1954 (1954-01-19) (aged 68) Göttingen , Lower Saxony , West Germany Alma mater University of Königsberg Known for Kaluza–Klein theory Scientific career Fields Mathematical physics Theodor Franz Eduard Kaluza ( German: [kaˈluːt͡sa] ; 9 November 1885 – 19 January 1954) was a German mathematician and physicist known for the Kaluza–Klein theory , involving field equations in five-dimensional space-time. His idea that fundamental forces can be unified by introducing additional dimensions was reused much later for string theory .

Life [ edit ] Kaluza was born to a Roman Catholic family from the town of Ratibor (present-day Racibórz in Poland) in the German Empire 's Prussian Province of Silesia . Kaluza himself was born in Wilhelmsthal (a village that was incorporated into Oppeln (presently Opole ) in 1899). He spent his youth in Königsberg , where his father, Maximilian "Max" Kaluza , was a professor of the English language. He entered the University of Königsberg to study mathematics and gained his doctorate with a thesis on Tschirnhaus transformations . Kaluza was primarily a mathematician but began studying relativity . In April 1919 Kaluza noticed that when he solved Albert Einstein 's equations for general relativity using five dimensions, then Maxwellian equations for electromagnetism resulted spontaneously.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Kaluza wrote to Einstein who, in turn, encouraged him to publish. Kaluza's theory was published in 1921 in a paper "Zum Unitätsproblem der Physik" with Einstein's support in Sitzungsberichte Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften 966–972 (1921).

[ 2 ] Kaluza's insight is remembered as the Kaluza–Klein theory (named also after physicist Oskar Klein ). However, the work was neglected for many years, as attention was directed towards quantum mechanics . His idea that fundamental forces can be explained by additional dimensions was not reused until string theory was developed. It is, however, also notable that many of the aspects of this body of work were already published in 1914 by Gunnar Nordström , but his work also went unnoticed and was not recognized when the ideas were reused.

Among his PhD students was Shmuel Sambursky , Professor of Physics at Hebrew University , and winner of the Israel Prize .

For the rest of his career Kaluza continued to produce ideas about relativity and about models of the atomic nucleus . Despite Einstein's encouragement, Kaluza remained only a ( Privatdozent ) at Königsberg until 1929, when he was appointed as professor at the University of Kiel . In 1935, he became a full professor at the University of Göttingen , where he remained until his death in 1954. Perhaps his finest mathematical work is the textbook Höhere Mathematik für den Praktiker , which was written jointly with Georg Joos .

Personal life [ edit ] Kaluza was extraordinarily versatile. He spoke or wrote 17 languages. He also had an unusually modest personality. He refused the Nazi ideology , and his appointment to the Göttingen professorship was possible only with difficulties and by assistance of his colleague Helmut Hasse . Strange stories were told of his private life, for example, that he taught himself to swim during his thirties by reading a book about it and succeeded at his first attempt in the water.

Kaluza had a son, also named Theodor Kaluza [ de ] (1910-1994), who was a notable mathematician .

See also [ edit ] Yang–Mills theory Superstring theory Notes [ edit ] ^ Daniela Wuensch.

Kaluza—Klein Theory . Compendium of Quantum Physics 2009, pp. 328–331.

^ a b Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (1918) ( Proceedings of the Prussian Academy of Sciences (1918)). archive.org. pp. 966–974.

^ Proceedings of the Prussian Academy of Sciences (1918). p. 969. (cf., da num (für alle drei arten feldgleichungen) [...

Ricci tensor ...], so für den die maxwellschen gleichen gem fur die komponenten des verstorms [...] der raumzeitliche energietensor is also im wesentlichen mir stromdichte zu randern (Tr., Since then (for all three types of field equations)  [...

Ricci-flat manifold ...], So for the same according to Maxwell's for the components of the verstorms [...] the spatio-temporal energy tensor thus essentially current density are random)).

References [ edit ] Biography of Kaluza from the MacTutor archive Theodor Kaluza at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Biography of Kaluza (book with 748 pages in German by Daniela Wuensch) from the Termessos publishing house Daniela Wünsch, "Der Erfinder der fünften Dimension", Neue Zürcher Zeitung , January 21, 2004 (article in German) .

Articles (some in English) about Kaluza by Daniela Wuensch External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Theodor Kaluza TED talk - capsule introduction to string theory given by Brian Greene Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Poland Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theodor_Kaluza&oldid=1300791277 " Categories : 1885 births 1954 deaths 20th-century German mathematicians 20th-century German physicists People from Opole Scientists from the Province of Silesia University of Königsberg alumni Academic staff of the University of Kiel Academic staff of the University of Göttingen German theoretical physicists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 12:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theodor Kaluza 27 languages Add topic

