Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Forms of mashup culture Toggle Forms of mashup culture subsection 2.1 Statement of art 2.2 Political statement 2.3 Do-it-yourself culture 3 Mashup in current literature Toggle Mashup in current literature subsection 3.1 DJ Spooky 4 See also 5 References 6 Literature Toggle the table of contents Mashup (culture) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Participants in an online music scene who rearrange spliced parts of musical pieces form mashup culture . The audio-files are normally in MP3 format and spliced with audio-editing software online. The new, edited song is called mashup.

[ 1 ] The expression mashup culture is also strongly connected to mashup in music . Even though it was not originally a political community, the production of mash-up music is related to the issue of copyright . Mashup Culture is even regarded as "a response to larger technological, institutional, and social contexts".

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The history of mashup culture in general can be dated back to the beginnings of dada and conceptual art . Artists such as Marcel Duchamp were the first to introduce already existing objects, which they rearranged and combined in collages , to the world of higher art.

[ 3 ] These artists believed that even though certain artifacts were ascribed a certain meaning, this meaning could be altered through rearranging them and putting them into a new context. However, it was still quite a long way to the beginning of mashup culture in music. From the early 2000s on, music was more and more distributed through the internet. With the introduction of MP3 audio files, it became much easier to access and download music. Not only could music be accessed easier, it could also be transformed and mixed in ways that were not possible before. Especially for younger people, this new gained freedom when it came to the accessibility of audio files lead to the development of a new form of cult around the transformation of musical pieces.

[ 1 ] This "reworking MP3 recordings pulled from the Internet" was turning into more than just a fashion just as "the Internet is more than just a means of distribution, it becomes a raison d’eˆtre for a culture based on audio data’’ states Alistair Riddell in 2001.

[ 4 ] During that time, the first versions of mashup music were published, sometimes not under the term mashup but under the name of " creative bootleg " or " bastard pop ".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Even though the creation of a new song by combining at least two samples of different songs was also used in other music styles such as hip hop before, [ 2 ] it was only with the rise of the MP3 audio file along with easy-to-use computer mash-up programs that mash-up was transformed into an own culture as such. Especially peer-to-peer sharing was contributing to this phenomenon: People who create mashup music can easily distribute it and share it with other people through online programs.

[ 1 ] Forms of mashup culture [ edit ] Cover of the Mixtape Mash Up 2 by DJ Jopez Mashup culture is motivated by a number of different factors.

Statement of art [ edit ] Mashup culture is sometimes regarded as a cultural movement against common, existing music that is published by the music industry. In 2002, a Newsweek article described the mashup of songs as a strategy of Londoner DJs to transform music they considered bad into something they could appreciate and were willing to listen to.

[ 1 ] Even though mashup culture has its origin in online communities, it entered a more art-related realm. It is art used as a statement against the content music industry provides.

[ 2 ] Political statement [ edit ] It can even be considered as a political statement against copyright laws and restrictions imposed by the government as well. "Reframing of the original narrative" is regarded as a way to create a new and unique product which leads to a "fresh perspective" of the original.

[ 3 ] Murray states "there’s the question of the kind of Internet we want moving forward – one increasingly controlled by corporate gatekeepers who get to sanction what creative expression looks like, or one in which the freedom of this expression is valued above share price". Copyright issues have always been limiting the possibilities of mashup culture. Those implications by law have led to the problem of online piracy .

[ 1 ] Mashups are often created with illegally acquired content. This closeness to illegality has become part of this culture. "In some cases, the illegality of piracy contributes to the appeal of unauthorized copies online" states Shiga in her article Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-Up Culture . Even though copyright laws were intentionally supposed to stop illegal downloads, they contributed to the appeal of mashup and to the culture existing around it.

Do-it-yourself culture [ edit ] Another important aspect of the success of mashup culture nowadays lies in the do-it-yourself or DIY trend. Consumers are turning into producers as well, especially due to the simplification of online tools that help creating personalized content.

The audience is taking on a DIY spirit, each masher becoming a mini-Burroughs, cutting the music and pasting it on a blank sheet of MP3 — Serazio [ 2 ] Mashup in current literature [ edit ] DJ Spooky [ edit ] Paul D. Miller, also known as DJ Spooky , Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and Culture , a book about mashup culture's influence on society. It focuses on "the nature of that transformation", stating that it has been "fuelled by rapid advances in technology that have transformed art and communication".

[ 5 ] He describes sampling as an essential part of our society. The book was published by the MIT Press and has been regarded highly by scholars such as Lawrence Lessig .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Mashup (music) Mashup (video) Mashup (book) Mashup (web application hybrid) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Shiga, J. (2007).

"Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-Up Culture" (PDF) .

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

24 (2): 93– 114.

doi : 10.1080/07393180701262685 .

S2CID 55531490 .

^ a b c d e Serazio, Michael (2008).

"The Apolitical Irony of Generation Mash-Up: A Cultural Case Study in Popular Music" (PDF) .

Popular Music and Society .

31 (1): 79– 94.

doi : 10.1080/03007760701214815 .

S2CID 30186562 .

^ a b Murray, Ben. (22 March 2015).

"Temixing Culture And Why The Art Of The Mash-Up Matters" .

Tech Crunch .

^ Riddell, Michael; Alistair (2001).

"Data Culture Generation. After Content, Process as Aesthetic" .

Leonardo .

34 (4): 337– 343.

doi : 10.1162/00240940152549294 .

hdl : 1885/41955 .

S2CID 33366354 .

^ a b Weidenbaum 2008 Literature [ edit ] Weidenbaum, Marc (2008).

"Mix and mash-up — An experimental musician explores how technology has transformed our cut-and-paste culture" .

Nature .

453 ( 33– 34). Nature Publishing Group: 33– 34.

doi : 10.1038/453033a .

v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Artificial scarcity Censorship by copyright Copyright infringement Copyright troll Digital rights management Gripe site Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital music novel videos Monopolies of knowledge Music piracy Orphan works Biopiracy Bioprospecting Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open-source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Electronic sell-through Free content Free-software license Libertarian positions Open content Open-design movement Open music model Open patent Open source hardware software Prizes instead of patents contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free-culture movement Free software movement Organizations Pro-copyright Copyright Alliance Pro-copyleft Anna's Archive Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Library Genesis Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Anarchist Library The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Public Knowledge Sci-Hub Shadow library Students for Free Culture Z-Library People Cory Doctorow Alexandra Elbakyan Rick Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Suber Peter Sunde Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film Good Copy Bad Copy RiP!: A Remix Manifesto TPB AFK The Internet's Own Boy v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mashup_(culture)&oldid=1275899871 " Categories : Mashup Intellectual property activism This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 19:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mashup (culture) Add languages Add topic

