Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Electrical and electronic industry 3 Schematics in repair manuals 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Schematic 12 languages Afrikaans العربية Español فارسی Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Representation of a system using abstract graphic symbols This article is about technical illustrations. For other uses, see Schema .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Schematic" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Photomicrograph of the human chromosomes Schematic diagram of the same A schematic , or schematic diagram , is a designed representation of the elements of a system using abstract, graphic symbols rather than realistic pictures. A schematic usually omits all details that are not relevant to the key information the schematic is intended to convey, and may include oversimplified elements in order to make this essential meaning easier to grasp, as well as additional organization of the information.

For example, a subway map intended for passengers may represent a subway station with a dot. The dot is not intended to resemble the actual station at all but aims to give the viewer information without unnecessary visual clutter. A schematic diagram of a chemical process uses symbols in place of detailed representations of the vessels, piping, valves, pumps, and other equipment that compose the system, thus emphasizing the functions of the individual elements and the interconnections among them and suppresses their physical details. In an electronic circuit diagram , the layout of the symbols may not look anything like the circuit as it appears in the physical world: instead of representing the way the circuit looks , the schematic aims to capture, on a more general level, the way it works . This may be contrasted with a wiring diagram , which preserves the spatial relationships between each of its components.

Types [ edit ] Schematics and other types of diagrams, e.g., Transit map , a schematic map (i.e. not drawn to scale, stations are equidistant, lines are drawn at 45 and 90-degree angles) Population density map Schematic of a drive train Exploded-view engineering drawing Chemical engineering schematic Electrical circuit diagram for TTL counter, a type of state machine A semi-schematic diagram combines some of the abstraction of a purely schematic diagram with other elements displayed as realistically as possible, for various reasons. It is a compromise between a purely abstract diagram (e.g. the schematic of the Washington Metro) and an exclusively realistic representation (e.g. the corresponding aerial view of Washington).

A semi-schematic map: Tabula Peutingeriana . While roads and features appear as abstract representations without resemblance to reality, their locations, orientations, and distances are as accurate as possible to make the map practical.

Electrical and electronic industry [ edit ] Main article: Circuit diagram Comparison of pictorial and schematic styles of circuit diagrams Example of a joule thief circuit driving an LED .

In electrical and electronic industry, a schematic diagram is often used to describe the design of equipment. Schematic diagrams are often used for the maintenance and repair of electronic and electromechanical systems.

[ 1 ] While schematics were traditionally drawn by hand, using standardized templates or pre-printed adhesive symbols, today electronic design automation software (EDA or "electrical CAD") is often used.

In electronic design automation, until the 1980s schematics were virtually the only formal representation for circuits. More recently, with the progress of computer technology, other representations were introduced and specialized computer languages were developed, since with the explosive growth of the complexity of electronic circuits, traditional schematics are becoming less practical. For example, hardware description languages are indispensable for modern digital circuit design.

Schematics for electronic circuits are prepared by designers using EDA ( electronic design automation ) tools called schematic capture tools or schematic entry tools. These tools go beyond simple drawing of devices and connections. Usually they are integrated into the whole design flow and linked to other EDA tools for verification and simulation of the circuit under design.

Programmable logic controllers (PLC) can be programmed using ladder diagrams .

In electric power systems design, a schematic drawing called a one-line diagram is frequently used to represent substations , distribution systems or even whole electrical power grids. These diagrams simplify and compress the details that would be repeated on each phase of a three-phase system, showing only one element instead of three. Electrical diagrams for switchgear often have common device functions designate by standard function numbers . Another type of diagram used for power systems is a three-line diagram .

For analysis purposes of a power system, from the one-line diagram, if the system is balanced, an equivalent per-phase (or single-phase ) schematic diagram can be obtained. If all of the parameters are represented as impedances and voltage sources, the equivalent per-phase schematic diagram is called an impedance diagram . If all of the parameters are represented as admittances and current sources, the equivalent per-phase schematic diagram is called an admittance diagram .

If the power system is unbalanced, but it is linear (or can be approximated by a linear system), then Fortescue's theorem ( symmetrical components ) can be applied. In this way, from the one-line diagram, three different per-phase schematic diagrams are obtained, known as sequence diagrams : positive sequence diagram , negative sequence diagram , and zero sequence diagram . Each of these diagrams can be represented as an impedance diagram or as an admittance diagram.

Schematics in repair manuals [ edit ] Schematic diagrams are used extensively in repair manuals to help users understand the interconnections of parts, and to provide graphical instruction to assist in dismantling and rebuilding mechanical assemblies.  Many automotive and motorcycle repair manuals devote a significant number of pages to schematic diagrams.

See also [ edit ] Electronics portal Look up schematic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Schematic diagrams .

Energy Systems Language Chart Diagram Logic gate § Symbols Straight-line diagram Topological map Transit map Open-source hardware References [ edit ] ^ Thomas E. French, Charles J. Vierck (1975).

Engineering Drawing and Graphic Technology, Eleventh Edition . McGraw Hill.

ISBN 0-07-022157-X .  pp. 621–624.

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7528t
Cached time: 20250816203902
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.401 seconds
Real time usage: 0.561 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 855/1000000
Revision size: 7934/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 47347/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1127/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 32515/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.269/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4924220/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  485.791      1 -total
 19.23%   93.432      1 Template:Visualization
 19.10%   92.782      2 Template:Navbox
 14.51%   70.471      1 Template:Reflist
 14.37%   69.818      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 14.18%   68.889      1 Template:Short_description
 13.34%   64.817      1 Template:Ambox
 12.09%   58.730      1 Template:ISBN
 10.31%   50.074      2 Template:Sister_project
  9.96%   48.366      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:41679:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816203902 and revision id 1281674597. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Schematic&oldid=1281674597 " Categories : Diagrams Electronic design automation Technical communication Infographics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2013 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 March 2025, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Schematic 12 languages Add topic

