Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Calendars 3 Works Toggle Works subsection 3.1 Extant works 3.2 Known lost works 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Marcus Terentius Varro 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Türkmençe Українська 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman polymath and author (116–27 BC) This article is about the Roman polymath. For the Roman general and consul of the Second Punic War, see Gaius Terentius Varro .

An imagined portrait of an elderly Varro, engraving from André Thevet , Les Vrais pourtraits et vies des hommes illustres grecz, latins et payens (1584).

Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 BCE) was a Roman polymath and a prolific author. He is regarded as ancient Rome 's greatest scholar, and was described by Petrarch as "the third great light of Rome" (after Virgil and Cicero ).

[ 1 ] He is sometimes called Varro Reatinus ("Varro of Rieti ") to distinguish him from his younger contemporary Varro Atacinus ("Varro of Atax ").

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Biography [ edit ] Varro was born in or near Reate (now Rieti in Lazio) [ 6 ] into a family thought to be of equestrian rank. He always remained close to his roots in the area, owning a large farm in the Reatine plain (reported as near Lago di Ripasottile, [ 7 ] ) until his old age. He supported Pompey , reaching the office of praetor , after having served as tribune of the people , quaestor and curule aedile .

[ 8 ] It is probable that Varro was discontented with the course on which Pompey entered when the First Triumvirate formed c.

60 BC, and he may thus have lost his chance of rising to the consulship.

[ 9 ] He actually ridiculed the coalition in a work entitled the Three-Headed Monster ( Τρικάρανος in the Greek of Appian , The Civil Wars , II.ii.9).

[ 9 ] He was one of the commission of twenty that carried out the great agrarian scheme of Caesar for the resettlement of Capua and Campania (59 BC).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Statue of Marcus Terentius Varro by local artist Dino Morsani in Rieti .

During Caesar's civil war of 49 to 45 he commanded one of Pompey's armies in the Ilerda campaign of 49 BC.

[ 10 ] He escaped the penalties of having backed the losing side in the civil war through two pardons granted by Julius Caesar , before and after the 48 BC Battle of Pharsalus .

[ 11 ] Caesar appointed him to oversee the public library of Rome in 47 BC, but following Caesar's death Mark Antony proscribed him, resulting in his losing much of his property, including his library. As the Republic gave way to the Empire c.

27 BC , Varro gained the favour of Augustus , under whose protection he found the security and quiet to devote himself to study and writing.

[ citation needed ] Varro had studied under the Roman philologist Lucius Aelius Stilo (died 74 BC), and later at Athens under the Academic philosopher Antiochus of Ascalon (died 68 BC). Varro proved a highly productive writer and turned out more than 74 Latin works on a variety of topics. Aside from his many lost works (known through fragments), two endeavors stand out for historians: Nine Books of Disciplines and his compilation of the Varronian chronology . His Nine Books of Disciplines became a model for later encyclopedists , especially for Pliny the Elder ( c.

23 to 79 AD). The most noteworthy portion of the Nine Books of Disciplines is its use of the liberal arts as organizing principles.

[ 12 ] Varro decided to focus on identifying [ citation needed ] nine of these arts: grammar , rhetoric , logic , arithmetic , geometry , astronomy , musical theory, medicine, and architecture . Using Varro's list, mediated through Martianus Capella 's early-5th century allegory, subsequent writers defined the seven classical "liberal arts" of the medieval schools.

[ 12 ] In c.

37 BC, [ 13 ] in his old age, Varro wrote on agriculture for his wife Fundania, producing a "voluminous" work De re rustica (also called Res rusticae )—similar to Cato the Elder 's work De agri cultura —on the management of large slave-run estates .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Calendars [ edit ] Fasti Antiates Maiores, an inscription containing the Roman calendar . This calendar predates the Julian reform of the calendar; it contains the months Quintilis and Sextilis , and allows for the insertion of an intercalary month The compilation of the Varronian chronology was an attempt to determine an exact year-by-year timeline of Roman history up to his time. It is based on the traditional sequence of the consuls of the Roman Republic —supplemented, where necessary, by inserting "dictatorial" and "anarchic" years. It has been demonstrated to be somewhat erroneous [ 16 ] but has become the widely accepted standard chronology, in large part because it was inscribed on the arch of Augustus in Rome; though that arch no longer stands, a large portion of the chronology has survived under the name of Fasti Capitolini .

Works [ edit ] Varro's literary output was prolific; Ritschl estimated it at 74 works in some 620 books, of which only one work survives complete, although we possess many fragments of the others, mostly in Gellius' Attic Nights . He was called "the most learned of the Romans" by Quintilian , [ 17 ] and also recognized by Plutarch as "a man deeply read in Roman history".

[ 18 ] Varro was recognized as an important source by many other ancient authors, among them Cicero , Pliny the Elder , Virgil in the Georgics , Columella , Aulus Gellius , Macrobius , Augustine , and Vitruvius , who credits him (VII.Intr.14) with a book on architecture.

His only complete work extant, Rerum rusticarum libri tres ("Three Books on Agriculture"), has been described as "the well digested system of an experienced and successful farmer who has seen and practised all that he records." [ 19 ] One noteworthy aspect of the work is his anticipation of microbiology and epidemiology . Varro warned his readers to avoid swamps and marshland, since in such areas ...there are bred certain minute creatures which cannot be seen by the eyes, but which float in the air and enter the body through the mouth and nose and cause serious diseases.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] All of the manuscripts of Cato's treatise De agri cultura also include a copy of Varro's De re rustica .

J.G. Schneider and Heinrich Keil showed that the existing manuscripts directly or indirectly descend from a long-lost manuscript called the Marcianus, which was once in the Biblioteca Marciana in Venice and described by Petrus Victorinus as liber antiquissimus et fidelissimus ( lit.

' a book most ancient and faithful ' ). The oldest existing manuscript is the Codex Parisinus 6842, written in Italy at some point before the end of the 12th century. The editio princeps was printed at Venice in 1472 ; Angelo Politian 's collation of the Marcianus against his copy of this first printing is considered an important witness for the text.

[ 23 ] A modern scholar, Bertha Tilly , assesses Varro's work as follows: For the immense mass of work completed, for his patriotic fervour, his high moral sentiments, for versatility in forms of writing and in subjects, for the vast range of material, Varro towers above all his contemporaries and his successors: he was distinguished for learning as no other man had ever been or was to be.

[ 24 ] Extant works [ edit ] Plan of the birdhouse at Casinum designed and built by Varro De lingua latina libri XXV (or On the Latin Language in 25 Books , of which six books (V–X) survive, partly mutilated) Rerum rusticarum libri III (or Three Books of Rural Topics ), also known as the De re rustica ("On Agriculture") or Res rusticae ("Agriculture") Known lost works [ edit ] Saturarum Menippearum libri CL or Menippean Satires in 150 books Antiquitates rerum humanarum et divinarum libri XLI ( Antiquities of Human and Divine Things ) [ 25 ] Logistoricon libri LXXVI Hebdomades vel de imaginibus Disciplinarum libri IX (An encyclopedia on the liberal arts, of which the first book dealt with grammar) De rebus urbanis libri III (or On Urban Topics in Three Books ) De gente populi Romani libri IIII (cf.

Augustine , ' De civitate dei ' xxi. 8.) De sua vita libri III (or On His Own Life in Three Books ) De familiis troianis (or On the Families of Troy ) De Antiquitate Litterarum libri II (addressed to the tragic poet Lucius Accius ; it is therefore one of his earliest writings) De Origine Linguae Latinae libri III (addressed to Pompey ; cf. Augustine, ' De civitate dei ' xxii. 28.) Περί Χαρακτήρων (in at least three books, on the formation of words) Quaestiones Plautinae libri V (containing interpretations of rare words found in the comedies of Plautus ) De Similitudine Verborum libri III (on regularity in forms and words) De Utilitate Sermonis libri IIII (on the principle of anomaly or irregularity) De Sermone Latino [ it ] libri V (?) (addressed to Marcellus, [ 27 ] on orthography and the metres of poetry) De philosophia (cf.

Augustine , ' De civitate dei ' xix. 1.) De Bibliothecis (in three books) [ 28 ] Most of the extant fragments of these works (mostly the grammatical works) can be found in the Goetz–Schoell edition of De Lingua Latina , pp. 199–242; in the collection of Wilmanns, pp. 170–223; and in that of Funaioli, pp. 179–371.

References [ edit ] ^ Oxford Classical Dictionary , " Terentius Varro, Marcus " ^ Courtney, Edward (2003).

The Fragmentary Latin Poets . Oxford University Press. p. 235.

ISBN 978-0-19-926579-4 .

^ Ferriss-Hill, Jennifer L. (26 February 2015).

Roman Satire and the Old Comic Tradition . Cambridge University Press. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-107-08154-3 .

^ Smith, William (1876).

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology: Oarses-Zygia . J. Murray. p. 1227.

^ Theophrastus (2007).

On Weather Signs . BRILL. p. 21.

ISBN 978-90-04-15593-0 .

^ "Marcus Terentius Varro | Roman author" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 12 January 2017 .

^ "LacusCurtius • Varro on Agriculture – Book I" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 12 January 2017 .

^ a b Baynes, Thomas Spencer (1891).

The Encyclopaedia Britannica: A Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and General Literature . C. Scribner's sons.

^ a b c Reid, James Smith (1911).

"Varro, Marcus Terentius" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

923– 924.

^ Caesar; Damon, Cynthia (2016).

Civil War . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674997035 .

^ Prioreschi, Plinio (1996).

A History of Medicine: Roman medicine . Horatius Press.

ISBN 978-1888456035 .

^ a b Lindberg, David (2007).

The Beginnings of Western Science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 137.

ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7 . Retrieved 6 March 2010 .

^ Flower, Harriet I., ed. (23 June 2014) [2004].

The Cambridge companion to the Roman Republic (2 ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 177.

ISBN 9781107032248 .

OCLC 904729745 .

^ Flower, Harriet I., ed. (23 June 2014) [2004].

The Cambridge companion to the Roman Republic (2 ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 193.

ISBN 9781107032248 .

OCLC 904729745 .

^ "Miscellaneous Publication" .

Miscellaneous Publication (900). Maryland Agricultural Experiment Station: 10. 1977 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

The writer Varro, whose book on agriculture was published in 37 B.C., makes it clear that such latifundia existed in those days. Varro discussed some of the problems of latifundia management.

^ Lendering, Jona (2020), "Varronian Chronology" , Official site , Amsterdam: Livius .

^ Quintilian .

"Chapter 1" .

Institutio Oratoria . Vol. Book X. Verse 95.

^ Plutarch.

Life of Romulus . New York: Modern Library. p. 31.

^ Harrison, Fairfax (1918).

"Note Upon the Roman Agronomists" .

Roman Farm Management . New York: The Macmillan Company. pp. 1–14 [10].

^ Varro, Marcus Terentius (2014) [1934].

De Re Rustica . Loeb Classical Library. I.12.2 – via Bill Thayer's Website.

^ Thompson, Sue (March 2014).

"From Ground to Tap" (PDF) .

The Mole : 3 (sidebar). Archived from the original on 12 October 2014 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 .

^ Hempelmann, Ernst; Krafts, Kristine (October 2013).

"Bad Air, Amulets and Mosquitoes: 2,000 Years of Changing Perspectives on Malaria" .

Malaria Journal .

12 : 232.

doi : 10.1186/1475-2875-12-232 .

ISSN 1475-2875 .

PMC 3723432 .

PMID 23835014 .

^ M.D. Reeve discusses the descent of both Cato's and Varro's essays in Texts and Transmission: A Survey of the Latin Classics , edited by L.D. Reynolds (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), pp. 40–42.

^ Tilly, Bertha (1973).

Varro the Farmer , p. 13.

^ "Marcus Terentius Varro | Roman author" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 4 January 2019 .

^ Wilmanns, Augustus (1864).

"II:97" .

De M. Terenti Varronis Libris Grammaticis . Berlin: Weidmann – via Project Gutenberg .

Marcellus autem ad quem haec uolumina misit quis fuerit nescio.

^ Several people called Marcellus lived during Varro's time. The identity of this one is unclear.

[ 26 ] ^ Reid Byers, The Private Library: The History of the Architecture and Furnishing of the Domestic Bookroom, 2021, p.53.

Bibliography [ edit ] Cardauns, B.

Marcus Terentius Varro: Einführung in sein Werk . Heidelberger Studienhefte zur Altertumswissenschaft. Heidelberg, Germany: C. Winter, 2001.

d’Alessandro, P. "Varrone e la tradizione metrica antica".

Spudasmata , volume 143. Hildesheim; Zürich; New York: Georg Olms Verlag, 2012.

Dahlmann, H.M. "Terentius Varro. Paulys Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft". Supplement 6, Abretten bis Thunudromon . Edited by Wilhelm Kroll, 1172–1277. Stuttgart: Metzler, 1935.

Ferriss-Hill, J. "Varro’s Intuition of Cognate Relationships".

Illinois Classical Studies , volume 39, 2014, pp. 81–108.

Freudenburg, K. "The Afterlife of Varro in Horace's Sermones : Generic Issues in Roman Satire." Generic Interfaces in Latin Literature: Encounters, Interactions and Transformations , edited by Stavros Frangoulidis, De Gruyter, 2013, pp. 297–336.

Kronenberg, L.

Allegories of Farming from Greece and Rome: Philosophical Satire in Xenophon, Varro and Virgil . Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Nelsestuen, G.

Varro the Agronomist: Political Philosophy, Satire, and Agriculture in the Late Republic . Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2015.

Richardson, J.S. "The Triumph of Metellus Scipio and the Dramatic Date of Varro, RR 3".

The Classical Quarterly , volume 33, no. 2, 1983, pp. 456–463.

Taylor, D.J..

Declinatio : A Study of the Linguistic Theory of Marcus Terentius Varro . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 1974.

Van Nuffelen, P. "Varro’s Divine Antiquities: Roman Religion as an Image of Truth".

Classical Philology , volume 105, no. 2, 2010, pp. 162–188.

External links [ edit ] Marcus Terentius Varro : Latin works in the Latin Wikisource.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Marcus Terentius Varro .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Marcus Terentius Varro Library resources about Varro Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Varro Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Works by Marcus Terentius Varro at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Marcus Terentius Varro at the Internet Archive On the Latin Language, Volume I — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press On the Latin Language, Volume II — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press On Agriculture — Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press Works by Marcus Terentius Varro at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) de Re Rustica (Latin and English at LacusCurtius ) Links to translation of De Linga Latina by R.G.Kent Livius.org: Varronian chronology Archived 7 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine thelatinlibrary.com: Latin works of Varro Oxford Classical Dictionary Oxford Bibliographies v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline Index History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Family Pater familias Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance Neo-Latin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Boëthius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Aëtius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Laërtius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes Roman–Iranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marcus_Terentius_Varro&oldid=1303226564 " Categories : 116 BC births 27 BC deaths 2nd-century BC Romans 1st-century BC Roman praetors 1st-century BC writers in Latin Ancient linguists Ancient Roman antiquarians Ancient Roman scholars of religion Roman Republican soldiers Ancient Roman writers Encyclopedias in classical antiquity Ancient Roman encyclopedists Geoponici Golden Age Latin writers People from Rieti Recipients of ancient Roman pardons Roman-era students in Athens Terentii Latinists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marcus Terentius Varro 54 languages Add topic

