Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academic career 2 Conversion story 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Books 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Kreeft 16 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (born 1937) For the German inventor and diver, see Peter Kreeft (diver) .

Peter Kreeft Born Peter John Kreeft ( 1937-03-16 ) March 16, 1937 (age 88) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Paterson, New Jersey , U.S.

Education Education Calvin College ( BA ) Fordham University ( MA , PhD ) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Christian philosophy Main interests Christian apologetics Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Peter John Kreeft ( / k r eɪ f t / ; [ 3 ] born March 16, 1937) is an American professor of philosophy at Boston College and The King's College . A convert to Catholicism , he is the author of over eighty books [ 4 ] on Christian philosophy , theology and apologetics . He also formulated, together with Ronald K. Tacelli , Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God in their Handbook of Christian Apologetics .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Academic career [ edit ] Kreeft was born March 16, 1937, in Paterson, New Jersey , the son of John and Lucy Kreeft. He graduated in 1955 from Eastern Christian High School , where his class hymn was sung at graduation ceremonies.

[ 7 ] Raised in Wyckoff, New Jersey , [ 8 ] he took his BA at Calvin College (1959) and an MA at Fordham University (1961). He completed his doctoral studies in 1965, also at Fordham, where he completed a dissertation under the direction of W. Norris Clarke . He subsequently completed his post-graduate studies at Yale University .

[ 1 ] Kreeft joined the philosophy faculty of the Department of Philosophy of Boston College in 1965.

[ 9 ] He has debated several academics in issues related to God's existence. Shortly after he began teaching at Boston College, he was challenged to a debate on the existence of God between himself and Paul Breines , an atheist and history professor, which was attended by a majority of undergraduate students. Kreeft later used many of the arguments in this debate to create the Handbook of Christian Apologetics with then undergraduate student Ronald K. Tacelli.

[ 10 ] In 1971, Kreeft published an article titled " Zen In Heidegger 's ' Gelassenheit ' " in the peer-reviewed journal International Philosophical Quarterly , of Fordham University.  In 1994, he was an endorser of the document " Evangelicals and Catholics Together ".

[ 11 ] He also formulated, with R. Tacelli, "Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God".

[ 12 ] Conversion story [ edit ] Kreeft converted to Catholicism during his college years.

[ 13 ] A key turning point came when he was asked by a Calvinist professor to investigate the claims of the Catholic Church that it traced itself to the early Church. He said that, on his own, he "discovered in the early Church such Catholic elements as the centrality of the Eucharist , the real presence , prayers to saints , devotion to Mary , an insistence on visible unity, and apostolic succession ." [ 14 ] The "central and deciding" factor for his conversion was "the Church's claim to be the one Church historically founded by Christ." [ 14 ] He reportedly applied C. S. Lewis's trilemma (that either Jesus is a lunatic, a liar, or the Lord): "I thought, just as Jesus made a claim about His identity that forces us into one of only two camps ... so the Catholic Church’s claim to be the one true Church, the Church Christ founded, forces us to say either that this is the most arrogant, blasphemous and wicked claim imaginable, if it is not true, or else that she is just what she claims to be." [ 15 ] According to Kreeft's personal account, his conversion to Catholic Christianity was influenced by, among other things, Gothic architecture and Thomistic philosophy , the writings of St. John of the Cross , the logic of asking saints to pray for us, and a visit to St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York City when he was twelve years old, "feeling like I was in heaven ... and wondering why, if Catholics got everything else wrong, as I had been taught, they got beauty so right..." [ 16 ] Although a Catholic, he places central emphasis on the unity between Catholics and Protestants .

[ 17 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] C. S. Lewis: A Critical Essay (1969) Love Is Stronger Than Death . 1979.

Heaven: The Heart’s Deepest Longing (1980) Between Heaven and Hell (1982) — A Dialog with John F. Kennedy, C. S. Lewis, and Aldous Huxley The Unaborted Socrates — Socratic dialogue on abortion (1983) The Best Things in Life — Twelve Socratic dialogues on modern life (1984) Yes or No? — Straight Answers to Tough Questions about Christianity (1984) Making Sense Out of Suffering (1986) Fundamentals of the Faith, Essays in Christian Apologetics (1988) Everything You Ever Wanted To Know About Heaven... But Never Dreamed of Asking (1990) Making Choices: Practical Wisdom for Everyday Moral Decisions (1990) You can understand the Old Testament : a book-by-book guide for Catholics (1990) Summa of the Summa (1990) — Summa Theologica edited and explained for beginners Three Philosophies of Life (1990) — Ecclesiastes (life as vanity), Job (life as suffering), Song of Songs (life as love) Prayer: The Great Conversation (1991) — Straight answers to tough questions Back to Virtue (1992) — Reprint of For Heaven's Sake: The Rewards of the Virtuous Life (1986) Shorter Summa (1993) — Shorter version of Kreeft's Summa of the Summa Christianity for Modern Pagans: Pascal's Pensees (1993) Your Questions, God's Answers (1994) — Solid responses for Catholic teens Handbook of Christian Apologetics (with Ronald K. Tacelli) (1994) C. S. Lewis for the Third Millennium (1994) — Six essays on Lewis' Abolition of Man Shadow-Lands of C.S. Lewis: The Man Behind the Movie (1994) Handbook of Christian Apologetics (Pocket Version) (1994) The Angel and the Ants: Bringing Heaven Closer to Your Daily Life (1994) Talking to Your Children About Being Catholic (1995) — A treasure trove of ideas Angels (and Demons): What Do We Really Know About Them?

(1995) Ecumenical Jihad: Ecumenism and the Culture Wars (1996) The Journey A Spiritual Roadmap For Modern Pilgrims (1996) The Snakebite Letters Devious Secrets for Subverting Society (1998) Refutation of Moral Relativism — Dialogues between a relativist and absolutist (1999) Prayer for Beginners (2000) Catholic Christianity (2001) Socrates Meets Jesus (1987/2002) — Socratic dialogue with students of Harvard University's Divinity School How to Win the Culture War: A Christian Battle Plan for a Society in Crisis (2002) Celebrating Middle Earth: Lord of the Rings (2002) — On western civilization Three Approaches to Abortion: a thoughtful and compassionate guide to today's most controversial issue (2002) Philosophy 101 by Socrates (2002) — An introduction to philosophy via Plato's Apology Socrates Meets Machiavelli (2003) — Socratic dialogue between Socrates and Machiavelli Socrates Meets Marx (2003) — Socratic dialogue between Socrates and Karl Marx The God Who Loves You (2004) Socratic Logic (2005) — A textbook on classical logic You Can Understand the Bible (2005) — a combination of his previous books You Can Understand the Old Testament: A Book-by-Book Guide for Catholics (1990) and Reading and Praying the New Testament: A Book-by-Book Guide for Catholics (1992) Socrates Meets Sartre: Father Of Philosophy Meets The Founder of Existentialism (2005) — Socrates and Jean-Paul Sartre The Philosophy of Tolkien: The Worldview Behind "The Lord of the Rings" (2005) The Sea Within (2006) Socrates Meets Descartes (2007) — The Father of Philosophy Analyzes the Father of Modern Philosophy's Discourse on Method The Philosophy of Jesus (2007) — On the wisdom of Jesus Pocket Guide to the Meaning of Life (2007) Before I Go (2007) — Letters to Children About What Really Matters I Surf Therefore I Am (2008) — An exploration of Surfing Because God Is Real: Sixteen Questions, One Answer (2008) Jesus-Shock (2008) Socrates Meets Kant (2009) — The Father of Philosophy Meets His Most Influential Modern Child If Einstein Had Been a Surfer (2009) — A Philosophy of Surfing Between Allah & Jesus: what Christians Can Learn from Muslims (2010) Socrates Meets Hume (2010) — The Father of Philosophy Meets the Father of Modern Skepticism An Ocean Full of Angels (2011) Summa Philosophica (2012) — 110 Key Questions in Philosophy Jacob's Ladder (2013) — Ten Steps to Truth Charisms: Visions, Tongues, Healing, etc.

(feat. Dave Nevins) (2013) — catalysts to "two-way" interactive prayer Socrates Meets Kierkegaard (2014) — Questions the founder of Christian existentialism 52 Big Ideas (2020) — From 32 Great Minds Practical Theology (2014) — Spiritual Direction from Aquinas Letters to an Atheist (2014) — Wrestling with Faith Philosophy 101 by Socrates: An Introduction to Philosophy Via Plato's Apology : (Forty Things Philosophy is According to History's First and Wisest Philosopher (2014) The Philosopher's Bench (2015)(DVD) — Catholic philosophers Peter Kreeft and Thomas Howard bring philosophy to the 'man in the street' I Burned for Your Peace: Augustine's Confessions Unpacked (2016) — Snippets and commentary from one of the most beloved books in the world How to Be Holy (2016) — First Steps in Becoming a Saint Catholics and Protestants (2017) — What Can We Learn from Each Other?

Between One Faith and Another (2017) — Engaging Conversations on the World's Great Religions Forty Reasons I am a Catholic (2018) Doors in the Walls of the World (2018) — Signs of Transcendence in the Human Story The Platonic Tradition (2018) 8 lectures "for beginners" on the essence of the Platonic tradition throughout philosophical history Socrates' Children , 4 vols. (2019) — The 100 Greatest Philosophers How To Destroy Western Civilization And Other Ideas From The Cultural Abyss (2021) The Greatest Philosopher Who Ever Lived (2021) Food for the Soul: Reflections on the Mass Readings 3 vols. (2023) What Would Socrates Say?

(2024) — An Introduction to Philosophy by the Socratic Method References [ edit ] ^ a b "Peter Kreeft" .

Exodus Books . Retrieved December 11, 2014 .

^ "Kreeft, Peter" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved December 11, 2014 .

^ "God vs. Atheism: Which is More Rational?" on YouTube ; at 4:12 ^ Charlie McKinney (11 September 2019), "Peter Kreeft On Books & Music" , Spiritual Direction . Retrieved 6 October 2019.

^ Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God , Peter Kreeft & Ronald K. Tacelli, Handbook of Christian Apologetics, Intervarsity Press, 1994, ISBN 978-0-8308-1774-0 ^ "Twenty Arguments God's Existence by Peter Kreeft (& Ronald K. Tacelli)" .

www.peterkreeft.com . Retrieved October 27, 2021 .

^ "Class Of 60 Graduated By Eastern Christian HS" , The Morning Call , June 25, 1955. Accessed December 27, 2023, via Newspapers.com . "The class hymn followed, which was composed by Peter Kreeft, a graduate." ^ "Kreeft Chosen For Fellowship" , Ridgewood Herald-News , March 12, 1959. Accessed December 27, 2023, via Newspapers.com . "Peter J. Kreeft of 760 Frederick Court has been chosen as a Woodrow Wilson Fellow for the 1959-1980 year and will enter Yale University to do graduate work in philosophy in September. He Is now student at Calvin College." ^ "Peter John Kreeft - Philosophy" .

Boston College .

^ Bishop, James (January 28, 2019).

"Peter Kreeft [Academic Philosopher & Christian Apologist]" .

Bishop's Encyclopedia of Religion, Society and Philosophy . Retrieved April 22, 2025 .

^ "Evangelicals and Catholics Together" .

First Things . May 1994 . Retrieved March 29, 2016 .

^ "Twenty Arguments for the Existence of God" .

www.apologetics.com . Archived from the original on February 17, 2003.

^ "Pints With Peter Kreeft – Pints with Aquinas" .

pintswithaquinas.com . October 16, 2018 . Retrieved October 17, 2018 .

^ a b Robert Baraam (1987).

Spiritual Journeys:Twenty-Seven Men and Women Share their Faith Experience] . Daughters of St. Paul.

ISBN 0-8198-6877-9 .

^ Robert Sibley (March 30, 2007), Boston College professor tackles God's existence - and its proof , Retrieved from PressReader, Ottawa Citizen ^ " "Peter Kreeft", Ignatius Insight" . Archived from the original on June 28, 2017 . Retrieved January 13, 2007 .

^ "70x7 Reasons to Be Both Catholic and Protestant (w/ Peter Kreeft) -- [ angel visits at 38:50! ]" . April 8, 2016 – via YouTube.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Peter Kreeft .

Official website A List of his Books Writings at Catholic Educator's Resource v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e J. R. R. Tolkien Bibliography Letters Poetry and songs Songs for the Philologists (1936) " Bagme Bloma " The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm's Son (1953) " A Walking Song " (1954) The Adventures of Tom Bombadil (1962) " Errantry " " Fastitocalon " " The Sea-Bell " " The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late " The Road Goes Ever On (1967) Bilbo's Last Song (1974) The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún (2009) The Fall of Arthur (2013) The Collected Poems of J.R.R. Tolkien (2024) List of Tolkien's alliterative verse Fiction The Hobbit (1937) " Leaf by Niggle " (1947) The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun (1945) Farmer Giles of Ham (1949) The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring (1954) The Two Towers (1954) The Return of the King (1955) Tree and Leaf (1964) The Tolkien Reader (1966) Smith of Wootton Major (1967) Posthumous fiction The Father Christmas Letters (1976) The Silmarillion (1977) Unfinished Tales (1980) Mr. Bliss (1982) The History of Middle-earth (1983–1996) The Book of Lost Tales The Lays of Beleriand The Shaping of Middle-earth The Lost Road and Other Writings The History of The Lord of the Rings Morgoth's Ring The War of the Jewels The Peoples of Middle-earth Roverandom (1998) The Children of Húrin (2007) The History of The Hobbit (2007) The Story of Kullervo (2015) Beren and Lúthien (2017) The Fall of Gondolin (2018) The Nature of Middle-earth (2021) The Fall of Númenor (2022) Academic works Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (Middle English text, 1925) " The Devil's Coach Horses " (1925) " Ancrene Wisse and Hali Meiðhad " (1929) " Sigelwara Land " (1932–34) " Chaucer as a Philologist: The Reeve's Tale " (1934) " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " (1936) " On Fairy-Stories " (1939) Eucatastrophe " On Translating Beowulf " (1940) Sir Orfeo (1944) Ancrene Wisse (1962) " English and Welsh " (1963) Jerusalem Bible (as translator and lexicographer, 1966) Posthumous academic Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , Pearl , and Sir Orfeo (translations, 1975) Exodus (1981) Finn and Hengest (1982) The Monsters and the Critics, and Other Essays (1983) Beowulf and the Critics (2002) Beowulf: A Translation and Commentary with " Sellic Spell " (2014) A Secret Vice (2016) Scholars (works) Biographers Humphrey Carpenter J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography (1977, authorized biography) John Garth Tolkien and the Great War The Worlds of J. R. R. Tolkien Catherine McIlwaine Tolkien: Maker of Middle-earth Charles Moseley Christian Stratford Caldecott Matthew T. Dickerson Colin Duriez Peter Kreeft Holly Ordway Joseph Pearce Fleming Rutledge Ralph C. Wood Literary critics Douglas A. Anderson Nicholas Birns Bradley J. Birzer Janice Bogstad & Philip Kaveny Picturing Tolkien David Bratman Janet Brennan Croft Tolkien on Film Patrick Curry Bradford Lee Eden Dimitra Fimi Tolkien, Race and Cultural History Jason Fisher Verlyn Flieger Interrupted Music A Question of Time Splintered Light Michael Foster Nick Groom Wayne G. Hammond & Christina Scull J. R. R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion J. R. R. Tolkien: Artist and Illustrator The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide Randel Helms Thomas Honegger Charles A. Huttar Paul H. Kocher Master of Middle-Earth Stuart D. Lee The Keys of Middle-earth Jared Lobdell A Tolkien Compass John D. Rateliff Robin Anne Reid Brian Rosebury Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon Amy H. Sturgis Anna Vaninskaya Richard C. West Elizabeth Whittingham Rose Zimbardo Understanding The Lord of the Rings Linguists Anthony Appleyard Helge Fauskanger Carl F. Hostetter Tom Loback David Salo Arden R. Smith Allan Turner Medievalists , Classicists Marjorie Burns Perilous Realms Jane Chance Tolkien and the Invention of Myth Tolkien's Art: 'A Mythology for England' Michael D. C. Drout J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia Jonathan Evans Vincent Ferré Gergely Nagy Tom Shippey J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century The Road to Middle-Earth Elizabeth Solopova Sandra Ballif Straubhaar Hamish Williams Tolkien and the Classical World Popular Lin Carter Robert Foster Glen GoodKnight Michael Martinez Charles Noad J. E. A. Tyler Related Family Francis Xavier Morgan Influences Artwork Languages constructed by Tolkien Impact of Tolkien's Middle-earth writings Inklings Milton Waldman Mythopoeic Society Elvish Linguistic Fellowship Tolkien's impact on fantasy Tolkien and the modernists Tolkien Estate Tolkien fandom Tolkien fan fiction Tolkien Gateway The Tolkien Society Awards Memorials Reception Tolkien research Mythlore Tolkien Studies Works inspired by Tolkien Tolkien (biographical film) Poems and Songs of Middle Earth (album) Language and Human Nature The Ring of Words: Tolkien and the Oxford English Dictionary Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Kreeft&oldid=1302131407 " Categories : 1937 births Living people 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American Roman Catholic theologians 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American philosophers 21st-century American Roman Catholic theologians American critics of atheism American male non-fiction writers American people of Dutch descent American religious writers American Roman Catholic writers Boston College faculty Calvin University alumni Catholics from New Jersey Catholic philosophers Christian apologists Converts to Roman Catholicism from Calvinism Eastern Christian High School alumni Fordham University alumni The King's College (New York City) faculty People from Wyckoff, New Jersey Philosophers from New Jersey Writers from Bergen County, New Jersey Writers from Paterson, New Jersey Yale University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2021 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 15:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Kreeft 16 languages Add topic

