Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Friar 1.3 Mystical teacher 2 Bibliography 3 Sources Toggle the table of contents Francisco de Osuna 6 languages Deutsch Español Français Nederlands Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish Franciscan friar and author Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Francisco de Osuna , O.F.M.

(1492 or 1497 – c. 1540), was a Spanish Franciscan friar and author of some of the most influential works on spirituality in Spain in the 16th century.

[ 1 ] His book The Third Spiritual Alphabet influenced Saint Teresa of Jesus .

[ 2 ] It is considered a masterpiece of Franciscan mysticism and a foundational text of the recogimiento movement. His premise in the book is that friendship and communion with God are possible in this life through cleansing one's conscience, entering one's heart, resting in loving stillness, and then rising above the heart to God alone.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Francis was born in the village of Osuna , in the province of Seville , in either 1492 or 1497 (he himself was unsure), of poor peasants whose names are not recorded. In his writings, he described his ancestors as having long been in the service of the Counts of Ureña . Francis himself entered military service while in his teens, in the course of which he saw action at the conquest of Tripoli (25 August 1510) by Spain under Pedro Navarro, Count of Oliveto .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] After his return to Spain from the campaign, Francisco chose to embark on a career in the Church. To this end he enrolled at the University of Seville , where he studied Latin and rhetoric . Shortly after this, he set out with a friend on a pilgrimage to the great shrine of St. James the Greater at Santiago de Compostella .

[ 7 ] In the course of this journey, according to his own account, he apparently had a religious experience. He completed his studies in 1513, whereupon he received the habit of the Observant branch of the Order of Friars Minor , with the Province of Castile .

[ 5 ] This was a reform movement in the Order then becoming widespread in Spain, which sought to re-establish the primacy of prayer and poor living as practiced by their holy founder, St.

Francis of Assisi .

Friar [ edit ] Francisco made his profession of religious vows in 1514, under the reformist leader, Francisco de Quiñones , Vicar of the province and later Minister General of the whole Order. He then resumed his studies, first at the province's House of Philosophy in Torrelaguna (1514-1518), followed by theological studies at the Complutense University , then still in Alcalá (1518-1522). There he mastered the three schools of theology being taught in his day, viz., Scotism , Scholasticism and the Nominalism of Gabriel Biel .

[ 5 ] In 1523, Osuna entered the Salceda retreat house, situated near Guadalajara , one of eight retreat houses in the province of Castile. It was an isolated house, large enough to accommodate up to 24 religious, and with five hermitages in the surrounding hills, so that one could spend up to a week in perfect seclusion.

[ 8 ] Osuna’s life there was strictly regulated and dedicated to prayer and meditation. As part of this, he practiced recollection. In order to develop his inner prayer life, he formulated maxims as a guide for meditation, which he arranged alphabetically. He composed three such alphabets.

[ 9 ] The Tercer Abercedario (1527), the Primero (1528), the Segundo , Cuarto o Ley de amor, Gracioso convite (1530), Norte de estados (1531).

[ 10 ] At the end of 1536 or beginning of 1537, Osuna returned to Spain. In these years, he composed the Fifth Alphabet, and the Sixth Alphabet.

[ 11 ] Between 1537 and 1540, the First, Second and Third Alphabets, and the Gracioso convite were reedited, though it is unclear whether Osuna himself was involved in this process.

[ 12 ] He died at some point between the end of 1540 and 31 March 1542.

[ 12 ] A note in a new edition of the Fifth Alphabet, dated 31 March 1542, advised readers of Osuna’s death.

Mystical teacher [ edit ] In fact, Osuna was the most read spiritual author in Spain between 1527 and 1559. His Spanish works emerged in 40 editions, and his Latin works in 23 editions.

[ 13 ] The Third Spiritual Alphabet was begun at Salceda, and probably finished at Escalona, where it is believed Osuna spent some time between 1526 and 1530; it was first published in 1527 in Toledo. The popularity of the work is shown by the fact it enjoyed several editions in the following decades (1527, 1537, 1544, 1554, 1555, 1638, 1911).

[ 14 ] Barring Fidèle Ros’s (1936) study of Osuna, most studies have been partial.

[ 15 ] The standard Spanish language edition of the Third Spiritual Alphabet is that of Miguel Mir (Madrid, 1911), but it contains numerous errors and important omissions, in part as it is based on the 1544 Burgos edition, not the original 1527 Toledo edition – around 50 lines of text are omitted, and numerous words misspelt as different words.

[ 15 ] A 1972 edition, based on the 1527 text, attempted to rectify this problem.

Bibliography [ edit ] Francisco de Osuna, Third Spiritual Alphabet (New York / London: Paulist Press / SPCK, 1981), ISBN 0-8091-2145-X Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972) Fidèle de Ros, Le Pére François d’Osuna. (Un maître de Sainte Thérèse.) Sa vie, son œuvre, sa doctrine spirituelle , (Paris, 1936) Sources [ edit ] ^ Peers, E. Allison (2002).

The Mystics of Spain . Mineola, New York: Dover Publications. p. 57.

ISBN 0-486-42501-0 .

^ Teresa of Avila, Life ^ Egan, Harvey D., S.J. (1991).

An Anthology of Christian mysticism (2nd ed.). Collegeville, Minnesota: The Liturgical Press. p. 413.

ISBN 0-8146-6012-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ T&T Clark Handbook of Christian Prayer . Bloomsbury Publishing. 16 December 2021. pp.

417– 425.

ISBN 978-0-567-66437-2 .

^ a b c "Francisco de Osuna" .

Enciclopedia franciscana (in Spanish).

^ Francisco de Osuna, The Third Spiritual Alphabet , trans Mary E Giles, (New York: Paulist Press; London: SPCK, 1981), p3. This is known from Osuna’s own reference to it in a sermon he preached, published in 1533.

^ Francisco de Osuna, The Third Spiritual Alphabet , trans Mary E Giles, (New York: Paulist Press; London: SPCK, 1981), p6. This is referred to in Osuna’s Fifth Spiritual Alphabet .

^ Francisco de Osuna, The Third Spiritual Alphabet , trans Mary E Giles, (New York: Paulist Press; London: SPCK, 1981), p6 ^ Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972), p6 ^ Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972), p15 ^ Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972), p18 ^ a b Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972), p21 ^ Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972), p.xiii ^ Francisco de Osuna, The Third Spiritual Alphabet , trans Mary E Giles, (New York: Paulist Press; London: SPCK, 1981), p8.

^ a b Francisco de Osuna, Tercer Abecedario espiritual , estudio histórico y edición crítica por Melquíades Andrés, (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1972), p.xiv Wikiquote has quotations related to Francisco de Osuna .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Belgium People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francisco_de_Osuna&oldid=1255344599 " Categories : 1490s births 1540s deaths 16th-century Christian mystics Roman Catholic mystics Spanish Friars Minor Franciscan theologians 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic priests People from Osuna Writers from Andalusia Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 4 November 2024, at 13:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francisco de Osuna 6 languages Add topic

