Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Scientific programmes 3 Directors 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Isaac Newton Institute 2 languages Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′36″N 0°06′10″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.20989°N 0.10287°E ﻿ / 52.20989; 0.10287 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International research institute Main building for the Isaac Newton Institute The Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences is an international research institute for mathematics and its applications at the University of Cambridge . It is named after one of the university's most illustrious figures, the mathematician and natural philosopher Sir Isaac Newton , and occupies one of the buildings in the Cambridge Centre for Mathematical Sciences .

History [ edit ] View of the interior of the Isaac Newton Institute building showing its large number of blackboards After a national competition run by SERC, the Science and Engineering Research Council (now known as EPSRC Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council ), this institute was chosen to be the national research institute for mathematical sciences in the UK.

[ 1 ] It opened in 1992 with support from St John's College and Trinity College .

[ 1 ] St. John's provided the land and a purpose-built building, Trinity provided running costs for the first five years and the London Mathematical Society provided other support.

[ 1 ] Shortly afterwards at the institute, the British mathematician Andrew Wiles announced his approach to proving Fermat's Last Theorem in three lectures on 21–23 June 1993.

[ 2 ] In 1999 the institute was awarded a Queen's Anniversary Prize in recognition of "world-class achievement in education."
Although it is part of the national infrastructure for mathematical research, it is formally part of the University of Cambridge , from which it receives some funding. Nowadays five UK Research Councils, BBSRC, EPSRC, ESRC, NERC, STFC support about 55% of its activity.
A number of philanthropic individuals, family and educational trusts, private companies and bodies associated with the University of Cambridge give their support.

[ 1 ] Scientific programmes [ edit ] There are typically two or three programmes at any one time, each with up to twenty people and lasting between 4 weeks and 6 months.

[ 3 ] During these periods of activity there are courses and workshops for the attendees.

[ 4 ] Programmes are chosen from proposals that cover the entire range of mathematical sciences and their applications by a Scientific Steering Committee of mathematical scientists solely on their scientific merit and the likelihood that they will have  significant impact in their subject.

[ 3 ] Although programmes are normally residential and planned several years ahead, during the COVID-19 pandemic , an urgent 6-workshop virtual programme on the Infectious Dynamics of Pandemics was approved and ran from April to September 2020. This was a successor to a 2013 programme on Infectious Disease Dynamics, and was complemented by virtual study groups and commissioned modelling for government.

[ 5 ] Directors [ edit ] 1991–1996 Sir Michael Atiyah OM FRS 1996–2001 Keith Moffatt FRS 2001–2006 Sir John Kingman FRS 2006–2011 Sir David Wallace CBE FRS 2011–2016 John Toland FRS 2016–2021 David Abrahams 2021– Ulrike Tillmann FRS The institute is chaired by technology entrepreneur and founder of Cantab Capital Partners , Ewan Kirk .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "A Brief History of the Newton Institute" . newton.ac.uk . Retrieved 7 September 2014 .

^ Gina Kolata (24 June 1993).

"At Last, Shout of 'Eureka!' In Age-Old Math Mystery" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 September 2014 .

^ a b "Scientific Programmes" . newton.ac.uk . Retrieved 10 September 2014 .

^ "The Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences" . ima.org.uk . Retrieved 10 September 2014 .

^ Dangerfield, CE (2023).

"Getting the most out of maths: How to coordinate mathematical modelling research to support a pandemic, lessons learnt from three initiatives that were part of the COVID-19 response in the UK" .

Journal of Theoretical Biology .

557 (557).

Bibcode : 2023JThBi.55711332D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jtbi.2022.111332 .

PMC 9618296 .

PMID 36323393 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Isaac Newton Institute .

Official website Interactive map of the Mathematical Sciences site including links to the departments.

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) Roger Cotes (student) William Whiston (student) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton v t e The European Mathematical Society International member societies European Society for Mathematical and Theoretical Biology National member societies Armenia Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Mathematical Society of France SMAI SFdS Georgia Germany German Mathematical Society GAMM Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Italian Mathematical Union SIMAI AMASES Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Montenegro Netherlands Norway Norwegian Mathematical Society NSF Poland Portugal Romania Russia Moscow Mathematical Society St. Petersburg Mathematical Society Serbia Slovakia Slovenia DMFA SDAMS Spain Catalan Mathematical Society RSMS SEIO SEMA Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Edinburgh Mathematical Society IMA London Mathematical Society Institutional Members Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics Centre de Recerca Matemàtica Centre International de Rencontres Mathématiques Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica Erwin Schrödinger International Institute for Mathematical Physics EURANDOM Faculty of Mathematics at the University of Barcelona Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques Institut Henri Poincaré Institut Mittag-Leffler Institute for Mathematical Research International Centre for Mathematical Sciences Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences Stefan Banach International Mathematical Center Thomas Stieltjes Institute for Mathematics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX 52°12′36″N 0°06′10″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.20989°N 0.10287°E ﻿ / 52.20989; 0.10287 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isaac_Newton_Institute&oldid=1305868405 " Categories : Research institutes established in 1992 Mathematical institutes Institutions in the School of the Physical Sciences, University of Cambridge Research institutes in Cambridge Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isaac Newton Institute 2 languages Add topic

