Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization 3 Numerical Weather Prediction 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Echelon IV command of the U.S. Navy This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center Logo Active 1958–Present Country United States Branch United States Navy Type Echelon IV command Part of Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command Garrison/HQ Monterey, California Website www .metoc .navy .mil /fnmoc /fnmoc .html Commanders Commanding Officer CAPT Mathias Roth Executive Officer CDR Christopher Tuggle Technical Director John Ertl Military unit The Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center ( FNMOC ) is an echelon IV component of the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command (NMOC), which provides worldwide meteorological and oceanographic data and analysis for the United States Navy and strategic allies of the United States. The center is based out of Monterey , California . FNMOC provides Global and Regional Weather Prediction Charts (WXMAP) and Global Ensemble Weather Prediction Charts (EFS). WxMAP depictions of NAVGEM predictions for side-by-side comparison with NCEP global NWS models (GFS) are also available. FNMOC provides Global and Regional Ocean Wave Prediction Charts (WW3), Global Ensemble Ocean Wave Prediction Charts (WW3 Ensemble), and Global Sea Surface Temperature and Sea Surface Anomaly Charts (NCODA). FNMOC provides links to satellite imagery of tropical cyclones (TCWEB) and current tropical storm forecast tracks.

FNMOC is composed of military and civilian personnel. The team consists of specialists in meteorology, oceanography, computer science, and Fleet operations. The team's efforts provide computerized weather and ocean prediction products, weather satellite imagery products, and related tactical decision aids and data, supporting virtually every combat platform and weapons system operated by the US Navy.

History [ edit ] In 1958, the Navy Numerical Weather Problems (NANWEP) group was established in Suitland, Maryland. NANWEP was later moved to the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in 1959. Fleet Numerical Weather Facility was established in 1961. In 1974, Fleet Numerical Weather Facility moved from NPS to its standalone location in Monterey, California. In 1993, the operating title: Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC), was adopted. In 2005, Fleet Numerical was realigned under Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command (NMOC). In 2011, Fleet Numerical completed a new Computer Operations Center.

[ citation needed ] FNMOC is one of the US Department of Defense's (DOD) primary central production sites for worldwide computer-generated operational meteorological and oceanographic analysis and forecast products.

[ citation needed ] Organization [ edit ] FNMOC is an echelon IV command [ 1 ] aligned under the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command (COMNAVMETOCCOM) or CNMOC. FNMOC is co-located with Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) Marine Meteorology Division . FNMOC maintains close ties with the nearby Naval Postgraduate School.

Numerical Weather Prediction [ edit ] Central to FNMOC modeling capability is a global numerical weather model called the Navy Global Environmental Model (NAVGEM) and a global ocean prediction model called the Hybrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM). FNMOC models a variety of global, regional, sub-regional areas and specialized ocean and atmospheric environments as the DOD's premier Numerical Weather Prediction Center.

External links [ edit ] Official website Naval Meteorology & Oceanography Command GODAE Portal FNMOC on the top500.org References [ edit ] ^ The United States Navy has a special hierarchical structure that uses 'echelons' to represent different levels of command. Echelon IV commands are responsible for operational control of naval forces. These commands typically oversee a specific geographic area or a specific type of naval operation. They are responsible for planning, coordinating, and executing naval operations within their assigned area of responsibility.

Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fleet_Numerical_Meteorology_and_Oceanography_Center&oldid=1305221154 " Categories : Buildings and structures in Monterey County, California Meteorological organizations based in the United States Monterey, California Naval meteorology United States Navy installations Military installations established in 1974 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from February 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with a promotional tone from February 2012 All articles with a promotional tone Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 19:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center Add languages Add topic

