Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Status within philosophy 2 History and proponents Toggle History and proponents subsection 2.1 Ancient 2.2 Contemporary 3 Varieties Toggle Varieties subsection 3.1 On realism 3.2 On truth 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources Toggle the table of contents Quietism (philosophy) 5 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View on the purpose of philosophy This article is about the analytic philosophy . For other uses, see Quietism .

Philosophical quietists want to release humanity from deep perplexity that philosophical contemplation often causes.

Quietism in philosophy sees the role of philosophy as broadly therapeutic or remedial.

[ 1 ] Quietist philosophers believe that philosophy has no positive thesis to contribute; rather, it defuses confusions in the linguistic and conceptual frameworks of other subjects, including non-quietist philosophy.

[ 2 ] For quietists, advancing knowledge or settling debates (particularly those between realists and non-realists) [ 3 ] is not the job of philosophy, rather philosophy should liberate the mind by diagnosing confusing concepts.

[ 4 ] Status within philosophy [ edit ] Crispin Wright said that "Quietism is the view that significant metaphysical debate is impossible." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] It has been described as "the view or stance that entails avoidance of substantive philosophical theorizing and is usually associated with certain forms of skepticism , pragmatism , and minimalism about truth. More particularly, it is opposed to putting forth positive theses and developing constructive arguments." [ 7 ] Quietism by its nature is not a philosophical school as understood in the sense of a systematic body of truths.  The objective of quietism is to show that philosophical positions or theories cannot solve problems, settle debates or advance knowledge.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] It is often raised in discussion as an opposite position to both philosophical realism and anti-realism .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Specifically, quietists deny that there is any substantial debate between the positions of realism and non-realism.

[ 12 ] There are a range of justifications for quietism about the realism debate offered by Gideon Rosen and John McDowell .

[ 13 ] History and proponents [ edit ] Ancient [ edit ] Pyrrhonism represents perhaps the earliest example of an identifiably quietist position in the West.

[ 14 ] The Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus described Pyrrhonism as a form of philosophical therapy: The causal principle of scepticism we say is the hope of attaining ataraxia (being unperturbed). Men of talent, troubled by the anomaly in things and puzzled as to which of them they should rather assent to, came to investigate what in things is true and what false, thinking that by deciding these issues they would attain ataraxia. The chief constitutive principle of scepticism is the claim that to every account an equal account is opposed; for it is from this, we think, that we come to hold no beliefs.

— Sextus Empiricus , Outlines of Pyrrhonism , Book I, Chapter 12 Some have identified Epicureans as another early proponent of quietism.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The goals of Epicurean philosophy are the decidedly quietist objectives of aponia (freedom from pain) and ataraxia, even dismissing Stoic logic as useless.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The neo-Confucian philosopher Cheng Hao is also associated with advocating quietism.

[ 18 ] He argued that the goal of existence should be calming one's natural biases and embracing impartial tranquility.

[ 18 ] This aversion to bias is nevertheless quite distinct from Wittgenstein's position.

Contemporary [ edit ] Contemporary discussion of quietism can be traced back to Ludwig Wittgenstein , whose work greatly influenced the ordinary language philosophers .  While Wittgenstein himself did not advocate quietism, he expressed sympathy with the viewpoint.

[ 19 ] One of the early 'ordinary language' works, Gilbert Ryle 's The Concept of Mind , attempted to demonstrate that dualism arises from a failure to appreciate that mental vocabulary and physical vocabulary are simply different ways of describing one and the same thing, namely human behaviour.

[ 20 ] J. L. Austin 's Sense and Sensibilia took a similar approach to the problems of skepticism and the reliability of sense perception , arguing that they arise only by misconstruing ordinary language, not because there is anything genuinely wrong with empirical evidence .

[ citation needed ] Norman Malcolm , a friend of Wittgenstein's, took a quietist approach to skeptical problems in the philosophy of mind .

[ citation needed ] More recently, the philosophers John McDowell , Irad Kimhi, Sabina Lovibond , Eric Marcus, Gideon Rosen , [ 13 ] and to a certain degree Richard Rorty [ 21 ] have taken explicitly quietist positions. Pete Mandik has argued for a position of qualia quietism on the hard problem of consciousness .

[ 22 ] Varieties [ edit ] Some philosophers have advanced quietism about specific subjects such as realism [ 3 ] or truth.

[ 23 ] These positions can be held independent of one's view on quietism about the entire project of philosophy.

On realism [ edit ] One may be a realist about a range of subjects within philosophy from ethics and aesthetics to science and mathematics .

[ 24 ] Realists claim that a given concept exists, has particular properties and is in some way mind independent, while non-realists deny this claim.

[ 25 ] Quietists take a third position, claiming that there is no real debate between realists and non-realists on a given subject.

[ 26 ] A version of this position espoused by John McDowell claims that the debate hinges on theses about the relationship between the mind and the world around us that are unsupported or unsupportable, and without those claims there will be no debate.

[ 27 ] Others, such as Gideon Rosen argue more specifically against individual cases of the realism debate.

[ 28 ] On truth [ edit ] Quietism about truth is a version of the identity theory of truth.

[ 23 ] Specifically, Jennifer Hornsby and John McDowell argue that, when we think truly, there is no ontological gap between what we think and what is actually true.

[ 29 ] Quietists about truth resist the distinction between truth bearers and truthmakers as leading to a correspondence theory of truth.

[ 29 ] Rather they claim that such a distinction should be eliminated, true statements are simply one thinking truly about the world.

[ 29 ] The target of these thoughts is not a truthbearer, but rather the facts of the world themselves.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophical hermeneutics Critical philosophy Fictionalism Nonsense § Disguised Epistemic Nonsense for Wittgenstein's approach to philosophical problems References [ edit ] ^ Bakhurst, David (2005).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Ted Honderich (2nd ed.). [Oxford]: Oxford University Press. p. 779.

ISBN 978-0-19-153265-8 .

OCLC 62563098 .

quietism, philosophical...Philosophy's proper role is therapeutic, rather than constructive: the philosopher diagnoses conceptual confusions.

^ Virvidakis, Stelios; Kindi, Vasso (2013).

"Quietism" .

Oxford Bibliographies Online Datasets .

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195396577-0184 .

^ a b Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-10 , Philosophers who subscribe to quietism deny that there can be such a thing as substantial metaphysical debate between realists and their non-realist opponents (because they either deny that there are substantial questions about existence or deny that there are substantial questions about independence).

^ Bakhurst, David (2005).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Ted Honderich (2nd ed.). [Oxford]: Oxford University Press. p. 779.

ISBN 978-0-19-153265-8 .

OCLC 62563098 .

philosophy should not aspire to produce substantive theories (e.g. of the nature of meaning, the foundations of knowledge, or of the mind's place in the world), adjudicate disputes in science or mathematics, make discoveries...Philosophy's proper role is therapeutic, rather than constructive: the philosopher diagnoses conceptual confusions.  Although the results of such therapy can be profoundly liberating, philosophy does not itself advance human knowledge.

^ Wright, Crispin (1994).

Truth and Objectivity . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. p. 202.

ISBN 9780674910874 .

^ See also "Philosophers who subscribe to quietism deny that there can be such a thing as substantial metaphysical debate between realists and their non-realist opponents (because they either deny that there are substantial questions about existence or deny that there are substantial questions about independence)." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/realism/ ^ "Quietism" .

^ Bakhurst, David (2005).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Ted Honderich (2nd ed.). [Oxford]: Oxford University Press. p. 779.

ISBN 978-0-19-153265-8 .

OCLC 62563098 .

philosophy should not aspire to produce substantive theories (e.g. the nature of meaning, the foundations of knowledge, or of the mind's place in the world...philosophy does not itself advance human knowledge, but 'leaves everything as it is'.

^ Blackburn, Simon (2016).

The Oxford dictionary of philosophy (3rd ed.). Oxford. p. 398.

ISBN 978-0-19-179955-6 .

OCLC 945776618 .

there is no standpoint from which to achieve the philosophical goal of a theory about some concept or another.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Quietism" .

^ "Realism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-10 ^ a b Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-10 , Philosophers who subscribe to quietism deny that there can be such a thing as substantial metaphysical debate between realists and their non-realist opponents (because they either deny that there are substantial questions about existence or deny that there are substantial questions about independence)...Quietism about the 'debate' between realists and their opponents can take a number of forms...This form of quietism is often associated with the work of the later Wittgenstein, and receives perhaps its most forceful development in the work of John McDowell...This is in fact the strategy pursued in Rosen 1994 ^ Virvidakis, Stelios; Kindi, Vasso.

"Quietism" .

Oxford Bibliographies . Retrieved 2021-04-10 .

The first conception of philosophical quietism in the history of Western thought is encountered in the approach of Pyrrhonian skeptics of the Hellenistic period, who pursued imperturbability, quietude or tranquility of mind (ataraxia) through suspension of judgment (epoché) and refused assent (synkatathesis) to any philosophical thesis.

^ Encyclopedia of philosophy . Vol. 10. Donald M. Borchert (2nd ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale/Macmillan Reference USA. 2006.

ISBN 0-02-865780-2 .

OCLC 61151356 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b Inwood, Brad; Jones, Alexander (2006).

Encyclopedia of philosophy . Vol. 4. Donald M. Borchert (2nd ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale/Macmillan Reference USA. pp.

300– 303.

ISBN 0-02-865780-2 .

OCLC 61151356 .

while Epicurus rejected logic along with many other specialized intellectual endeavors as useless. For Epicurus even physics mattered only in so far as it was essential to achieving tranquility.

^ Konstan, David (2018), "Epicurus" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-10 , The philosophy of Epicurus (341–270 B.C.E.) was a complete and interdependent system, involving a view of the goal of human life (happiness, resulting from absence of physical pain and mental disturbance) ^ a b Chan, Wing-tsit (2006).

Encyclopedia of philosophy . Donald M. Borchert (2nd ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale/Macmillan Reference USA. pp.

144– 145.

ISBN 0-02-865780-2 .

OCLC 61151356 .

The chief task of moral and spiritual cultivation is to calm one's nature through absolute impartiality...Under the influence of Buddhism Cheng Hao also advocated quietism.

^ Blackburn, Simon (2016).

The Oxford dictionary of philosophy (3rd ed.). Oxford. p. 398.

ISBN 978-0-19-179955-6 .

OCLC 945776618 .

In philosophy the doctrine doubtfully associated with Wittgenstein...Wittgenstein sympathized with this but his own practice include a relentless striving to gain a 'perspicacious representation' of perplexing elements in our thought {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Tanney, Julia (2015), "Gilbert Ryle" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2015 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-10 ^ Kraugerud, Hanne Andrea; Ramberg, Bjørn Torgrim (2010).

"The New Loud: Richard Rorty, Quietist?" .

Common Knowledge .

16 (1): 48– 65.

doi : 10.1215/0961754X-2009-060 .

ISSN 1538-4578 .

^ Mandik, Pete (2016).

"Meta-Illusionism and Qualia Quietism" .

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

23 ( 11– 12).

^ a b Candlish, Stewart; Damnjanovic, Nic (1996-03-28).

"The Identity Theory of Truth" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Quietism Jennifer Hornsby (1997, 1999) and McDowell (on an alternative reading to that of Fish and Macdonald) endorse a version of the identity theory they see as truistic and which they put forward as an antidote to substantive theorizing about truth.

^ Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-13 , The question of the nature and plausibility of realism arises with respect to a large number of subject matters, including ethics, aesthetics, causation, modality, science, mathematics, semantics, and the everyday world of macroscopic material objects and their properties.

^ Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-13 , Generic Realism: a, b, and c and so on exist, and the fact that they exist and have properties such as F-ness, G-ness, and H-ness is (apart from mundane empirical dependencies of the sort sometimes encountered in everyday life) independent of anyone's beliefs, linguistic practices, conceptual schemes, and so on.  Non-realism can take many forms, depending on whether or not it is the existence or independence dimension of realism that is questioned or rejected.

^ Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-13 , Philosophers who subscribe to quietism deny that there can be such a thing as substantial metaphysical debate between realists and their non-realist opponents (because they either deny that there are substantial questions about existence or deny that there are substantial questions about independence).

^ Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-13 , One form might claim that the idea of a significant debate is generated by unsupported or unsupportable philosophical theses about the relationship of the experiencing and minded subject to their world, and that once these theses are exorcised the 'debate' will gradually wither away. This form of quietism is often associated with the work of the later Wittgenstein, and receives perhaps its most forceful development in the work of John McDowell ^ Miller, Alexander (2019), "Realism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-04-13 , Other forms of quietism may proceed in a more piecemeal fashion, taking constraints such as Wright's realism-relevant Cruces and arguing on a case-by-case basis that their satisfaction or non-satisfaction is of no metaphysical consequence. This is in fact the strategy pursued in Rosen 1994.

^ a b c d Candlish, Stewart; Damnjanovic, Nic (1996-03-28).

"The Identity Theory of Truth" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

While Hornsby and McDowell characterize the resulting view as an identity conception of truth, it is important to realize that they resist inflating the above remarks into an identification of truth bearers and truthmakers. To do so, they appear to think, is to move us beyond the truisms in a way which pushes us towards a correspondence theory of truth. The alternative appears to be to abandon the distinction between truth bearers and truthmakers entirely.

Sources [ edit ] Wittgenstein, Ludwig.

Philosophical Investigations . 3rd Rev Edn, Blackwell, 2002.

ISBN 0-631-23127-7 Ryle, Gilbert.

The Concept of Mind . London: Hutchinson, 1949.

ISBN 0-14-012482-9 Austin, J L.

Sense and Sensibilia . OUP, 1962.

ISBN 0-19-881083-0 Macarthur, David. "Pragmatism, Metaphysical Quietism and the Problem of Normativity", Philosophical Topics. Vol.36 No.1, 2009.

Malcolm, Norman.

Dreaming (Studies in Philosophical Psychology) . Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1959.

ISBN 0-7100-3836-4 McDowell, John and Evans, Gareth.

Truth and Meaning . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.

ISBN 0-19-824517-3 McDowell, John.

Mind and World . New Ed, Harvard, 1996.

ISBN 0-674-57610-1 v t e Ludwig Wittgenstein Family Margaret Stonborough-Wittgenstein Karl Wittgenstein Paul Wittgenstein Works associated with Paul Wittgenstein Early work Picture theory of language Truth tables Truth conditions Truth functions State of affairs Logical necessity Wittgenstein's ladder Late work Meaning as use Language-game Private language argument Family resemblance Ideal language analysis Rule-following Form of life Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics Therapeutic approach Anti-skepticism Publications Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus " Some Remarks on Logical Form " Blue and Brown Books Philosophical Remarks Philosophical Investigations On Certainty Culture and Value Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics Zettel Remarks on Colour Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology Movements Analytic philosophy Linguistic turn Ideal language philosophy Logical atomism Logical positivism Pyrrhonian skepticism Ordinary language philosophy Wittgensteinian fideism Quietism Therapeutic approach Postanalytic philosophy Friends G. E. M. Anscombe R. B. Braithwaite Rudolf Carnap Paul Engelmann John Maynard Keynes Peter Geach Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore David Pinsent Frank P. Ramsey Rush Rhees Bertrand Russell Moritz Schlick Francis Skinner Piero Sraffa Vienna Circle Friedrich Waismann Peter Winch G. H. von Wright Biographers David Edmonds Ray Monk William Warren Bartley Secondary sources A. J. Ayer Gordon Baker Jacques Bouveresse Stanley Cavell James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Terry Eagleton Juliet Floyd Warren Goldfarb A. C. Grayling Peter Hacker Oswald Hanfling Cressida Heyes Jaakko Hintikka Dale Jacquette Anthony Kenny Fergus Kerr Saul Kripke Sandra Laugier Elisabeth Leinfellner Werner Leinfellner Sabina Lovibond Norman Malcolm John McDowell Colin McGinn Marie McGinn Stephen Mulhall D. Z. Phillips Rupert Read Constantine Sandis Hans Sluga Barry Stroud Stephen Toulmin Michael Williams Crispin Wright John Wisdom Related Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society Cambridge Apostles Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club International Wittgenstein Symposium Haidbauer incident Haus Wittgenstein New Wittgenstein Fritz Mauthner Wittgenstein's Poker Film Wittgenstein (film) Wittgenstein Tractatus v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quietism_(philosophy)&oldid=1304429619 " Categories : Metaphysical theories Theories of language Philosophical methodology Psychological attitude Scientific method Analytic philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 00:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quietism (philosophy) 5 languages Add topic

