Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and use 2 Origins 3 Related concepts 4 Manifestations Toggle Manifestations subsection 4.1 Harassment and violence 4.1.1 Sexual violence 4.1.2 Physical violence 4.2 Misgendering 5 In society Toggle In society subsection 5.1 In healthcare 5.2 In the workplace 5.3 From government 5.4 In education 5.5 Online 5.6 In religion 5.6.1 In Christianity 5.6.2 In Islam 5.7 In language 6 In feminism 7 In gay, lesbian, and bisexual communities Toggle In gay, lesbian, and bisexual communities subsection 7.1 Gay and lesbian communities 7.2 Bisexual communities and binarism 8 Consequences Toggle Consequences subsection 8.1 Childhood and adolescence 8.2 Adulthood 8.3 United States military 8.4 Poverty and homelessness 8.5 Violence and harassment 8.5.1 In public restrooms 8.6 Health 8.6.1 Mental health 8.6.2 Pregnancy issues 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Transphobia 53 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Latina Magyar Македонски Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Anti-transgender prejudice Transphobic graffiti in Rome, Italy . It says "trans out" in German, with a swastika drawn above it.

Part of a series on Transgender topics Outline History Timeline Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care practices Gender clinic Gender dysphoria in children causes Sex assignment Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Puberty-suppressing hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery masculinizing feminizing Facial feminization surgery Facial masculinization surgery Hair removal Pregnancy Assisted reproductive technology Voice therapy WPATH Standards of Care Transgender health care misinformation Rights and legal status Gender self-identification Legal gender Non-binary gender Personal identity Rights movement Organizations Political office-holders United States Asylum Healthcare Military service South Korea United States Prisons Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Anti-gender movement Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom Discrimination Non-binary Parental rights movement Transgender men Transmisogyny Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Genocide Inequality Violence Murders Trans panic defense Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Events and awareness Awareness Week Beauty pageants Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility Flag March more Culture Anatomical terminology Fictional characters Film Literature Transgender culture of New York City Media portrayals People non-binary Publications Religion Sports Television Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Austria Brazil Canada 2016 bill China Finland France [ fr ] Germany 1980 law 2018 law 2024 law India 2014 bill 2019 act Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 act New Zealand Norway 2016 act Singapore South Africa 2003 act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom Anti-trans movement 2004 act 2022 bill United States Disenfranchisement Title IX Transphobia History Argentina [ es ] Australia Re Kevin Brazil China Finland Nazi Germany Singapore United Kingdom United States Legality elected officials Cafeteria riot Stonewall See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people LGBTQ portal Category v t e Part of a series on LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Sexual orientation and gender Aromantic Asexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Biology Bisexual Pansexual Demographics Environment Fictosexual Gender fluid Gender identity Gender role Gender modality Gender nonconforming Homosexual Intersex Non-heterosexual Non-binary Queer Queer heterosexual Questioning Sexual identity Sex–gender distinction Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Two-spirit History General Timeline Same-sex marriage Homosexuality Movements Gay liberation Same-sex unions Stonewall riots Identities Lesbian Bisexual Transgender Intersex Culture Business Coming out Community African-American Dyke March Events Awareness periods Largest events Gay village Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals LGBTQ culture in New York City Pride Pride Month Parade Queer art QPR and QPP Same-sex relationship Cross-sex relationship Slang Polari Socialization Subcultures Transgender in NYC Symbols Flags Takatāpui Moe aikāne Tourism Rights Adoption Civil union Decriminalization Gender self-identification Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Military service Parenting Rights by country or territory Sexuality Trans rights Yogyakarta Principles Health MSM and Blood donation restrictions / HIV LGBTQ medical organizations Reproduction Mental health Transgender health care Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery Gender transition Legal status of gender-affirming healthcare Misinformation Suicide Societal attitudes Allonormative amatonormative Cisnormative Heteronormative Comphet Opposition to LGBTQ rights 21st century UK anti-trans 2020s US anti-LGBTQ Grooming conspiracy theory Media portrayal Religion & LGBTQ Homosexuality Trans people Sexual diversity Stereotypes Issues Acephobia Arophobia AIDS stigma Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Biphobia Bullying Censorship Closeted Outing Criminalization Domestic violence Erasure Straightwashing Bisexual Lesbian Trans Gay bashing Gayphobia Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal Intersex discrimination Legality of conversion therapy Lesbophobia Suicide Youth vulnerability Migration Mixed-orientation marriage Racism Sexualism Transphobia Non-binary people Trans men Trans women Violence Trans people Academic fields and discourse Communism & LGBTQ rights Gender studies Lesbian feminism Lavender linguistics LGBTQ conservatism In the US Queer anarchism Queer studies Queer theory Social construction of gender Socialism & LGBTQ rights Transfeminism Transgender studies Travesti LGBTQ portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Transphobia consists of negative attitudes, feelings, or actions towards transgender or transsexual people, or transness in general. Transphobia can include fear, aversion, hatred, violence or anger towards people who do not conform to social gender roles .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Transphobia is a type of prejudice and discrimination , similar to racism , sexism , or ableism , [ 3 ] [ page needed ] and it is closely associated with homophobia .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] People of color who are transgender experience discrimination above and beyond that which can be explained as a simple combination of transphobia and racism.

[ 6 ] Transgender youth often experience a combination of abuse from family members , sexual harassment , and bullying or school violence .

[ 7 ] They are also disproportionately placed in foster care and welfare programs compared to their peers.

[ 8 ] Adult transgender people regularly encounter sexual violence , police violence , public ridicule , misgendering, or other forms of violence and harassment in their daily lives.

[ 9 ] These issues cause many trans people to feel unsafe in public.  Other issues include healthcare discrimination , workplace discrimination or feeling under siege by conservative political or religious groups who oppose LGBT-rights laws .

[ 10 ] Discrimination and violence sometimes originates from people within the LGBT community [ 11 ] or feminist movements .

As well as increased risk of violence and other threats, the stress created by transphobia causes negative mental health outcomes and leads to drug use disorders , running away from home (in minors), and suicide.

In much of the Western world , there has been a gradual establishment of policies combatting discrimination and supporting equal opportunity in all aspects of life since the 1990s. The trend is also taking shape in some developing nations . In addition, campaigns regarding the LGBT community are being spread around the world to improve social acceptance of nontraditional gender identities. The "Stop the Stigma" campaign by the UN is one such example.

[ 12 ] However, transphobic violence has been on the rise since 2021 , [ 13 ] accompanied with an increase in anti-trans discriminatory laws being enacted in many parts of the US and other countries.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Etymology and use The word transphobia is a classical compound patterned on the term homophobia . The first component is the neo-classical prefix trans- (originally meaning "across, on the far side, beyond") from transgender , and the second component -phobia comes from the Ancient Greek φόβος ( phóbos , "fear"). Along with lesbophobia , biphobia and homophobia , transphobia is a member of the family of terms used when intolerance and discrimination is directed toward LGBT people.

Transphobia is not a phobia as defined in clinical psychology (i.e., an anxiety disorder ). Its meaning and usage parallels xenophobia .

[ 16 ] The noun transphobe denotes someone who harbors transphobia. The adjectival form transphobic may be used to describe a transphobe or their actions. The words transphobia and transphobic were added to the Oxford English Dictionary in 2013.

[ 17 ] Origins Transfeminist theorist and author Julia Serano argues that the root of transphobia is "oppositional sexism ", i.e. the belief that male and female are "rigid, mutually exclusive categories, each possessing a unique and nonoverlapping set of attributes, aptitudes, abilities, and desires". She contrasts this against the belief that males and masculinity are superior to females and femininity along with people's insecurities about gender and gender norms, which she calls "traditional sexism".

[ 18 ] Other transgender rights authors argue that a significant part of the oppositional sexist origin of transphobia and violence towards transsexual people is linked to psychological claims of difference between male sexuality and female sexuality in the brain's protection mechanisms from committing sex crimes. These authors argue that the paradigm of acceptable sexual behavior that assumes men's sexual arousal is category-specific and women's sex drive is lower and more inhibited causes allegations that transsexual people have neither safety system in the brain and are therefore sex criminals. They argue that studies that claim to show such sex differences have flaws, such as the possibility that more men are deterred from participating in sexual arousal studies than women due to fear of being alleged to be inappropriately sexually aroused.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ clarification needed ] Others have argued that hostility towards transgender identity is in part due to the challenge it poses to the idea that gender is based on observable physical and behavioral characteristics determined at birth.

[ 21 ] Rad and colleagues surveyed a sample of 1323 American adults, asking them to identify the gender of transgender people who medically transitioned , finding that the type of transition procedure mattered but its direction did not. Specifically, biological changes resulted in the target being more identified with their self-identified gender than their birth-assigned gender, but there were no significant differences between male-to-female and female-to-male transitions. Moreover, compared to male test subjects, female test subjects were more likely to identify the targets as their self-identified gender. This gender difference was larger in younger, more liberal, and less religious non-Midwestern respondents. The authors further showed that gender category beliefs (ratings of the transgender person's post-transition gender identity) were strongly associated with attitudes and feelings of warmth towards transgender people. However, gender category beliefs performed better in predicting bathroom policy preferences compared to feelings in unseen data, indicating that beliefs about what gender is and how it is determined are significantly linked to transphobia and support for anti-transgender policies. The authors argue that this pattern is consistent with theories that transphobia is rooted in a hierarchical social classification system where low-status groups (e.g., females) view the hierarchy in less essentialist ways than high-status groups (e.g., males).

[ 21 ] Transgender author and critic Jody Norton believes that transphobia is an extension of homophobia and misogyny . She argues that transgender people, like gays and lesbians, are hated and feared for challenging and undermining gender norms and the gender binary , and the "male-to-female transgender incites transphobia through her implicit challenge to the binary division of gender upon which male cultural and political hegemony depends".

[ 22 ] Drawing on theory of radicalization , Craig McLean argues that discourse on transgender-related issues in the UK has been radicalized in response to the activities of what he terms the "anti-transgender movement," claiming that the movement pushes "a radical agenda to deny the basic rights of trans people (...) under the cover of 'free speech.'" [ 23 ] Some authors have linked transphobia's origins to colonialism, arguing that gendercide against third gender people carried out during the European colonization of the Americas reflect the historical roots of transphobia.

[ 24 ] Sociologists McLean and Stretesky argue that "a veritable miasma of anti-trans campaign groups [...] united in their antipathy toward transgender people" has contributed to an anti-trans moral panic in the United Kingdom, which they link to authoritarian beliefs.

[ 25 ] Related concepts Cissexism (also termed cisgenderism, and related to but distinct from cisnormativity or cissexual assumption) is the appeal to norms that enforce the gender binary and gender essentialism , resulting in the oppression of gender variant , non-binary , and transgender identities .

[ 26 ] Cissexism refers to the assumption that, due to human sexual differentiation , one's gender is determined solely by a biological sex of male or female (or, in the case of cisgenderism, a bivalent male or female expression), and that trans people are inferior to cisgender people.

[ 27 ] Cisgender privilege is the set of "unearned rights afforded to nontransgender people by virtue of the fact that they are not transgender", such as access to gender-segregated spaces and teams, lower exposure to gender-based violence, and easier access to gender-specific healthcare.

[ 28 ] Harassment and violence directed against transgender people is often called trans bashing , and can be physical, sexual or verbal. Whereas gay bashing is directed against a target's real or perceived sexual orientation , trans bashing is directed against the target's real or perceived expressed gender identity. The term has also been applied to hate speech directed at transgender people [ 29 ] and to depictions of transgender people in the media that reinforce negative stereotypes about them.

[ 30 ] Transprejudice is a term similar to transphobia, and refers to the negative valuing, stereotyping, and discriminatory treatment of individuals whose appearance or identity does not conform to current social expectations or conventional conceptions of gender.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Manifestations Transgender people are often excluded from entitlements or privileges reserved for cisgender people of the same gender: for example, it is common for transgender women to be stopped or questioned when they use public bathrooms designated for women.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Homeless shelters , hospitals and prisons have denied trans women admission to women's areas and forced them to sleep and bathe in the presence of men.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ page needed ] Harassment and violence Main article: Violence against transgender people The stigma against transgender people often results in physical violence or bodily harm, sexual violence or assault, and verbal or emotional abuse.

[ 37 ] Transgender individuals are at increased risk for experiencing aggression and violence throughout their life when compared to cisgender individuals, especially when it comes to sexual violence.

[ 38 ] Other kinds of abuse include bullying , harassment , and multiple forms of discrimination .

[ 39 ] Abuse against transgender people can come from many different sources, including family and friends, partners, co-workers and acquaintances, strangers, and the police, and the abuse can occur at each developmental stage in life.

[ 38 ] As homophobia and transphobia are correlated, many trans people experience homophobia and heterosexism due to people who associate trans people's gender identity with homosexuality , or because trans people may also have a sexual orientation that is non-heterosexual .

[ 4 ] [ 40 ] [ 5 ] Author Thomas Spijkerboer [ Wikidata ] stated that "transgender people subjected to violence, in a range of cultural contexts, frequently report that transphobic violence is expressed in homophobic terms." [ 5 ] According to the American Psychological Association , transgender children are more likely than other children to experience harassment and violence in school, foster care, residential treatment centers, homeless centers, and juvenile justice programs.

[ 41 ] Researchers say trans youth routinely experience taunting, teasing and bullying at school, and that nearly all trans youth say they were verbally or physically harassed in school, particularly during gym class, at school events, or when using single-sex restrooms. Three-quarters report having felt unsafe.

[ 2 ] As adults, transgender people are frequently subjected to ridicule, taunting, and threats of violence, even when just walking down the street or walking into a store.

[ 33 ] A U.S. survey of 402 older, employed, high-income transgender people found that 60% reported violence or harassment because of their gender identity. Among other things, 56% of the respondents reported being harassed or verbally abused, 30% reported being assaulted, and 8% reported unjustified arrest.

[ 40 ] A study of 81 transgender people in Philadelphia found that 30% of the respondents reported feeling unsafe in public because they were transgender, with 19% feeling uncomfortable for the same reason. When asked if they had ever been forced to have sex, experienced violence in their home, or been physically abused, the majority answered yes to each question.

[ 42 ] Sexual violence In 2009, researcher Rebecca L. Stotzer published an article in Aggression and Violent Behavior that compiled information from numerous studies reporting violence against transgender people, describing it as "shockingly common" and noting that transgender people have a high risk of experiencing sexual violence throughout their lifetimes, and while reported rates vary considerably among studies for methodological and other reasons, the most common finding is that around 50% of transgender people have been sexually assaulted.

[ 43 ] A meta-analysis on the rates of intimate partner violence found that transgender individuals are 66% more likely to experience violence of some kind from an intimate partner than cisgender subjects, and more than twice as likely to experience both sexual and physical intimate partner violence than their cisgender peers.

[ 44 ] Physical violence Perpetrators of physical violence against transgender people are reported to have been influenced by negative attitudes against transgender people, many of whom do not report their assault to the police.

[ 45 ] In the United States, the available homicide data suggests that transgender people are murdered at a lower rate than cisgender people. However, young Black and Latina trans women appear to be at greater risk of homicide than their cisgender peers.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Misgendering See also: Deadnaming Bus with transphobic message promoted by the right-wing organization HazteOir . Top text in Spanish translates to "Boys have a penis. Girls have a vulva. Don't let them deceive you. If you're born a man, you are a man. If you're a woman, you'll keep being one." Misgendering is the act of labelling or referring to others with a gender that does not match their gender identity.

[ 48 ] Misgendering can be deliberate or accidental; common examples of misgendering a person are using the wrong pronouns to describe someone, [ 34 ] [ 49 ] calling a person "ma'am" or "sir" in contradiction to the person's gender identity, [ 50 ] using a person's previous, pre-transition name for them in place of their current name (" deadnaming "), [ 34 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] or insisting that a person must adhere to the norms of their sex assigned at birth rather than the ones that align with their gender identity; for example, using a bathroom designated for males even though the person identifies as female.

[ 53 ] The experience of being misgendered is common for all transgender people before they transition, and for many afterwards as well.

[ 54 ] Transgender people are regularly misgendered by doctors, [ 41 ] police, media, and peers, experiences that have been described as "mortifying", [ 55 ] cruel, [ 56 ] and "only making our lives harder".

[ 57 ] A 2018 study of 129 transgender and other gender-expansive youth published in the Journal of Adolescent Health , found that "for each additional social context in which a youth's chosen name was used, there was a statistically significant decrease in depressive symptoms, suicidal ideation, and suicidal behaviors," [ 58 ] though the study was "correlational so causality cannot be assumed, and the sample size was small." [ 59 ] Deliberately misgendering a transgender person is considered extremely offensive by transgender individuals.

[ 60 ] [ 56 ] In society In healthcare See also: LGBTQ health A study of 81 transgender people in Philadelphia found 14% said they had been refused routine medical care because they were transgender. 18% answered 'yes' when asked if, when they went in for a check-up, "being transgender created a problem" for them.

[ 42 ] Additionally, a study of 223 healthcare providers indicated a correlation between transphobia and decreased performance on survey questions regarding the treatment of transgender patients, with no significant correlation to the amount of time spent learning about transgender health, leading researchers to state that "broader efforts to address transphobia in society in general, and in medical education in particular, may be required to improve the quality of medical care for [transgender and gender diverse] patients." [ 61 ] In the United States–based National Center For Transgender Equality 's 2011 survey, 19% of respondents reported being refused medical care due to their transgender or gender non-conforming status, [ 62 ] such as Robert Eads , who died of ovarian cancer after being refused treatment by more than two dozen doctors due to fears that taking him on as a patient might harm their practice, [ 63 ] or Tyra Hunter , who was involved in an automobile accident; when rescue workers discovered she was transgender, they backed away and stopped administering treatment. She later died in a hospital.

[ 64 ] In many European countries, laws require that any transgender person who wishes to change their legal gender must first be sterilized .

[ 65 ] Sweden repealed its law in December 2012, [ 66 ] and the European Court of Human Rights struck down such laws in 2017.

[ 67 ] In the workplace Transphobia also manifests itself in the workplace. Some transgender people lose their jobs when they begin to transition and a 1995 study from Willamette University stated that a transgender person fired for following the recommended course of treatment rarely wins it back through federal or state statutes.

[ 68 ] A survey of 392 trans women and 123 trans men conducted by the San Francisco Department of Public Health in 1997 and released in 1999 found that 40% of trans women surveyed had earned money from full or part-time employment over the preceding six months. For trans men, the equivalent statistic was 81%. The survey also found that 46% of trans women and 57% of trans men reported employment discrimination .

[ 69 ] The Associated Press and the Out Traveler later reported the San Francisco Department of Public Health had found 70% of trans respondents in San Francisco were unemployed.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ better source needed ] A 2002 American study found that among educators, trans educators are 10–20% more likely to experience workplace harassment than their gay and lesbian colleagues.

[ 2 ] In the hiring process, discrimination may be either open or covert, with employers sometimes finding other ostensible reasons to not hire a candidate. Additionally, when an employer fires a transgender employee, it may be a "mixed motive" case, with the employer openly citing obvious wrongdoing or job performance issues while keeping silent in regards to transphobia.

[ 72 ] Employment discrimination on the basis of gender identity and expression is illegal in the United States . Such discrimination is outlawed by specific legislation in the State of New Jersey and might be in other states (as it is in the states of California, Illinois, Maine, Minnesota, New Mexico and Washington) or city ordinances; additionally, it is covered by case law in some other states. (For example, Massachusetts is covered by cases such as Lie vs. Sky Publishing Co.

and Jette vs. Honey Farms .) Several other states and cities prohibit such discrimination in public employment. Sweden and the United Kingdom have also legislated against employment discrimination on the grounds of gender identity. Sometimes, however, employers discriminate against transgender employees in spite of such legal protections.

[ 73 ] In 2000, the southern U.S. grocery chain Winn-Dixie fired long-time employee Peter Oiler, despite a history of repeatedly earning raises and promotions, after management learned that Oiler identified as transgender and occasionally cross-dressed off the job. Management argued that this hurt Winn-Dixie's corporate image. The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit against Winn-Dixie on behalf of Oiler, but a judge dismissed it.

[ 74 ] Transgender people facing employment discrimination may turn to sex work to survive , [ 75 ] placing them at additional risk of  encountering troubles with the law, including arrest and criminal prosecution, workplace violence, the risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV .

[ 69 ] Lack of employment has also resulted in the transgender community resorting to illegal means of earning money such as drug-dealing.

[ 76 ] A study conducted by Anneliese Singh and Vel McKleroy on transgender people of color revealed that difficulty finding a job or losing a job due to transphobia resulted in some respondents living in crime-ridden neighborhoods and getting involved in abusive relationships.

[ 77 ] A 2021 study in the Journal of Career Development looked at 18 Latino transgender immigrants to the United States and found five themes related to these participants' experiences while seeking employment: discrimination, limited options, positive experiences, and disability benefits as financial relief.

[ 78 ] From government See also: Transgender disenfranchisement in the United States Voter identification laws in the United States often impact transgender individuals' ability to vote, since many lack photo identification with their current name and gender.

[ 79 ] Prisons frequently make no attempt to accommodate transgender individuals, assigning them to facilities using only the criteria of genitalia, which is believed to contribute to the pervasiveness of prison rape with regards to transgender women. Prison staff have been noted to frequently deny trans women privileges disproportionately, and the Eighth Amendment right for an individual not to be given cruel or unusual punishment has historically not been liberally enforced in cases involving transgender inmates.

[ 80 ] In July 2023, Russia enacted a law which had, among other measures, banned gender-affirming healthcare for all transgender people regardless of age and had also banned them from adopting children.

[ 81 ] Transgender people also face the denial of right of asylum or inhuman treatment in process of asylum-seeking.

[ 82 ] In education See also: Anti-LGBT curriculum laws in the United States Further information: Censorship of school curricula in the United States Within the school system, many transgender teens are harassed and mistreated with reported negative effects on both victim and the school's population in general.

[ 83 ] Transgender youth frequently report fear and anxiety about using restrooms and locker rooms at school because of harassment by both peers and adults when using them.

[ 84 ] Over 80% of transgender teens report feeling unsafe in a school environment, more than 40% report having been physically abused, and over 65% report being bullied online or via social media.

[ 83 ] Such discrimination is generally underreported, and school officials may even participate in transphobic name-calling or victim-blaming . Additionally, administrative practices such as misgendering students in school records can contribute to transgender students' distress in school.

[ 85 ] A study done on Canadian high school students between December 2007 and June 2009 illustrated how the LGBTQ students felt unsafe at the school and were exposed to insults and discrimination by their peers and sometimes even by their teachers.

[ 86 ] Even heterosexual students and teachers fear attack by transphobia on account of supporting or having a transgender friend or family member.

[ citation needed ] Online Georgia U.S. Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene (left) and Libs of TikTok creator Chaya Raichik (right) holding a sign claiming there are exactly two genders. Greene posted this image to Twitter with the caption "@libsoftiktok knows the truth!" [ 87 ] Online transphobia remains a growing problem across various online spaces. A study by Brandwatch analyzing over ten million posts in transgender-related discussions on various social media platforms between 2015 and 2019 found over 1.5 million transphobic posts. These posts varied from promoting transphobic sentiment to advocating for anti-transgender violence and genocide .

[ 88 ] Transgender people are often victims of online harassment and experience higher reported levels of online harassment compared to their cisgender heterosexual counterparts.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] One study on transphobic cyberbullying by Evelyn et al. found that participants most frequently reported being bullied on social media platforms, alongside frequently reporting bullying in online video games and dating apps . Most of the bullying was found to be from anonymous users or people unknown to the participants, and often in the form of transphobic insults, intersectional sexist, homophobic and/or racist insults, outing their identity , threats of harm, and sexual harassment. Participants even reported transphobic cyberbullying from other transgender individuals, usually by policing or outing their identity.

[ 91 ] Online transphobia has potential to lead to real-world violence and threats. An example of this is when far-right Twitter account Libs of TikTok made a series of posts spreading misinformation that Boston Children's Hospital was performing hysterectomies on minors. This led to a series of death threats and bomb threats being made against the hospital and individual physicians, and individual physicians being doxxed and harassed in person.

[ 92 ] Libs of TikTok has similarly posted about several other LGBT-themed events, such as Drag Queen Story Hours , often leading to said events receiving mass threats of violence and being canceled or postponed by organizers.

[ 93 ] The LGBT grooming conspiracy theory - claiming that LGBTQ people and allies are systematically grooming children- has been promoted online by both users and mainstream politicians such as Marjorie Taylor Greene and Lauren Boebert . Former US President Donald Trump claimed in a video posted to Truth Social on 31 January 2023, that "the left-wing gender insanity being pushed at our children is an act of child abuse" and that if re-elected, he would pass numerous laws significantly limiting gender-affirming care for minors.

[ 94 ] One study on Twitter found that use of the term " groomer " in tweets spiked on multiple occasions, including the passing of the Florida Parental Rights in Education Act , the signing into law of said act, and Twitter posting a statement that tweets calling transgender or nonbinary people "groomers" violates its hate speech policy.

[ 95 ] Despite Twitter's prior public stance against transphobia and homophobia on its platform, the company was criticized by organizations such as the Human Rights Campaign for being inefficient. One audit by the organization found that Twitter failed to act on 99 out of 100 of the most viewed anti-LGBT tweets between January and July 2022.

[ 95 ] The acquisition of Twitter by Elon Musk has led to a significant increase in hate speech , especially in terms of anti-LGBTQ content. Following Musk's takeover, tweets linking LGBT people to grooming rose by 119%, and retweets and mentions of right-wing figures' anti-LGBT tweets increased by over 1200%.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Under Elon Musk , Twitter has also relaxed transgender hate speech policies , such as misgendering.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] GLAAD described Twitter as "the most dangerous platform for LGBTQ people ", ranking the lowest on its Social Media Safety Index.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] Similarly, a 2020 study on Facebook by Media Matters for America found that right-leaning sources took up a vast majority of interactions in transgender topics compared to left-leaning or queer sources, with anti-LGBT outlets such as The Daily Wire and LifeSiteNews earning the highest engagements out of any source analyzed in the study.

[ 103 ] In religion See also: Transgender people and religion In Christianity See also: Christianity and transgender people and Anti-gender movement Some of this section's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In North America, organizations associated with the Christian right , including the American Family Association , Family Research Council , Focus on the Family , National Association for Research and Therapy of Homosexuality , believe that " transgenderism " is unnatural and that transgender people are and remain the sex they were assigned at birth. These organizations oppose laws and policies intended to accommodate transgender people, such as allowing them to change their legal sex, use the washroom corresponding to the gender with which they identify, or become ordained Christian ministers. It is their position that God created people's bodies as they are meant to be, that accepting transgender people would violate scripture and natural law , and that the Bible refers to male and female only.

[ 104 ] According to the Ontario Consultants for Religious Tolerance website, under Pope John Paul II , the Holy See first stated its opposition to reassignment surgery in 2000, although it was not made public until 2003.

[ 105 ] Transgender people face particular challenges in attempting to integrate their faith with their gender identity. One author says "expectations [based on gender] are usually predicated upon our genitalia and begin from the moment of birth, continuing throughout our lives." [ 106 ] Many Christian denominations use biblical notions of gender and gender roles to support their views. These include "So God created man in His own image, in the image of God He created him; male and female He created them" (Genesis 1:27) and "The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are an abomination unto the Lord thy God" (Deuteronomy 22:5).

[ 107 ] Views of gender identity based on the Christian faith do not always coincide with the perspectives of transgender individuals.

[ clarification needed ] However, if they do not conform to these expectations, they may face rejection. Many transgender Christians seek out an "individualized relationship with God", often facing "a period of denial and struggle" as well as depression, disconnection, dissatisfaction, and spiritual difficulty before "discovering a sense of self that feels integral and true".

[ 108 ] Many transgender individuals face barriers within the church, such as "fear and unfamiliarity on the part of the congregation, language issues, physical layout that separates people by gender, programs that exclude or separate by gender, pathologizing or designating trans issues as sinful, and overt hostility".

[ 109 ] [ 107 ] In Islam The Islamic faith has historically supported heteronormative, binary gender identification.

[ 110 ] This support is reinforced by cultural norms and traditional readings of sacred texts which prohibit a wide range of identities. Despite this history, progressive Muslims have built arguments that support transgender Muslims on long-established doctrine, [ 111 ] and support for gender transition has even been found among influential conservative scholars.

In 1988, gender reassignment surgery was declared acceptable under Islamic law by scholars at Egypt's Al-Azhar , the world's oldest Islamic university. In Iran during 1987, Ayatollah Khomeini , the supreme religious leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran at that time, also declared transgender surgical operations as acceptable (see transgender rights in Iran ). The foundation for this accepting attitude in contrast to intolerance of homosexuality is the belief that a person is born transgender but chooses to be homosexual. Despite this acceptance among some conservative Muslim scholars and leaders, transgender individuals within the Muslim community still face particular challenges.

Today, there are some Muslim communities that explicitly welcome transgender Muslims, including some which have trans leadership. Masjid Al-Rabia, founded in 2017, is a trans-led, women-centred, LGBTQ+ affirming mosque based in Chicago, IL.

[ 112 ] In Northampton, Massachusetts, the Pioneer Valley Progressive Muslims (Masjid Al-Inshirah) was founded in 2010 by a transgender Muslim.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Muslims for Progressive Values has founded Unity Mosques in Atlanta, Georgia; Columbus, Ohio; and Los Angeles, California; as well as outside the United States. The Muslim Alliance for Sexual and Gender Diversity hosts an annual retreat for LGBTQ+ Muslims in Pennsylvania each May.

[ 115 ] The Trans and Muslim Project of TransFaith is a project devoted specifically to the support of transgender Muslims.

[ 116 ] In language Transphobia can manifest in attacks on inclusive language . Dorothee Beck writes that gender-inclusive language "is a trigger point for ‘ anti-gender ’ attacks," and describes it as "an important aspect of a broader political ‘crusade’ against gender." [ 117 ] Lucy Jones writes, in her review of scholarly literature on language, gender, and sexuality, that anti-gender and gender-critical actors often resist the adoption of inclusive and nonbinary language, particularly in relation to pronouns and the recognition of transgender and nonbinary identities. Jones notes that gender-critical actors frequently reject linguistic practices that affirm trans and nonbinary identities, often citing the preservation of " sex-based rights " as justification. She observes that this resistance is typically framed by a binary and essentialist ideology that defines "woman" exclusively as someone assigned female at birth .

[ 118 ] Drawing on this scholarship, Jones characterizes gender-critical resistance to inclusive language as part of a broader "cisnormative preoccupation with trans people’s bodies" and a form of linguistic policing aimed at denying the legitimacy of trans and nonbinary identities.

[ 118 ] Jones situates these discursive patterns within a wider political context by citing Borba (2022), who examines the emergence of an "anti-gender register" used in trans-exclusionary discourse, including gender-critical feminism. Borba argues that this register, which draws on essentialist ideas about sex and gender, has gained traction through a process of enregisterment, a way of making certain ideological positions appear natural or commonsensical. He further suggests that this has been achieved in part by appropriating the language of feminist and LGBTQ+ antidiscrimination activism, reframing it to emphasize threats to the rights of cisgender women and children.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] In feminism See also: Feminist views on transgender topics and Trans-exclusionary radical feminism Some positions within feminism have been considered transphobic. This may include criticism of transitioning or sex reassignment surgery (SRS) as a personal choice or medical invention, or the position that trans women are not women in a literal sense and should not be allowed access to women-only spaces.

[ 120 ] Some second-wave feminists perceive trans men and women respectively as "traitors" and "infiltrators" to womanhood.

[ 121 ] Second-wave feminist and activist Gloria Steinem expressed concerns in 1977 about transsexuality and SRS, writing that in many cases, transsexuals "surgically mutilate their own bodies." [ 122 ] : 227 She concluded that "feminists are right to feel uncomfortable about the need for and uses of transsexualism." [ 122 ] : 228 For some years, this led to Steinem being characterized as transphobic.

[ 123 ] In 2013, she repudiated the interpretation of her text as an altogether condemnation of SRS, stating that her position was informed by accounts of gay men choosing to transition as a way of coping with societal homophobia . She added that she sees transgender people as living "authentic lives" that should be "celebrated".

[ 124 ] Radical feminist Janice Raymond 's 1979 book, The Transsexual Empire , was and is still controversial due to its unequivocal condemnation of transsexual surgeries.

[ 120 ] In the book Raymond says, "All transsexuals rape women's bodies by reducing the real female form to an artifact, appropriating this body for themselves .... Transsexuals merely cut off the most obvious means of invading women, so that they seem non-invasive" and that trans people should be "morally mandated out of existence".

[ 125 ] Another site of conflict between feminists and trans women has been the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival . In the early 1990s, the festival ejected a transsexual woman, Nancy Burkholder.

[ 126 ] In 2014, the festival "passionately rejected" accusations that it believed transgender women are "less than" other women.

[ 127 ] The activist group Camp Trans had protested the "womyn-born-womyn" intention and advocated for greater acceptance of trans women within the feminist community. The festival had considered allowing only post-operative trans women to attend, but this was criticized as classist , as many trans women cannot afford sex reassignment surgery.

[ 128 ] Trans women such as Sandy Stone challenged the feminist conception of "biological woman". Stone worked as a sound engineer for Olivia Records from about 1974 to 1978, resigning as the controversy over a trans woman working for a lesbian-identified enterprise increased.

[ 129 ] The debate continued in Raymond's book, [ 125 ] which devoted a chapter to criticism of "the transsexually constructed lesbian-feminist." Groups like Lesbian Organization of Toronto then voted to exclude trans lesbians.

[ 130 ] Sheila Jeffreys described " transgenderism " as "deeply problematic from a feminist perspective and [stated] that transsexualism should be seen as a violation of human rights." [ 131 ] The work of poststructuralist feminist and lesbian Judith Butler , particularly their books Gender Trouble (1990) [ 132 ] and Bodies That Matter (1993), [ 133 ] argues that the "violent inscription" of gender as a social construct on human bodies leads to violence against those who do not conform to such binaristic gender dichotomies.

Feminists who oppose the inclusion of trans women in women's spaces have been labeled " TERFs ", short for "trans-exclusionary radical feminists".

[ 134 ] Those at whom the term is directed, in turn, have perceived their labeling as "TERF" to be a slur .

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] In gay, lesbian, and bisexual communities Transphobia is documented in the lesbian , gay and bisexual communities, despite historic cooperation between these communities in campaigns for equality.

[ 137 ] [ unreliable source?

] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Authors and observers, such as transgender author Jillian Todd Weiss, have written that "there are social and political forces that have created a split between gay/lesbian communities and bisexual/transgender communities, and these forces have consequences for civil rights and community inclusion. 'Biphobia' and 'transphobia' are a result of these social and political forces, not psychological forces causing irrational fears in aberrant individuals." [ 11 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] Gay and lesbian communities Protesters outside the 2010 premiere of Ticked-Off Trannies with Knives , written and directed by gay filmmaker Israel Luna , objecting to what they considered to be transphobic portrayals in the film and its trailer, which referred to several notable real-life murders of transgender people before being taken down [ 143 ] Historian Joanne Meyerowitz documented transphobia within the gay rights movement in the mid 20th century in response to publicity surrounding the transition of Christine Jorgensen . Jorgensen, who made frequent homophobic remarks and insisted she was not connected to or identified with gay men, was a polarizing figure among activists: In 1953, for example, ONE magazine published a debate among its readers as to whether gay men should denounce Jorgensen. In the opening salvo, the author Jeff Winters accused Jorgensen of a "sweeping disservice" to gay men. "As far as the public knows," Winters wrote, "you were merely another unhappy homosexual who decided to get drastic about it." For Winters, Jorgensen's story simply confirmed the false belief that all men attracted to other men must be basically feminine," which, he said, "they are not." Jorgensen's precedent, he thought, encouraged the "reasoning" that led "to legal limitations upon the homosexual, mandatory injections, psychiatric treatment – and worse." In the not-so-distant past, scientists had experimented with castrating gay men.

— Joanne Meyerowitz [ 144 ] Several prominent figures in second wave feminism have also been accused of transphobic attitudes, culminating in 1979 with the publication of The Transsexual Empire by radical lesbian feminist Janice Raymond , who popularized the term shemale as derogatory slur referring to trans women in 1994, [ 125 ] and her statements on transsexuality and transsexual people have been criticized by many in the LGBT and feminist communities as extremely transphobic and as constituting hate speech .

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] In 1950s America, there was a debate among gay men and women about those who felt they were of the opposite sex. Gay men and women who were trying to melt quietly into the majority society criticized them as "freaks" who brought unwanted disreputable attention upon them. Such attitudes were widespread at the time.

[ 152 ] Some trans men face rejection from lesbian communities they had been part of prior to transition. Journalist Louise Rafkin writes, "there are those who are feeling curiously uncomfortable standing by as friends morph into men. Sometimes there is a generational flavor to this discomfort; many in the over-40 crowd feel particular unease", stating that this was "shaking the foundation of the lesbian-feminist world".

[ 153 ] Trans men were part of the protest at the 2000 Michigan Womyn's Music Festival , the first time the ' womyn-born womyn only' policy has been used against trans males, women supporting the transgender community and young gender-variant women.

[ 154 ] In the early 1970s, conflicts began to emerge due to different syntheses of lesbian, feminist and transgender political movements, particularly in the United States. San Francisco trans activist and entertainer Beth Elliott became the focus of debate over whether to include transgender lesbians in the movement, and she was eventually blacklisted by her own movement.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] Bisexual communities and binarism One view is that the word bisexual is transphobic, as "bi" means "two" (thus implying a belief in the binary view of gender ). Some people, such as scholar Shiri Eisner , say that some make the claim that the term "erases nonbinary genders and sexes out of existence", [ 157 ] as many dictionaries define bisexuality as "of, relating to, or having a sexual orientation to persons of either sex", [ 158 ] "sexually attracted to both men and women" [ 159 ] and other similar definitions.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] However, some bisexual individuals and scholars object to the notion that bisexuality means sexual attraction to only two genders, arguing that since bisexual is not simply about attraction to two sexes and encompasses gender as well, it can include attraction to more than one [ 162 ] or more than two genders [ 163 ] and is occasionally defined as such.

[ 157 ] Others, such as the American Institute of Bisexuality , say that the term "is an open and inclusive term for many kinds of people with same-sex and different-sex attractions" [ 164 ] and that "the scientific classification bisexual only addresses the physical, biological sex of the people involved, not the gender-presentation." [ 163 ] To deal with issues related to transphobia and the gender binary, some individuals have taken on terms such as pansexual , omnisexual , or polysexual in place of the term bisexual . The American Institute of Bisexuality argues that these terms "describe a person with homosexual and heterosexual attractions, and therefore people with these labels are also bisexual" [ 164 ] and that the notion that bisexuality is a reinforcement of a gender binary is a concept that is founded upon "anti-science, anti-Enlightenment philosophy that has ironically found a home within many Queer Studies departments at universities across the Anglophone world".

[ 163 ] Eisner agrees with this view, stating that "allegations of binarism have little to do with bisexuality's actual attributes or bisexual people's behavior in real life" and that the allegations are an attempt to separate the bisexual and transgender communities politically.

[ 157 ] Consequences Graffiti left by trans individuals in Baltimore , Maryland , expressing disillusionment with society Whether intentional or not, transphobia and cissexism have severe consequences for the target of the negative attitude. Transphobia creates significant stresses for transgender people which can lead them to feel shame, low self-esteem , alienation and inadequacy. Transgender youth often try to cope with the stress by running away from home, dropping out of school, using drugs or self-harming .

[ 2 ] [ 165 ] Suicide rates among transgender people are thought to be especially high, because of how they are treated by their families and by society.

[ 27 ] Childhood and adolescence Polyvictimization is experiencing multiple forms of abuse and victimization throughout a person's life, such as physical or sexual violence, bullying/aggression, parental neglect or abuse, experiencing crime, etc. Polyvictimization can start in childhood and has consequences for adolescent health and thus adult health.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Transgender, gender diverse , and sexual minority adolescents (TGSA) are more likely to experience polyvictimization when compared to their cisgender peers.

[ 168 ] Family traits more associated with polyvictimization in TGSA include: families that have higher than average levels of violence and adversity in their life, families that give their child higher than average levels of microaggressions and lower levels of microaffirmations , and families that have average levels of violence and adversity, and also give their child higher levels of microaffirmations.

Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms reported by TGSA has shown to be a significant link between TGSA grouped by their family experiences and polyvictimization.

[ 169 ] Research supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) assessed lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender ( LGBT ) adolescents and noted that those who had moderate to high, and steady or increasing rates of victimization or verbal or physical threats, were at heightened risk for developing PTSD.

[ 170 ] Relational and physical bullying victimization, as well as various other forms of emotional distress, are increasingly experienced by the transgender and gender diverse (TGD) adolescent population. Those who experience the most physical and relational bullying victimization and emotional distress, are AMAB youth whom others perceived as very, or mostly, feminine. Moreover, regardless of assigned gender at birth, relational bullying victimization, depression, and suicidal ideation is common among adolescents that can be perceived as anything other than very, or mostly, masculine.

[ 171 ] Repeatedly, research on the effects of aggression and violence against TGD youth and young adults shows – when compared to their cisgender peers – higher rates of PTSD, depression, non-suicidal self-injury , suicidal ideation , intent, plan, and attempts, higher rates of substance use (cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana), trauma, skipping school due to safety concerns, and poorer health outcomes.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ excessive citations ] The 2015 United States Transgender Survey, the largest such survey ever carried out (with 27,715 respondents), found that one in ten respondents suffered transphobic violence at the hands of a family member and 8% were forced to leave their homes for being transgender. The majority of those who were openly transgender or perceived as transgender at school were victims of some form of mistreatment on account of this, including verbal abuse (54%), physical attacks (24%), and sexual assault (13%). 17% experienced such severe mistreatment that they had to leave school. Support from one's community or family was correlated with more positive outcomes related to mental health and social functioning.

[ 181 ] Adulthood In adulthood, the effects of aggression and violence against various groups of transgender people has also been documented in domains such as mental and physical health, and safety and discrimination in the military. Transgender related bias, or discrimination, victimization, and rejection, affects transgender adults and the severity of PTSD symptoms they report. A systematic review completed in 2018 examined 77 studies that reported mental health disparities and social stress felt by TGD adults. The analysis found associations between TGD identity and anxiety, depression, PTSD, substance use, and suicidality , as well as added social stress factors such as violence, discrimination, and exclusion.

[ 182 ] When examining posttraumatic stress disorder and substance use in transgender adult communities, records indicated that transgender adults who have PTSD are more likely to be diagnosed with a substance use disorder within their lifetime.

[ 183 ] A National Institute of Health (NIH) analysis conducted with data collected at a community health center in the United States compared transgender and cisgender adult patients on various possible health disparities. Their research showed that within their lifetime, transgender patients experienced more violence, childhood abuse, discrimination, and suicidal thoughts or suicide attempts when compared to their cisgender counterparts who had a similar age, education, ethnicity/race, and income.

[ 184 ] United States military Strong associations between military sexual assault (MSA) and PTSD have been documented in both men and women.

[ 185 ] A nationwide survey of military personnel in 2015 found that 17.2% of transgender veterans reported experiencing MSA. Links have been found between MSA experienced by transgender veterans and increased depression symptom severity, past-year drug use, and PTSD symptom severity.

[ 186 ] Posttraumatic stress disorder has also been associated with suicidality and substance use among adults.

[ 187 ] For instance, records reflect that veterans who identify as transgender increasingly experience PTSD and suicide ideation , plans, and attempts. Further, transgender specific stigma experienced while in the military and PTSD have been associated with deaths by suicide.

[ 188 ] This could be worsened by racial health disparities that exist within the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Healthcare System.

[ 189 ] Particularly, racial health disparities between non-Hispanic Black transgender veterans (BTV) and non-Hispanic White transgender veterans (WTV) have been acknowledged. Non-Hispanic Black transgender veterans are at increased odds of having an array of physical health issues/diseases, serious mental illnesses, alcohol use, tobacco use, homelessness, and previous incarceration when compared to the WTV. Non-Hispanic White transgender veterans had increased odds of depression, obesity, and hypercholesterolemia when compared to BTV.

[ 190 ] Previous incarceration plays a larger role in the PTSD and homelessness that transgender veterans may experience. Specifically, transgender veterans that have a history of previous incarceration are more likely to have PTSD or to experience homelessness when compared to previously incarcerated veterans who are not transgender.

[ 191 ] Poverty and homelessness Nearly one third of U.S. transgender people responding to the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey lived in poverty, compared to 14% of the population. During the 12 months prior to the survey, 30% of employed transgender people were either fired or mistreated for being transgender, from verbal abuse to sexual violence. 30% had been homeless at some point in their life, and 12% had been homeless during the previous year. Family and community support were correlated with significantly lower rates of homelessness and poverty.

[ 181 ] Violence and harassment During the year prior to the 2015 U.S. survey, 46% of respondents had been verbally harassed and 9% had been physically attacked for being transgender. 10% had been sexually assaulted during the previous year, and 47% had been sexually assaulted at some point in their life.

[ 181 ] Evidence collected by the Transgender Day of Remembrance and National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs on the homicide rates of transgender individuals suggests that the homicide rates of young trans women who are Black or Latina are "almost certainly higher" than those of cisgender women of the same race.

[ 46 ] In public restrooms During the year prior to the 2015 U.S. survey, 12% of respondents reported being verbally harassed in a public restroom. 1% reported being sexually assaulted in a public restroom for being transgender, and 1% reported being otherwise physically assaulted for being transgender. 9% reported being denied the right to use a public restroom consistent with their gender.

[ 181 ] Health During the year prior to the 2015 U.S. survey, 59% of respondents reported avoiding using a public restroom out of fear of violence or harassment. 32% limited the amount they ate or drank in order to avoid using a public restroom. 8% reported suffering a urinary tract infection, kidney infection, or other kidney problem as a result of avoiding public restrooms.

[ 181 ] 33% reported having negative experiences with a healthcare professional related to being transgender, such as verbal harassment or denial of treatment. 23% reported that they did not seek treatment for a condition out of fear of being mistreated, while 33% did not seek treatment because they were unable to afford it.

[ 181 ] During the month prior to the survey, 39% of American transgender people experienced major psychological distress, compared to 5% of the general population of the United States. 40% had attempted suicide at some point in their life, compared to 4.6 percent of the American population. Family and community support were correlated with far lower rates of suicide attempts and of major psychological distress.

[ 181 ] A study conducted on transgender women of color in San Francisco has shown a higher correlation between transphobia and risk of transgender women engaging in HIV risk behavior. The study shows that the transgender youth face social discrimination, and they may not have a social role model. The young adults in this group have shown a higher risk of engaging in unprotected receptive anal intercourse when the exposure to transphobia is high. Therefore, as per the study shows a correlation between transphobia and high risk of HIV.

[ 192 ] Mental health People who are transgender are more likely to experience some type of psychological distress because of the harassment and discrimination that comes with transphobia. Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education conducted a nationwide survey on college campuses examining the psychological effects on transgender people, with a sample size of 86. Out of these 86 participants, 54% stated they have attended psychological counseling before and 10% had been hospitalized for reasons related to mental health. The final results of the study show that over twice as many participants who considered themselves transgender (43%) had engaged in self-injurious behavior, versus those who considered themselves male or female (16%).

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] According to Virupaksha, Muralidhar, and Ramakrishna, suicide attempts among transgender people globally range from 32% to 50%. In India, 31% to 50% of transgender people have tried to commit suicide before age 20. 50% of transgender people in Australia and 45% of those in England have attempted suicide at least once.

[ 195 ] In the United States, suicide attempts reported by transgender and gender nonconforming adults exceed the rate of the general population: 41% versus 4.6 percent.

[ 196 ] In San Francisco alone, the suicide attempt rate among transgender people is 32% overall, and for those under age 25 it is 50%.

[ 195 ] According to the study Transphobia Among Transgenders of Color by the University of California, San Francisco , transphobia affects the psychological vulnerability of transgender people of color as compared to those of other ethnicities. Acts of transphobia such as undue denial of services, unfair dismissal from work places or stigmatization have far-reaching effects on the subjects such as low self-esteem, under-performance, stress, withdrawal or even depression. When it comes to the minorities, who are already proven to be undergoing various forms of discrimination, the consequences are even more exaggerated. Transgender people of color are more significantly associated with depression than their white counterparts.

[ 197 ] Information regarding the effects of transphobia with respect to minority identities has not been well documented. In a 2018 review of mental health research regarding transgender individuals, only 4 out of 77 studies that were reviewed examined the intersectionality of transgender and racial identities. There were other studies that included disproportionately high amounts of transgender individuals who are in multiple minority groups, but the authors note that it is difficult to tell if these studies generalize to the transgender/ gender nonconforming community as a whole due to lack of extensive study.

[ 198 ] To help transgender people work through traumatic experiences, minority stress, and internalized transphobia, mental health practitioners have begun integrating the gender-affirmative model into cognitive behavioral therapy , [ 199 ] person-centered therapy , [ 200 ] and acceptance and commitment therapy .

[ 26 ] Pregnancy issues Many transgender people transition without undergoing surgery to remove reproductive organs or to reconstruct genitals, thus transition does not necessarily remove the ability or the desire to reproduce. While the same-sex issues surrounding the birth and parenting of children have gained a degree of acceptance, trans practices of parenting have received much less attention and acceptance.

[ 201 ] In 2007 a transgender man, Thomas Beatie , became pregnant because his wife was infertile. His pregnancy drew world-wide attention. He commented: Doctors have discriminated against us, turning us away due to their religious beliefs. Health care professionals have refused to call me by a male pronoun or recognize Nancy as my wife. Receptionists have laughed at us. Friends and family have been unsupportive; most of Nancy's family doesn't even know I'm transgender.

[ 202 ] See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom Anti-gender movement Parental rights movement Transgender health care misinformation Biological determinism Corrective rape GATE Hate crime LGBTQ people in prison List of people killed for being transgender Minority stress Outline of transgender topics Press for Change – UK law organisation for transgender people Transgender genocide Trans panic defense – a legal defense for assault or murder where the victim is trans.

Transgender Day of Remembrance Transgender Europe Transgender inequality Transgender Law Center Transmisogyny Transphobia in the United States References ^ Chakraborti, Neil; Garland, Jon (2009).

Hate Crime: Impact, Causes and Responses . SAGE Publications, Ltd. pp.

77 .

ISBN 978-1412945684 .

^ a b c d Chrisler, Donald R.; McCreary, Joan C. (2010).

Handbook of Gender Research in Psychology, Volume 2 . Springer. p. 366.

ISBN 978-1441913555 .

^ Judith A. Lewis, Michael D. Lewis, Judy A. Daniels, Community Counseling: A Multicultural-Social Justice Perspective (2010, ISBN 113317003X ) ^ a b Maurianne Adams; Lee Anne Bell; Pat Griffin (2007).

Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice .

Routledge . pp.

198– 199.

ISBN 978-1135928506 . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

Because of the complicated interplay among gender identity, gender roles, and sexual identity, transgender people are often assumed to be lesbian or gay (See Overview: Sexism, Heterosexism, and Transgender Oppression ). ... Because transgender identity challenges a binary conception of sexuality and gender, educators must clarify their own understanding of these concepts. ... Facilitators must be able to help participants understand the connections among sexism, heterosexism, and transgender oppression and the ways in which gender roles are maintained, in part, through homophobia.

^ a b c Thomas Spijkerboer (2013).

Fleeing Homophobia: Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Asylum .

Routledge . p. 122.

ISBN 978-1134098354 . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

Transgender people subjected to violence, in a range of cultural contexts, frequently report that transphobic violence is expressed in homophobic terms. The tendency to translate violence against a trans person to homophobia reflects the role of gender in attribution of homosexuality as well as the fact that hostility connected to homosexuality is often associated with the perpetrators' prejudices about particular gender practices and their visibility.

^ Meyer, Doug (11 October 2015).

Violence Against Queer People: Race, Class, Gender, and the Persistence of Anti-LGBT Discrimination . New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. pp.

14– 15.

ISBN 9780813573182 .

OCLC 945735923 .

^ GLSEN (October 2022).

"The 2021 National School Climate Survey: The Experiences of LGBTQ+ Youth in Our Nation's Schools" (PDF) .

^ "LGBTQ+ Youth | Los Angeles County Department of Children and Family Services" .

dcfs.lacounty.gov . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ What Constitutes Transphobic and Cisnormative Bullying and Harassment (PDF) (Report).

Egale Canada . November 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 .

^ Astor, Maggie (10 December 2022).

"Transgender Americans Feel Under Siege as Political Vitriol Rises" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ a b Weiss, JT (2004). "GL vs BT The archaeology of biphobia and transphobia within U.S. gay and lesbian community".

Journal of Bisexuality .

3 ( 3– 4): 25– 55.

doi : 10.1300/j159v03n03_02 .

S2CID 144642959 .

^ "Tackling Discrimination on Grounds of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity" (PDF) .

^ Williamson, Harriet (9 September 2023).

"Transphobia is on the rise – and the press is to blame" .

PinkNews . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ Evdokimova, Tamara (10 July 2023).

"The global rise of anti-trans legislation" .

Coda Story . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ "2023 Anti-Trans Bills: Trans Legislation Tracker" .

translegislation.com . Retrieved 22 October 2023 .

^ Shelley, Christopher A. (2008).

Transpeople: Repudiation, Trauma, Healing . Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp.

32– 35.

ISBN 978-0802097842 .

^ "New words list" .

public.oed.com . June 2013. Archived from the original on 27 March 2018 . Retrieved 23 February 2018 .

^ Serano, Julia (2007).

Whipping Girl: A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of Femininity . Seal Press. pp.

13– 14.

ISBN 978-1-58005-154-5 .

^ Protection of Sexual Minorities Since Stonewall: Progress and Stalemate in Developed and Developing Countries: Phil C. W. Chan Routledge, 2010 ^ Sexuality and Equality Law; Suzanne B. Goldberg 2017 ^ a b Rad, Mostafa Salari; Shackleford, Crystal; Lee, Kelli Ann; Jassin, Kate; Ginges, Jeremy (30 December 2019).

"Folk theories of gender and anti-transgender attitudes: Gender differences and policy preferences" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (12): e0226967.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1426967R .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0226967 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 6936834 .

PMID 31887173 .

^ Norton, Jody (1997). " "Brain Says You're a Girl, But I Think You're a Sissy Boy": Cultural Origins of Transphobia".

International Journal of Sexuality and Gender Studies .

2 (2): 139– 164.

doi : 10.1023/A:1026320611878 .

S2CID 141097763 .

^ McLean, Craig (2021).

"The Growth of the Anti-Transgender Movement in the United Kingdom. The Silent Radicalization of the British Electorate" (PDF) .

International Journal of Sociology .

51 (6): 473– 482.

doi : 10.1080/00207659.2021.1939946 .

S2CID 237874806 .

^ Goldie, Peter D.; Chatterjee, Isha (6 October 2021).

"Examining the elevated risk of COVID-19 in transgender communities with an intersectional lens" .

SN Social Sciences .

1 (10): 249.

doi : 10.1007/s43545-021-00255-x .

ISSN 2662-9283 .

PMC 8492083 .

PMID 34693307 .

As such, it is necessary to acknowledge that transphobia is rooted in white supremacy and colonization, as trans people (and trans PoC in particular) threaten the cisheteropatriarchy established by White settlers.

^ McLean, Anna; Stretesky, Paul B.

(2025).

"The Influence of Authoritarian Beliefs on Support for Transgender Rights in the UK" .

Sociology Compass .

19 (7) e70088.

doi : 10.1111/soc4.70088 .

eISSN 1751-9020 .

A veritable miasma of anti-trans campaign groups have wafted in to public discourse in recent years. These have included, but are not limited to, Authentic Equity Alliance, CitizenGo, FiLiA, Fair Play for Women, Get the L Out, Keep Prisons Single Sex, Lesbian Rights Alliance, LGB Alliance, MayDay4Women, Object!, Safe Schools Alliance, Sex Matters, Transgender Trend, and Woman's Place UK. Although the ostensible focus of these groups is varied, they are united in their antipathy toward transgender people.

^ a b Stitt, Alex (2020).

ACT For Gender Identity: The Comprehensive Guide . London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

ISBN 978-1785927997 .

OCLC 1089850112 .

^ a b Lennon, Erica; Mistler, Brian (2014).

"Cisgenderism" .

TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly .

1 ( 1– 2): 63– 64.

doi : 10.1215/23289252-2399623 .

^ Kevin L. Nadal, The SAGE Encyclopedia of Psychology and Gender (2017), page 667 ^ "Demagogues of defamation Gay: Where is the outrage when cable TV's talking heads trash trans people?" .

Washington Blade - America's Leading Gay News Source . Archived from the original on 11 March 2012 . Retrieved 3 October 2012 .

^ McNamara, Mary (8 February 2001). "Transgender Artists, Work Gaining Acceptance".

Los Angeles Times .

^ King, M., Webster, B., & Winter, S. (2007). Transprejudice in Hong Kong: Chinese Attitudes Towards Transgenderism and Transgender Civil Rights (under review) ^ King, Mark Edward (27 January 2017).

Transprejudice in Hong Kong: Chinese Attitudes Towards Transgenderism and Transgender Civil Rights . BiblioBazaar.

ISBN 9781361440773 .

^ a b Girshick, Lori B. (2008).

Transgender Voices: Beyond Women and Men . Hanover and London: University Press of New England. pp.

133– 144.

ISBN 978-1584658382 .

^ a b c Bender-Baird, Kyla (2011).

Transgender Employment Experiences: Gendered Perceptions and the Law . SUNY Press. pp.

5– 24.

ISBN 978-1438436746 .

^ Beam, Cris (January 2008).

Transparent . Harvest Books.

ISBN 9780156033770 .

^ Beam, Cris (2007).

Transparent: Love, Family, and Living the T with Transgender Teenagers . Orlando, Florida: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt .

ISBN 9780156033770 .

OCLC 65820154 .

^ Weir, Cassandra; Piquette, Noëlla (2018). "Counselling transgender individuals: Issues and considerations".

Canadian Psychology .

59 (3): 252– 261.

doi : 10.1037/cap0000129 .

ISSN 1878-7304 .

S2CID 149607596 .

^ a b Stotzer, Rebecca L. (2009). "Violence against transgender people: A review of United States data".

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

14 (3): 170– 179.

doi : 10.1016/j.avb.2009.01.006 .

ISSN 1359-1789 .

^ McKay, Tasseli; Lindquist, Christine H.; Misra, Shilpi (2017). "Understanding (and Acting On) 20 Years of Research on Violence and LGBTQ + Communities".

Trauma, Violence, & Abuse .

20 (5): 665– 678.

doi : 10.1177/1524838017728708 .

ISSN 1524-8380 .

PMID 29334007 .

S2CID 43156503 .

^ a b Beemyn, Genny (2011).

The Lives of Transgender People . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 91.

ISBN 978-0231143073 .

^ a b Ansara, Y. Gavriel; Hegarty, Peter (2011).

"Cisgenderism in psychology: pathologising and misgendering children from 1999 to 2008" (PDF) .

Psychology & Sexuality .

3 (2): 137– 160.

doi : 10.1080/19419899.2011.576696 .

S2CID 10589506 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

^ a b Bockting, Walter O. (2006).

Transgender Health and HIV Prevention: Needs Assessment Studies from Transgender Communities Across the United States . CRC Press. pp.

41– 53.

ISBN 978-0789030153 .

^ Stotzer, Rebecca L. (2009). "Violence against transgender people: A review of United States data".

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

14 (3): 170– 179.

doi : 10.1016/j.avb.2009.01.006 .

^ Peitzmeier, Sarah M; Malik, Mannat; Kattari, Shanna K; Marrow, Elliot; Stephenson, Rob; Agénor, Madina; Reisner, Sari L (September 2020).

"Intimate Partner Violence in Transgender Populations: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Prevalence and Correlates" .

American Journal of Public Health .

110 (9): pe1 – e14 .

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2020.305774 .

PMC 7427218 .

PMID 32673114 .

^ Xavier, Jessica. "A needs assessment of transgendered people of color living in Washington, D.C.".

International Journal of Transgenderism : 31– 47.

^ a b Dinno, Alexis (September 2017).

"Homicide Rates of Transgender Individuals in the United States: 2010–2014" .

American Journal of Public Health .

107 (9): 1441– 1447.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2017.303878 .

PMC 5551594 .

PMID 28727530 .

^ Stotzer, Rebecca L. (September 2017).

"Data Sources Hinder Our Understanding of Transgender Murders" .

American Journal of Public Health .

107 (9): 1362– 1363.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2017.303973 .

ISSN 0090-0036 .

PMC 5551619 .

PMID 28787204 .

^ Julia Serano (20 May 2009).

Whipping Girl: A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of Femininity . Seal Press.

ISBN 978-0-7867-4791-7 . Archived from the original on 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 – via Cambridge University Press .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Herman, Joanne (2009).

Transgender Explained For Those Who Are Not . AuthorHouse. pp.

50– 51.

ISBN 978-1449029579 .

^ DeCecco, John (2012).

Looking Queer: Body Image and Identity in Lesbian, Bisexual, Gay, and Transgender Communities (Haworth Gay & Lesbian Studies) . New Jersey: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0789004635 .

^ Talusan, Meredith Ramirez (4 June 2015).

"What 'deadnaming' means, and why you shouldn't do it to Caitlyn Jenner" .

Fusion . Archived from the original on 7 February 2017 . Retrieved 8 June 2015 .

^ Fae, Jane (19 May 2015).

"Changing your name should be a joyous moment, but for many it's a nightmare" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 8 July 2015 .

^ McLemore, Kevin (July 2014). "Experiences with Misgendering: Identity Misclassification of Transgender Spectrum Individuals".

Self and Identity .

14 (1): 51– 74.

doi : 10.1080/15298868.2014.950691 .

S2CID 145101341 .

^ Harrison, Kelby (2013).

Sexual Deceit: The Ethics of Passing . Lexington Books. p. 12.

ISBN 978-0739177051 .

^ Ansara, Y. Gavriel.

"Cisgenderism in Medical Settings: Challenging Structural Violence Through Collaborative Partnerships" (PDF) . p. 95. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

^ a b Di Menna, Hillary (16 September 2013).

"Gender Block: Media misgendering and Chelsea Manning" .

This Magazine .

^ Molloy, Parker Marie (23 August 2013).

"The happy story of my transgender coming-out" .

Salon magazine .

^ Grossman, Arnold H.; Li, Gu; Pollitt, Amanda M.; Russell, Stephen T. (1 October 2018).

"Chosen Name Use Is Linked to Reduced Depressive Symptoms, Suicidal Ideation, and Suicidal Behavior Among Transgender Youth" .

Journal of Adolescent Health .

63 (4): 503– 505.

doi : 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.02.003 .

ISSN 1054-139X .

PMC 6165713 .

PMID 29609917 .

^ Vance, Stanley R. (1 October 2018).

"The Importance of Getting the Name Right for Transgender and Other Gender Expansive Youth" .

Journal of Adolescent Health .

63 (4): 379– 380.

doi : 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.07.022 .

ISSN 1054-139X .

PMID 30286897 .

^ Shapiro, Lila (28 August 2013).

"Shouting Disrupts Vigil For Murdered Transgender Woman Islan Nettles" .

Huffington Post .

^ Stroumsa, Daphna; Shires, Deirdre A; Richardson, Caroline R; Jaffee, Kim D; Woodford, Michael R (21 January 2019). "Transphobia rather than education predicts provider knowledge of transgender health care".

Medical Education .

53 (4): 398– 407.

doi : 10.1111/medu.13796 .

hdl : 2027.42/148342 .

PMID 30666699 .

S2CID 58643722 .

^ "Injustice at Every Turn A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" (PDF) . transequality.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 November 2013.

^ "FTM Informational Network" . Archived from the original on 9 May 2008 . Retrieved 24 November 2009 .

^ "Victory in Tyra Hunter case" . Archived from the original on 22 November 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2009 .

^ Pazulka, Nicole.

"17 European Countries Force Transgender Sterilization" . Retrieved 24 August 2013 .

^ Nelson, Rebecca (14 January 2013).

"Transgender People in Sweden No Longer Face Forced Sterilization" .

Time . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ Liam Stack, European Court Strikes Down Required Sterilization for Transgender People (12 April 2017) ^ JoAnna McNamara (30 August 1996).

"Employment discrimination and the Transsexual" .

Phyllis Randolph Frye . Retrieved 10 June 2022 .

^ a b The Transgender Community Health Project (18 February 1999).

"Sociodemographics" .

Descriptive Results . HIVInSite. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 September 2006 .

^ Leff, Lisa (24 July 2003). "Senate passes bill outlawing bias against transgendered residents".

Associated Press .

^ "California senate passes transgender rights bill" .

Out Traveler .

The Advocate ]. 26 July 2003.

^ Sears, Brad; Mallory, Christy (1 July 2011).

"Documented Evidence of Employment Discrimination & Its Effects on LGBT People" .

The Williams Institute, UCLA – via eScholarship.

^ barbara findlay, Q.C. (June 1999).

"Transgendered people and Employment: An equality analysis" (PDF) . Barbara Findlay Law Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 June 2007 . Retrieved 10 September 2006 .

^ Ronald L. Wilson (23 October 2000).

"Oliver v. Winn-Dixie Complaint" . Archived from the original on 3 April 2012 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 .

^ Jacques, Juliet (25 August 2010).

"No wonder many transsexual people end up in sex work" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 March 2012 .

^ Bith-Melander, Pollie (2010). "Understanding sociocultural and psychological factors affecting transgender people of color in San Francisco".

Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care .

21 (3): 207– 220.

doi : 10.1016/j.jana.2010.01.008 .

PMID 20416495 .

S2CID 7332525 .

^ Singh, Anneliese A; McKleroy, Vel S (2011). " "Just Getting Out of Bed Is a Revolutionary Act" The Resilience of Transgender People of Color Who Have Survived Traumatic Life Events".

Traumatology .

17 (2): 34– 44.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1017.9594 .

doi : 10.1177/1534765610369261 .

^ Abreu, Roberto L.; Gonzalez, Kirsten A.; Lindley, Louis; Capielo Rosario, Cristalís; Lockett, Gabriel M.; Teran, Manuel (16 December 2021).

" "Why can't I Have the Office Jobs?": Immigrant Latinx Transgender Peoples' Experiences with Seeking Employment" .

Journal of Career Development .

50 : 20– 36.

doi : 10.1177/08948453211062951 .

ISSN 0894-8453 .

S2CID 245306097 .

^ Holder, Sarah (27 October 2020).

"How Transgender Voters Are Fighting to Make Their Votes Count" .

Bloomberg Citylab . Bloomberg . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ Erni, John Nguyet (January 2013). "Legitimating Transphobia".

Cultural Studies .

27 (1): 136– 159.

doi : 10.1080/09502386.2012.722305 .

S2CID 147546970 .

^ MacFarquhar, Neil; Birger, Georgy (1 August 2023).

"Putin's Crackdown Leaves Transgender Russians Bracing for Worse" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2023 . Retrieved 11 June 2024 .

^ Shaw, Ari; Verghese, Namrata (June 2022).

LGBTQI+ REFUGEES AND ASYLUM SEEKERS A Review of Research and Data Needs (PDF) (Report).

Williams Institute .

^ a b "Transgender Bullying: A National Epidemic" .

nobullying.com . Archived from the original on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 February 2016 .

^ "Peer Violence and Bullying Against Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Youth" (PDF) .

National Center for Transgender Equality . May 2011. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 30 December 2016 .

^ McGuire, Jenifer K.; Anderson, Charles R.; Toomey, Russell B.; Russell, Stephen T. (29 April 2010). "School Climate for Transgender Youth: A Mixed Method Investigation of Student Experiences and School Responses".

Journal of Youth and Adolescence .

39 (10). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 1175– 1188.

doi : 10.1007/s10964-010-9540-7 .

ISSN 0047-2891 .

PMID 20428933 .

S2CID 20838648 .

^ Taylor, Catherine (2011).

Final report on the first national climate survey on homophobia, biphobia, and transphobia in Canadian schools .

hdl : 10680/1265 .

^ Greene, Marjorie Taylor (23 March 2023).

".@libsoftiktok knows the truth!" .

X (formerly Twitter) . Retrieved 3 December 2023 .

^ "The Scale of Transphobia Online" .

Brandwatch . Retrieved 11 May 2023 .

^ "Transgender people treated 'inhumanely' online" .

BBC News . 25 October 2019.

^ Powell, Anastasia; Scott, Adrian J; Henry, Nicola (March 2020).

"Digital harassment and abuse: Experiences of sexuality and gender minority adults" .

European Journal of Criminology .

17 (2): 199– 223.

doi : 10.1177/1477370818788006 .

ISSN 1477-3708 .

S2CID 149537486 .

^ Evelyn, Sophie (2022).

"A Phenomenological Investigation into Cyberbullying as Experienced by People Identifying as Transgender or Gender Diverse" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

19 (11): 6560.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph19116560 .

PMC 9180504 .

PMID 35682144 .

^ Human Rights Campaign Foundation (8 December 2022).

"ONLINE HARASSMENT, OFFLINE VIOLENCE: UNCHECKED HARASSMENT OF GENDER-AFFIRMING CARE PROVIDERS AND CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS ON SOCIAL MEDIA, AND ITS OFFLINE VIOLENT CONSEQUENCES" (PDF) .

^ "What is "Grooming?" The Truth Behind the Dangerous, Bigoted Lie Targeting the LGBTQ+ Community | ADL" .

www.adl.org . Retrieved 3 September 2023 .

^ "Trump vows to 'stop' gender-affirming care for minors if re-elected president" .

NBC News . 31 January 2023 . Retrieved 2 September 2023 .

^ a b Human Rights Campaign Foundation.

"DIGITAL HATE: Social Media's Role In Amplifying Dangerous Lies About LGBTQ+ People" (PDF) .

^ Gogarty, Kayla (13 December 2022).

"Anti-LGBTQ hate has increased on Twitter since Elon Musk officially acquired the company" .

Media Matters for America . Retrieved 11 May 2023 .

^ Muldowney, Decca (28 March 2023).

"Elon Musk's Twitter Makes Millions Off Anti-LGBT 'Groomer' Tweets: Report" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 3 September 2023 .

^ Urquhart, Evan (1 November 2022).

"One of the Biggest Red Flags of Elon Musk's Twitter Takeover" .

Slate .

ISSN 1091-2339 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "We're Officially in the Elon Musk Era of Content Moderation" .

Vanity Fair . 21 November 2022 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "Twitter is the 'most dangerous' major social media platform for LGBTQ users, GLAAD says" .

NBC News . 15 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ Gomez, Brandon (15 June 2023).

"Twitter is a more dangerous platform for the LGBTQ community now than it was a year ago, GLAAD finds" .

CNBC . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ Yurcaba, Jo; Ingram, David (27 October 2023).

"A year after Elon Musk bought Twitter, LGBTQ people say it has become toxic" .

NBC News . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "The right is dominating Facebook engagement on content about trans issues" .

Media Matters for America . 20 July 2020 . Retrieved 10 June 2023 .

^ "Beliefs among religious conservatives about the causes & cures of transsexuality (Cont'd)" . Retrieved 7 June 2015 .

^ "Catholic beliefs about the causes & cures of transsexuality" . Retrieved 7 June 2015 .

^ Sheridan, Vanessa (2001).

Crossing Over: Liberating the Transgendered Christian . Pilgrim Press. p. 31.

ISBN 9780829814460 .

OCLC 47126733 .

^ a b Levy, Denise L. (15 February 2013).

"Transgender, Transsexual, and Gender Queer Individuals with a Christian Upbringing: The Process of Resolving Conflict Between Gender Identity and Faith" (PDF) .

Journal of Religion & Spirituality in Social Work: Social Thought .

32 (1): 60– 83.

doi : 10.1080/15426432.2013.749079 .

S2CID 216087109 .

^ Sabia-Tanis, Justin (25 June 2018).

Trans-Gender: Theology, Ministry, and Communities of Faith . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 38.

ISBN 9781725239005 .

^ Tanis, J. (2003).

Trans-gendered: Theology, ministry, and communities of faith , Cleveland, OH: The Pilgrim Press. p. 116.

^ Alipour, M. (2 January 2017).

"Islamic shari'a law, neotraditionalist Muslim scholars and transgender sex-reassignment surgery: A case study of Ayatollah Khomeini's and Sheikh al-Tantawi's fatwas" .

International Journal of Transgenderism .

18 (1): 91– 103.

doi : 10.1080/15532739.2016.1250239 .

ISSN 1553-2739 .

S2CID 152120329 .

^ Zaharin, A. A. M.; Pallotta-Chiarolli, M. (June 2020).

"Countering Islamic conservatism on being transgender: Clarifying Tantawi's and Khomeini's fatwas from the progressive Muslim standpoint" .

International Journal of Transgender Health .

21 (3): 235– 241.

doi : 10.1080/26895269.2020.1778238 .

PMC 8726683 .

PMID 34993508 .

S2CID 225679841 .

^ "About Masjid Al-Rabia" .

Masjid Al-Rabia . Archived from the original on 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 .

^ "LGBT Muslims Make Progress on the Path to Acceptance" .

The Advocate . Pride Publishing, Inc. 23 September 2013.

^ Power, Tynan (2021). "Muslim People". In Goldberg, Abbie E.; Beemyn, Genny (eds.).

The SAGE Encyclopedia of Trans Studies . United States: SAGE Publishing. pp.

553– 555.

doi : 10.4135/9781544393858.n188 .

ISBN 9781544393810 .

S2CID 242422061 .

^ "Stances of Faiths on LGBTQ Issues: Islam – Sunni and Shi'a" .

Human Rights Campaign .

^ Holmes, Kristin E. (19 January 2017).

"For transgender community, a search for faith and acceptance" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . Philadelphia . Retrieved 2 November 2021 .

^ Beck, Dorothee (2024). "The Crusade Against Gender-Inclusive Language in Germany: A Discursive Bridge Between the Far Right and the Civic Mainstream". In Beck, Dorothee; Habed, Adriano José; Henninger, Annette (eds.).

Blurring Boundaries: ‘Anti-Gender’ Ideology Meets Feminist and LGBTIQ+ Discourses . Barbara Budrich. pp.

109– 126.

doi : 10.2307/jj.8692983.8 .

JSTOR jj.8692983.8 .

^ a b c Jones, Lucy (2023).

"Language, gender and sexuality in 2022: Documenting and resisting regressive ideology" .

Gender and Language .

17 (2): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1558/genl.26176 .

^ Borba, Rodrigo (2022).

"Enregistering 'gender ideology': the emergence and circulation of a transnational anti-gender language" .

Journal of Language and Sexuality .

11 (1): 57– 79.

doi : 10.1075/jls.21003.bor .

^ a b Goldberg, Michelle (4 August 2014).

"What Is a Woman?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 November 2015 .

^ Erickson-Schroth, Laura (12 May 2014).

Trans Bodies, Trans Selves: A Resource for the Transgender Community .

Oxford University Press . pp.

568– 569.

ISBN 978-0199325351 .

Some feminists have perceived transmasculine people as traitors—that is, as women who identify politically with men. When inclusive of trans men, these feminists have often gendered them as women. Conversely, these feminists have tended to perceive transfeminine people as infiltrators of womanhood and of women's space. Many commentators refer to feminists who think in these ways as 'trans-exclusionary radical feminists' (TERFs). ...'The fetishistic (often infantalizing) embrace of trans men by lesbian communities is ungendering, othering, and transphobic.' ^ a b Steinem, Gloria (15 May 2012) [1st pub. 1983].

Outrageous Acts and Everyday Rebellions . EBL-Schweitzer. Open Road Media. pp.

206– 210.

ISBN 978-1-4532-5018-1 .

OCLC 894737151 . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ Vasquez, Tina (17 February 2014).

"It's Time to End the Long History of Feminism Failing Transgender Women" .

Bitch Media . Archived from the original on 22 May 2014 . Retrieved 18 April 2014 .

Steinem was long considered transphobic because of the stance she took in writing about professional tennis player Renée Richards, who transitioned in the 1970's. Steinem's 1983 book Outrageous Acts and Everyday Rebellion cited Janice Raymond's work and discussed how transsexuals "mutilate their own bodies." ^ Steinem, Gloria (2 October 2013).

"Op-ed: On Working Together Over Time" .

The Advocate . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ a b c Raymond, Janice (1994).

The Transsexual Empire (2nd ed.). Teachers College Press.

ISBN 9780807762721 .

^ Van G., Lindsy; Brandt, Pamela R. (3 October 1997).

The Girls Next Door: Into the Heart of Lesbian America . New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 73.

ISBN 9780684839578 .

OCLC 37775922 .

^ Vogel, Lisa (1 August 2014).

"Michfest Response to Equality Michigan's Call For Boycott" .

Michigan Womyn's Music Festival .

^ Sreedhar, Susanne (2006). "The Ethics of Exclusion: Gender and Politics at the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival". In Scott-Dixon, Krista (ed.).

Trans/Forming Feminisms: Trans/Feminist Voices Speak Out . Toronto: Sumach Press. pp.

164– 65.

ISBN 978-1-894-54961-5 .

OCLC 70839321 .

^ Goldberg, Michelle (4 August 2014).

"What Is a Woman?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 November 2015 .

Stone received death threats, but ultimately it was the threat of a boycott that drove her out of the collective.

^ Ross, Becki (1995).

The House that Jill built: A Lesbian Nation in Formation . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 9780802074799 .

OCLC 988571311 .

^ Jeffreys, Sheila (1997). "Transgender Activism: A Lesbian Feminist Perspective".

Journal of Lesbian Studies .

1 (3/4): 55– 74.

doi : 10.1300/j155v01n03_03 .

^ Butler, Judith (1990).

Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138236363 .

OCLC 63679948 .

at Routledge.com .

^ Butler, Judith (1993).

Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of "Sex" . Abingdon, Oxfordshire: Routledge.

ISBN 9781134711345 .

OCLC 727139650 .

^ O'Connell, Jennifer (26 January 2019).

"Transgender for beginners: Trans, terf, cis and safe spaces" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ Michelle Goldberg (4 August 2014).

"What Is a Woman?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2023.

TERF stands for "trans-exclusionary radical feminist." The term can be useful for making a distinction with radical feminists who do not share the same position, but those at whom it is directed consider it a slur.

^ Vasquez, Tina (17 February 2014).

"It's Time to End the Long History of Feminism Failing Transgender Women" .

Bitch Media . Archived from the original on 22 May 2014 . Retrieved 18 April 2014 .

Drawing from that history, Brennan, fellow attorney Elizabeth Hungerford, and other modern-day feminists continue to actively question the inclusion of trans people in women's spaces. These feminists refer to themselves as "radical feminists" or "gender critical feminists." In 2008, trans women and trans advocates started referring to this group as "trans-exclusionary radical feminists" or TERFs, a term Brennan considers a slur.

^ Williams, Christian (18 February 2013).

"Interview With an Actual Stonewall Riot Veteran: The Ciswashing of Stonewall Must End!" .

transadvocate.com . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Talusan, Meridith (25 June 2014).

"45 Years After Stonewall, the LGBT Movement Has a Transphobia Problem" .

The American Prospect . Archived from the original on 1 January 2015 . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Brink, Rebecca Vipond (6 June 2014).

"The Soapbox: On The Stonewall Rebellion's Trans History" .

The Frisky . Spin Entertainment . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Cara (30 January 2013).

"Yet Another News Outlet Fails Queer History 101 by Erasing Trans* People from Stonewall" .

autostraddle.com . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Sears, James T.; Williams, Walter L. (1997).

Overcoming Heterosexism and Homophobia: Strategies that Work . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-10422-7 .

OCLC 36024057 .

^ Byrne Fone, ed. (1998).

The Columbia anthology of gay literature: readings from Western antiquity to the present day . New York.

ISBN 9780231096706 .

OCLC 37545605 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Honan, Edith (25 April 2010).

"Ticked-Off Trannies," and detractors, take on Tribeca" . Archived from the original on 1 July 2010.

.

^ Meyerowitz, Joanne J. (2002).

How sex changed: a history of transsexuality in the United States . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674009257 .

OCLC 654274727 .

^ Rose, Katrina C. (2004) "." Transgender Tapestry 104, Winter 2004 ^ Katrina C Rose (Winter 2004).

"The Man Who Would be Janice Raymond" .

Transgender Tapestry (Review). No. 104. p. 56.

^ Julia Serano (2007) Whipping Girl: A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of Femininity , pp. 233–234 ^ Serano, Julia (2007).

Whipping Girl: A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of Femininity . Berkeley, California: Seal Press ; Internet Archive .

ISBN 9781580051545 .

OCLC 81252738 .

^ Namaste, Viviane K. (2000) Invisible Lives: The Erasure of Transsexual and Transgendered People , pp. 33–34.

^ Namaste, Viviane K. (2000).

Invisible Lives: The Erasure of Transsexual and Transgendered People . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

33– 34.

ISBN 9780226568102 .

OCLC 43526777 .

^ Hayes, Cressida J (2003). "Feminist Solidarity after Queer Theory: The Case of Transgender".

Signs .

28 (4): 1093– 1120.

doi : 10.1086/343132 .

S2CID 144107471 .

^ Weiss, Jillian Todd.

"GL vs. BT: The Archaeology of Biphobia and Transphobia Within the U.S. Gay and Lesbian Community" . Archived from the original on 29 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 July 2006 .

[ better source needed ] quoting Kay Brown of Transhistory.net [defunct since 2009] ^ Rafkin, Louise (22 June 2003) Straddling Sexes: Young lesbians transitioning into men are shaking the foundation of the lesbian-feminist world.

San Francisco Chronicle .

^ Mantilla, Karla (1 October 2000). Michigan: transgender controversy.

Off Our Backs .

^ Henry Rubin (2003).

Self-made Men: Identity and Embodiment Among Transsexual Men.

Vanderbilt University Press, ISBN 978-0-8265-1435-6 .

^ Geri Nettick, Beth Elliot (1996). "Mirrors: Portrait of a Lesbian Transsexual." Badboy Books ISBN 978-1-56333-435-1 .

^ a b c Eisner, Shiri (2 July 2013).

Bi: Notes for a Bisexual Revolution . Seal Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1580054751 . Retrieved 28 December 2014 .

Yet another way in which bisexuality has been recently imagined is as inherently binary, and therefore intrinsically transphobic. [...] As the argument classically goes, since the word bisexuality has bi (literally: two) in it, it inherently refers to a two-gender structure. This means it erases nonbinary genders and sexes out of existence.

^ "Bisexual – definition of bisexual by The Free Dictionary" .

thefreedictionary.com . The Free Dictionary . Retrieved 28 December 2014 .

^ "bisexual: definition of bisexual in Oxford dictionary (British & World English)" .

oxforddictionaries.com . Oxford Dictionaies. Archived from the original on 21 July 2012 . Retrieved 28 December 2014 .

^ "Definition of Bisexual by Merriam-Webster" .

merriam-webster.com . Merriam-Webster Online . Retrieved 28 December 2014 .

sexually attracted to both men and women ^ "Google Search: Bisexual definition" .

google.co.uk .

sexually attracted to both men and women.

^ "BRC Brochure 2010" (PDF) .

biresource.net . Bisexual Resource Council/ Bisexual Resource Center . 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 8 July 2013 .

^ a b c "Doesn't identifying as bisexual reinforce a false gender binary?" .

American Institute of Bisexuality . 2014 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ a b "What is the difference between bisexual and terms like pansexual, polysexual, omnisexual, ambisexual, and fluid?" .

American Institute of Bisexuality . 2014 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Ruiz MD, Pedro (2009).

Disparities in Psychiatric Care: Clinical and Cross-Cultural Perspectives . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 111.

ISBN 978-0781796392 .

^ Le, Minh T. H.; Holton, Sara; Romero, Lorena; Fisher, Jane (26 July 2016). "Polyvictimization Among Children and Adolescents in Low- and Lower-Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis".

Trauma, Violence, & Abuse .

19 (3): 323– 342.

doi : 10.1177/1524838016659489 .

ISSN 1524-8380 .

PMID 27461094 .

S2CID 22742690 .

^ Källström, Åsa; Hellfeldt, Karin; Howell, Kathryn H.; Miller-Graff, Laura E.; Graham-Bermann, Sandra A. (13 April 2017). "Young Adults Victimized as Children or Adolescents: Relationships Between Perpetrator Patterns, Poly-Victimization, and Mental Health Problems".

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

35 ( 11– 12): 2335– 2357.

doi : 10.1177/0886260517701452 .

ISSN 0886-2605 .

PMID 29294710 .

S2CID 24904770 .

^ Sterzing, Paul R.; Gartner, Rachel E.; Goldbach, Jeremy T.; McGeough, Briana L.; Ratliff, G. Allen; Johnson, Kelly C. (2019). "Polyvictimization prevalence rates for sexual and gender minority adolescents: Breaking down the silos of victimization research".

Psychology of Violence .

9 (4): 419– 430.

doi : 10.1037/vio0000123 .

ISSN 2152-081X .

S2CID 148649307 .

^ Sterzing, Paul R.; Fisher, Aaron J.; Gartner, Rachel E. (2019). "Familial pathways to polyvictimization for sexual and gender minority adolescents: Microaffirming, microaggressing, violent, and adverse families".

Psychology of Violence .

9 (4): 461– 470.

doi : 10.1037/vio0000224 .

ISSN 2152-081X .

S2CID 149604473 .

^ Mustanski, Brian; Andrews, Rebecca; Puckett, Jae A. (2016).

"The Effects of Cumulative Victimization on Mental Health Among Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Adolescents and Young Adults" .

American Journal of Public Health .

106 (3): 527– 533.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.2015.302976 .

ISSN 0090-0036 .

PMC 4815715 .

PMID 26794175 .

^ Gower, Amy L.; Rider, G. Nicole; Coleman, Eli; Brown, Camille; McMorris, Barbara J.; Eisenberg, Marla E. (2018).

"Perceived Gender Presentation Among Transgender and Gender Diverse Youth: Approaches to Analysis and Associations with Bullying Victimization and Emotional Distress" .

LGBT Health .

5 (5): 312– 319.

doi : 10.1089/lgbt.2017.0176 .

ISSN 2325-8292 .

PMC 6034394 .

PMID 29920146 .

^ Newcomb, Michael E.; Hill, Ricky; Buehler, Kathleen; Ryan, Daniel T.; Whitton, Sarah W.; Mustanski, Brian (14 August 2019).

"High Burden of Mental Health Problems, Substance Use, Violence, and Related Psychosocial Factors in Transgender, Non-Binary, and Gender Diverse Youth and Young Adults" .

Archives of Sexual Behavior .

49 (2): 645– 659.

doi : 10.1007/s10508-019-01533-9 .

ISSN 0004-0002 .

PMC 7018588 .

PMID 31485801 .

^ Hatchel, Tyler; Ingram, Katherine M.; Mintz, Sasha; Hartley, Chelsey; Valido, Alberto; Espelage, Dorothy L.; Wyman, Peter (22 January 2019).

"Predictors of Suicidal Ideation and Attempts among LGBTQ Adolescents: The Roles of Help-seeking Beliefs, Peer Victimization, Depressive Symptoms, and Drug Use" .

Journal of Child and Family Studies .

28 (9): 2443– 2455.

doi : 10.1007/s10826-019-01339-2 .

ISSN 1062-1024 .

PMC 11452144 .

PMID 39372436 .

S2CID 150838577 .

^ Taliaferro, Lindsay A.; McMorris, Barbara J.; Rider, G. Nicole; Eisenberg, Marla E. (8 May 2018).

"Risk and Protective Factors for Self-Harm in a Population-Based Sample of Transgender Youth" .

Archives of Suicide Research .

23 (2): 203– 221.

doi : 10.1080/13811118.2018.1430639 .

ISSN 1381-1118 .

PMC 6102088 .

PMID 29461934 .

^ Atteberry-Ash, Brittanie; Kattari, Shanna K.; Speer, Stephanie Rachel; Guz, Samantha; Kattari, Leo (2019). "School safety experiences of high school youth across sexual orientation and gender identity".

Children and Youth Services Review .

104 : 104403.

doi : 10.1016/j.childyouth.2019.104403 .

ISSN 0190-7409 .

S2CID 198615480 .

^ Veale, Jaimie F.

; Watson, Ryan J.; Peter, Tracey; Saewyc, Elizabeth M. (2017).

"Mental Health Disparities Among Canadian Transgender Youth" .

Journal of Adolescent Health .

60 (1): 44– 49.

doi : 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2016.09.014 .

ISSN 1054-139X .

PMC 5630273 .

PMID 28007056 .

^ Reisner, Sari L.; Biello, Katie B.; White Hughto, Jaclyn M.; Kuhns, Lisa; Mayer, Kenneth H.; Garofalo, Robert; Mimiaga, Matthew J. (1 May 2016).

"Psychiatric Diagnoses and Comorbidities in a Diverse, Multicity Cohort of Young Transgender Women" .

JAMA Pediatrics .

170 (5): 481– 6.

doi : 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.0067 .

ISSN 2168-6203 .

PMC 4882090 .

PMID 26999485 .

^ Nahata, Leena; Quinn, Gwendolyn P.; Caltabellotta, Nicole M.; Tishelman, Amy C. (2017). "Mental Health Concerns and Insurance Denials Among Transgender Adolescents".

LGBT Health .

4 (3): 188– 193.

doi : 10.1089/lgbt.2016.0151 .

ISSN 2325-8292 .

PMID 28402749 .

^ Wawrzyniak, Andrew J.; Sabbag, Samir (2018). Nemeroff, Charles B; Marmar, Charles R (eds.). "PTSD in the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) Population".

Oxford Medicine Online .

doi : 10.1093/med/9780190259440.003.0014 .

^ Toomey, Russell B.; Syvertsen, Amy K.; Shramko, Maura (11 September 2018).

"Transgender Adolescent Suicide Behavior" .

Pediatrics .

142 (4): e20174218.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2017-4218 .

ISSN 0031-4005 .

PMC 6317573 .

PMID 30206149 .

^ a b c d e f g "Executive Summary" (PDF) .

U.S. Transgender Survey . Washington: National Center for Transgender Equality. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 January 2017 .

.

^ Valentine, Sarah E.; Shipherd, Jillian C. (2018).

"A systematic review of social stress and mental health among transgender and gender non-conforming people in the United States" .

Clinical Psychology Review .

66 : 24– 38.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpr.2018.03.003 .

ISSN 0272-7358 .

PMC 6663089 .

PMID 29627104 .

^ Keuroghlian, Alex S.; Reisner, Sari L.; White, Jaclyn M.; Weiss, Roger D. (1 July 2015).

"Substance Use and Treatment of Substance Use Disorders in a Community Sample of Transgender Adults" .

Drug and Alcohol Dependence .

152 : 139– 146.

doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.04.008 .

ISSN 0376-8716 .

PMC 4458188 .

PMID 25953644 .

^ Reisner, Sari L.; White, Jaclyn M.; Bradford, Judith B.; Mimiaga, Matthew J. (2014).

"Transgender Health Disparities: Comparing Full Cohort and Nested Matched-Pair Study Designs in a Community Health Center" .

LGBT Health .

1 (3): 177– 184.

doi : 10.1089/lgbt.2014.0009 .

ISSN 2325-8292 .

PMC 4219512 .

PMID 25379511 .

^ Hyun, J.K.; Kimerling, R. (2009). "Military sexual trauma".

Research Quarterly .

^ Beckman, Kerry; Shipherd, Jillian; Simpson, Tracy; Lehavot, Keren (30 March 2018).

"Military Sexual Assault in Transgender Veterans: Results From a Nationwide Survey" .

Journal of Traumatic Stress .

31 (2): 181– 190.

doi : 10.1002/jts.22280 .

ISSN 0894-9867 .

PMC 6709681 .

PMID 29603392 .

^ Blanco, Carlos; Xu, Yang; Brady, Kathleen; Pérez-Fuentes, Gabriela; Okuda, Mayumi; Wang, Shuai (2013).

"Comorbidity of posttraumatic stress disorder with alcohol dependence among US adults: Results from National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions" .

Drug and Alcohol Dependence .

132 (3): 630– 638.

doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.04.016 .

ISSN 0376-8716 .

PMC 3770804 .

PMID 23702490 .

^ Lehavot, Keren; Simpson, Tracy L.; Shipherd, Jillian C. (15 February 2016). "Factors Associated with Suicidality Among a National Sample of Transgender Veterans".

Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior .

46 (5): 507– 524.

doi : 10.1111/sltb.12233 .

ISSN 0363-0234 .

PMID 26878597 .

^ Carter, Andrea; Borrero, Sonya; Wessel, Charles; Washington, Donna L.; Bean-Mayberry, Bevanne; Corbelli, Jennifer; Batch, Bryan C.; Breland, Jessica Y.; DiLeone, Brooke; Foynes, Melissa Ming; Keene, Robin (2016). "Racial and Ethnic Health Care Disparities Among Women in the Veterans Affairs Healthcare System: A Systematic Review".

Women's Health Issues .

26 (4): 401– 409.

doi : 10.1016/j.whi.2016.03.009 .

ISSN 1049-3867 .

PMID 27138241 .

^ Brown, George R.; Jones, Kenneth T. (16 July 2014).

"Racial Health Disparities in a Cohort of 5,135 Transgender Veterans" .

Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities .

1 (4): 257– 266.

doi : 10.1007/s40615-014-0032-4 .

ISSN 2197-3792 .

^ Brown, George R.; Jones, Kenneth T. (2015). "Health Correlates of Criminal Justice Involvement in 4,793 Transgender Veterans".

LGBT Health .

2 (4): 297– 305.

doi : 10.1089/lgbt.2015.0052 .

ISSN 2325-8292 .

PMID 26788770 .

^ Sugano, Eiko; Nemoto, Tooru; Operario, Don (2006). "The Impact of Exposure to Transphobia on HIV Risk Behavior in a Sample of Transgendered Women of Color in San Francisco".

AIDS and Behavior .

10 (2): 217– 225.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.554.5857 .

doi : 10.1007/s10461-005-9040-z .

PMID 16362237 .

S2CID 6642842 .

^ Hayes, J. "The Center for Collegiate Mental Health: Practice and research working together".

Journal of College Counseling : 101– 104.

^ Effrig, Jessica C.; Bieschke, Kathleen J.; Locke, Benjamin D. (1 September 2011). "Examining Victimization and Psychological Distress in Transgender College Students".

Journal of College Counseling .

14 (2): 143– 157.

doi : 10.1002/j.2161-1882.2011.tb00269.x .

ISSN 2161-1882 .

^ a b Virupaksha, H. G.; Muralidhar, Daliboyina; Ramakrishna, Jayashree (2016).

"Suicide and Suicidal Behavior among Transgender Persons" .

Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine .

38 (6): 505– 509.

doi : 10.4103/0253-7176.194908 .

ISSN 0253-7176 .

PMC 5178031 .

PMID 28031583 .

^ Haas, Ann H.; Philip Rodgers (2014).

Suicide Attempts Among Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming Adults (PDF) (Technical report). American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law.

^ "Transphobia Among Transgenders of Color" (PDF) .

Center for AIDS Prevention Studies, University of California, San Francisco . November 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2017 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ Valentine, Sarah E; Shipherd, Jillian C (March 2018).

"A systematic review of social stress and mental health among transgender and gender non-conforming people in the United States" .

Clinical Psychology Review . 66 December 2018: 24– 38.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpr.2018.03.003 .

PMC 6663089 .

PMID 29627104 .

^ Austin, Ashley; Craig, Shelley L. (2015). "Transgender Affirmative Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: Clinical Considerations and Applications".

Professional Psychology: Research and Practice .

46 (1): 21– 29.

doi : 10.1037/a0038642 .

^ Hope, Sam (2020).

Person-Centered Counselling for Trans and Gender Diverse People . London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

ISBN 978-1785925429 .

^ "Trans Pregnancy" .

University of Leeds . Archived from the original on 1 November 2022 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 .

^ " 'Pregnant Man' Thomas Beatie Splits From Wife Nancy: Why The Break-Up After 9 Years [PHOTOS]" .

International Business Times . 21 April 2012 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 .

Further reading "Thematic report on Discrimination against trans and intersex people on the grounds of sex, gender identity and gender expression" , The European Commission , 2012.

External links Media related to Transphobia at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Transphobia at Wikiquote Remembering our Dead at the Wayback Machine (archived 29 November 2014) Survivor bashing – bias motivated hate crimes Translatina documentary (2010) v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category v t e Transgender and gender non-conforming topics Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care and medicine Gender dysphoria causes in children Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Legal status Misinformation Surgery feminizing masculinizing Pregnancy Puberty blocker Rights Gender self-identification Legal gender Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status Marriage Rights movement Rights organizations Toilets bathroom bills unisex Yogyakarta Principles Discrimination Against non-binary people Against transgender men Anti-gender movement Anti-trans movement in the UK Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Asylum seekers Cisgenderism Inequality Prison Transmisogyny Violence genocide killings trans panic Society and culture Anatomical terminology Blåhaj Christianity LGBTQ-related films Events Awareness Week Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility March Non-binary People's Day LGBTQ Flags History Media portrayals fictional characters film People Pornography Publications Sexuality Sports ice hockey chess Youth Zizians more Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country History Argentina [ es ] Australia Brazil Cambodia Chile [ es ] China Finland India Iran Russia Singapore United Kingdom United States legal People China ancient Egypt France [ fr ] Nazi Germany South Korea Singapore Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Re Kevin Bolivia 2016 law [ es ] Brazil Canada 2016 bill C-16 Chile 2018 law [ es ] Germany India 2014 Bill 2019 Act Kerala Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland New Zealand Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 Act South Africa 2003 Act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom 2004 act United States legal history title IX Uruguay 2018 law [ es ] Political office-holders United States See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people Outline Timeline Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transphobia&oldid=1306270703 " Categories : Transphobia Anti-LGBTQ sentiment Harassment and bullying Sexism Prejudice and discrimination by type Discrimination against LGBTQ people Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2016 CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from July 2024 Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2017 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2021 Articles lacking reliable references from July 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles lacking reliable references from January 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2023 Articles lacking reliable references from September 2017 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from September 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 21:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transphobia 53 languages Add topic

