Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research Groups 3 Directors 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cambridge University medical school department MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit The Keith Peters Building, housing the Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and the MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit Abbreviation MBU Formation 1927 Type Research institute Legal status University Unit Purpose Mitochondrial research Headquarters The Keith Peters Building Location Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY Director Professor Judy Hirst Parent organization Medical Research Council Website MBU The MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit (formerly the MRC Dunn Human Nutrition Unit ) is a department of the School of Clinical Medicine at the University of Cambridge , funded through a strategic partnership between the Medical Research Council and the University. It is located at the Addenbrooke’s Hospital / Cambridge Biomedical Campus site in Cambridge, England . The unit is concerned with the study of the mitochondrion , as this organelle has a varied and critical role in many aspects of eukaryotic metabolism and is implicated in many metabolic, degenerative, and age-related human diseases.

History [ edit ] The Unit was founded in 1927 using a donation from Sir William Dunn , who left £1 million to charity on his death in 1912. Part of this money was used to fund what was then called the Dunn Nutritional Laboratory, with its research supported by the Medical Research Council (MRC). Its original research focus was to investigate the role of vitamins in human health. Under the directorship of Egon Kodicek this focus changed to more general nutritional research. The Unit was restructured in 1998 under the directorship of Professor Sir John Walker to focus on mitochondrial research. The Unit was renamed in 2009 to the Mitochondrial Biology Unit to reflect its mitochondrial expertise. In March 2017 the Unit was transferred from the MRC to the University of Cambridge . The current director of the Unit is Professor Judy Hirst .

The Unit has three major scientific aims: [ 1 ] To understand the fundamental processes taking place in mitochondria To understand the involvement of these processes in human diseases To exploit knowledge of these fundamental processes for the development of new therapies to treat human diseases Research Groups [ edit ] The MBU is organised into nine independent research groups [ 2 ] and includes 30-40 graduate students who are members of the University of Cambridge : Professor Judy Hirst FRS - Understanding the molecular mechanism of complex I and its roles in human disease Professor Patrick Chinnery - Mitochondrial genomics and human diseases Professor Edmund Kunji - Understanding transport processes in mitochondria Dr Michal Minczuk - Discovering the genetic links between mitochondrial dysfunction and human disease Professor Mike Murphy - Targeting therapeutic and probe molecules to mitochondria, mitochondrial radical production and redox signalling Dr Julien Prudent - Interactions between mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum in cell physiology and disease Dr Jelle van den Ameele - Molecular mechanisms of tissue specificity in mitochondrial disease Dr Alex Whitworth - Genetic models of neurodegenerative disease Professor John E. Walker FRS - Understanding the molecular mechanism of how ATP is made Directors [ edit ] Professor Judy Hirst FRS (2020 - ) [ 3 ] Professor Massimo Zeviani (2013 - 2019) Professor Sir John Walker FRS (1998 - 2013) [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Dr Roger Whitehead (1973 – 1998) Dr Egon Kodicek CBE FRS (1963 - 1973) Dr Leslie Harris (1929 - 1963) Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins (1927 - 1929) See also [ edit ] Sir William Dunn Institute of Biochemistry - another beneficiary of Dunn's will References [ edit ] ^ "Introduction from the Director - MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit" .

www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ "Research - MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit" .

www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ "News" .

^ "latest news - MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit" .

www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ "Staff & Students - MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit" .

www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases ISNI 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MRC_Mitochondrial_Biology_Unit&oldid=1301427337 " Categories : Biological research institutes in the United Kingdom Nutrition in the United Kingdom Medical research institutes in the United Kingdom Research institutes in Cambridge Institutions in the School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge Medical Research Council (United Kingdom) Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 19:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit 1 language Add topic

