Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Radicalism 3 Political activism 4 LGBT+ activism 5 Late life 6 Works 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Daniel Guérin 19 languages العربية تۆرکجه Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French anarcho-communist author and influential queer anarchist contributor For the French table tennis player, see Daniel Guérin (table tennis) .

Daniel Guérin Daniel Guérin in 1925 Born ( 1904-05-19 ) 19 May 1904 Paris , France Died 14 April 1988 (1988-04-14) (aged 83) Suresnes , Hauts-de-Seine , France Daniel Guérin ( French: [danjɛl ɡeʁɛ̃] ; 19 May 1904 – 14 April 1988) was a French libertarian-communist author, best known for his work Anarchism: From Theory to Practice , as well as his collection No Gods No Masters: An Anthology of Anarchism in which he collected writings on the idea and movement it inspired, from the first writings of Max Stirner in the mid-19th century through the first half of the 20th century. He is also known for his opposition to Nazism , fascism , capitalism , imperialism and colonialism , in addition to his support for the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) during the Spanish Civil War . His revolutionary defense of free love and homosexuality influenced the development of queer anarchism . He sought to combine the ideology of Marxism and anarchism .

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] Daniel Guérin was born in 1904 in Paris, France to a wealthy family. In 1921 he enrolled in The Institute of Political Sciences, or Sciences Po, an elite French university, although he quickly became dissatisfied with his experiences there and dropped out by 1925.

[ 2 ] He felt distinctly out of place among the throngs of ambitious young students and did not enjoy the academics; he wrote in his Autobiographie de jeunesse: D’une dissidence sexuelle au socialisme , "For me, studies are idiocies that make life hardly worth living." Despite his indifference for studying, he was a talented writer from a young age. Future Nobel Prize winner François Mauriac said that Guérin’s poetry, published in a short book, was evidence of an "exceptional gift." The novelist Colette Audry remarked that his work showed the "birth of a true poet." [ 3 ] Guérin was bisexual. His relationship with his sexuality was defined in part by his relationship with his father, who was also not heterosexual. Guérin recalled that he told his father he "preferred" boys shortly after a trip to Greece, to which his father responded by crying and saying to him, "So do I." [ 4 ] Radicalism [ edit ] Part of a series on Libertarian socialism Concepts Anti-authoritarianism Class conflict Decentralization Egalitarian community Free association Mutual aid Revolutionary spontaneity Workers' control Economics Anti-capitalism Co-operative economics Decentralized planning Economic democracy Industrial democracy Participatory economics Socialization Socialist economics Worker cooperative Workers' self-management People Albert Andrews Bakunin Berkman Bookchin Boric Camus Castoriadis Chomsky Cole Déjacque Foot Fotopoulos Fourier Guérin Kropotkin Lefort Luxemburg Makhno Marcos Morris Marcuse Negri Öcalan Pallis Pankhurst Pannekoek Pi i Margall Proudhon Rocker Russell Rühle Variants Anarchist tendencies Social anarchism Communist Collectivist Individualist anarchism Market Mutualism Anarcho-syndicalism Marxist tendencies Autonomism Chaulieu–Montal tendency Communization Council communism Situationism Western Marxism Other tendencies Democratic confederalism Guild socialism Libertarian municipalism Utopian socialism Neozapatismo History International Workingmen's Association Revolutions of 1917–1923 Makhnovshchina Korean People's Association in Manchuria Spanish Revolution of 1936 New Left New social movements Zapatista uprising MAREZ Rojava Revolution AANES Related topics Communism Libertarianism Social democracy Socialism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Syndicalism Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e As a student, Guérin encountered socialist ideology, but just reading it wasn't enough to engender a political conversion. Ultimately, Guérin's engagement with socialism first stemmed from sexual affairs with young Parisian workers. He said later in life, "It was in bed with them that I discovered the working class, much more than through Marxist writings." [ 1 ] In his Eux et lui he also wrote: "I did not deny, I did not desecrate my socialism when I exalted phallism. My socialism and my phallism, in fact, the more that I thought about it, were not in contradiction. To tell the truth, I didn’t have to choose between the two. Their deep synthesis had ended up forming the substance of my being... Because I had come to socialism through phallism. It was not pity, brotherhood overflowing from my heart, it was not the reading of theorists – undertaken much later, as enlightening as the removal of cataracts – it was no more than a social injustice felt in my very own flesh that had made me into a socialist." [ 5 ] Guérin became radicalized through his travels to many of the various French colonies. He described his journeys through in particular Lebanon, French Indochina, and northern Vietnam, noting the barbarity of European colonialism in great detail.

[ 3 ] In Autobiographie de jeunesse he described colonists as: "'such human garbage, doleful men, engaged in an endless card game, or slandering one another'; '[t]hese little white men [petits Blancs], prison guards, police officers, customs officers, manille [a card game] players and absinthe drinkers, pot-bellied slavedrivers of coolies'." [ 5 ] During his travels he frequently engaged with and aided Communists and Trotskyists , who were fighting against French control.

[ 1 ] Upon returning to Paris, he claimed to have "more or less found [him]self." [ 3 ] Guérin wrote in his Autobiographie de jeunesse : "My move in the direction of socialism wasn’t objective, or of an intellectual order... It was more subjective, physical, coming from feeling and the heart. It wasn’t in books, it was in me, first of all, through years of sexual frustration, and it was through contact with young oppressed people that I learned to hate the established order. The carnal quest freed me from social segregation." [ 3 ] Political activism [ edit ] In 1933, Hitler rose to power. Guérin toured Germany by bicycle that summer, seeking to understand the German people’s motivations for supporting Hitler and find the "other" Germany, made up of oppositionist groups still assembling against Hitler; he collected leaflets produced illegally by oppositionist groups and smuggled them out of Germany in his bicycle frame. His experiences led him to produce a series of articles and two books, titled The Brown Plague and Fascism and Big Business.

In these, he argued that fascism was “an instrument in the service of big capital” motivated by industry bosses, and that the only way to fight it was through socialism. Guérin allied with the small body of Trotskyists led by German Jewish exile Martin Monath .

[ 1 ] In France in 1936, after a failed coup by fascists, the Popular Front alliance , a cumulation of France's communists and socialists, was elected. An extensive strike movement began in response, spanning the entire country and consisting of 2 million workers, who struck mainly in the workplace. Guérin was active in the organization of the strike movement. In Les Lilas , where he lived, Guérin was the secretary of the local committee for trade union propaganda. Guérin worked with the most radical faction of the Socialist Party, the Revolutionary Left tendency headed by Marceau Pivert . The Revolutionary Left tendency was ultimately removed from the SFIO in 1938, but Guérin was not finished. That same year he co-founded the Workers' and Peasants' Socialist Party , and the tendency's former members thronged to it. Guérin hoped that it would become a strong party, but it was too small and divided to last through the beginning of the Second World War and was outlawed by the Vichy regime in 1940.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] In 1939, he moved to Oslo to work for the International Revolutionary Marxist Centre , a London-based group of small socialist parties. He was detained by Nazi troops in April 1940, but was released only a couple months later because of health reasons. In 1942, Germany ordered all French citizens to return home. He settled back in Paris and took up editing radical anti-war propaganda from both sides of the conflict.

[ 3 ] After 1945, Guérin was less supportive of Trotskyism , and he became more interested in anarchism. He began to research and write about the history of anarchism, and joined several anarchist organizations.

[ 1 ] From 1946 to 1949, Guérin spent time traveling across America, meeting with political leaders and activists, including C. L. R. James and W. E. B. Du Bois . He expressed strong mistrust of the United States but empathized with those who experienced discrimination within it: "I have an unshakeable faith in the future of the American people. It must not be confused with a few monopolies which dishonour it in the eyes of the world." [ 1 ] (His skepticism was noted; between 1950 and 1957 he was not allowed a visa to visit the U.S.

[ 1 ] ) Guérin documented his experiences and new knowledge in a 2-volume collected called Où va le peuple américain?

(Where Are the American People Going?), parts of which were later publishd in Décolonisation du Noir américain (Decolonisation of the Black American) in 1963, and Africains du Nouveau Monde (Africans of the New World) in 1984.

[ 5 ] LGBT+ activism [ edit ] Guérin kept closeted for most of his life. The French political left was known to be homophobic, and he knew that coming out would ruin his life and career. He described feeling trapped: "I felt myself cut in two, voicing out loud my new militant [political] beliefs and feeling myself by necessity obliged to hide my private [sexual] tendencies." [ 6 ] However, he began advocating for sexual freedom and gay liberation in the early 1950s, and came out after the uprising of May 1968.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] Guérin soon joined the Front homosexuel d’action révolutionaire (Homosexual Front of Revolutionary Action), which was founded in 1971.

[ 3 ] Guérin found himself unhappy with the group, as he believed that it consisted of young gay liberationists who intended to "shock and provoke society instead of organizing effectively to change it." He considered its members to be "politically inept, ideologically naive, and 'often very stupid.'" Guérin, appealing to the bold audacity of FHAR, once stripped nude at a general assembly in order to make a point.

[ 6 ] Guérin believed that reformist actions were not enough to eradicate prejudice against homosexuals. He argued that gay liberation would "be total and irreversible only if it is achieved within the context of social revolution." [ 6 ] His Autobiographie de jeunesse: D’une dissidence sexuelle au socialism e (Autobiography of Youth: From Sexual Dissidence to Socialism) was published in 1965.

[ 3 ] In it he discussed his sexuality in a way that was intended to strike against the homophobia that still riddled the revolutionary Left. He wrote, "My real intention... was to help the homophiles in their fight. To help them, this time, no longer as in some of my earlier books, through some developments that were of a scientific character, sociological, juridical, sexological, etcetera, but through the exposé of an individual case." [ 5 ] In Homosexualité et révolution , he wrote: "In order to omit nothing from my discourse of a whole life, that never, at no moment, in no manner whatsoever, has the intensity, the multiplicity, the frenetic nature of my homosexual affairs taken precedence over my militant activity which aims to change the world, nor has it disguised my determination, my revolutionary obstinacy. I say so not to glorify myself, but because it is the strict truth." [ 4 ] Pierre Hahn , a figurehead of the French gay liberation movement, wrote to Guérin in 1975, saying that: "More than to anyone else, homosexuals are grateful to you... for everything you have done for them. . . . The most valuable thing you have done is a life's work that is both political (in the traditional sense) and sexological: it's [your books like] The Brown Plague [on fascism] plus Kinsey [on the Kinsey Report]; it's Fourier [on the nineteenth-century radical thinker] and the texts against colonialism: finally it's you yourself." [ 6 ] Late life [ edit ] Guérin was said to be the grandfather of the French gay liberation movement by Frédéric Martel . He continued to have homosexual relationships up to the end of his life.

[ 1 ] His life was documented in a biographical film called "Combats dans le siécle." [ 2 ] Guérin passed away on April 14, 1988. He had many political titles and associations, but he died a libertarian Marxist , still seeking to connect the working class with anarchist ideology.

[ 3 ] Works [ edit ] Le livre de la dix-huitième année (poèmes), Paris, Albin Michel, 1922 L'enchantement du Vendredi Saint (roman), Paris, Albin Michel, 1925 La vie selon la chair (roman), Paris, Albin Michel, 1929 Fascisme et grand capital. Italie-Allemagne , Paris, Éditions de la révolution prolétarienne, 1936 English translation by Einde O' Callaghan Fascism and Big Business .

La lutte des classes sous la Première République, 1793-1797 , Paris, Gallimard, 2 vol., 1946 (édition abrégée : Bourgeois et bras-nus, 1793-1795 , 1968) Où va le peuple américain ?

, Paris, Julliard, 2 vol., 1950-1951 Au service des colonisés , Paris, Éditions de Minuit, 1954 Kinsey et la sexualité , Paris, Julliard, 1955 Les Antilles décolonisées , préface d' Aimé Césaire , Paris, Présence Africaine, 1956 Trois problèmes de la Révolution , 1958 essay English translation by Paul Sharkey: "Three Problems of the Revolution" Jeunesse du socialisme libertaire , Paris, Rivière, 1959 Shakespeare et Gide en correctionnelle ?

, Paris, Editions du Scorpion, 1959 Le grain sous la neige , adaptation théâtrale d'après Ignazio Silone , Éditions Mondiales, 1961 Vautrin , adaptation théâtrale d'après Honoré de Balzac , Paris, La Plume d'or, 1962 Eux et lui , illustré par André Masson , Monaco, Editions du Rocher, 1962 Essai sur la révolution sexuelle après Reich et Kinsey , Paris, Belfond, 1963 Front Populaire, révolution manquée ?

, Paris, Julliard, 1963 Décolonisation du noir américain , Paris, Présence Africaine, 1963 L'Algérie qui se cherche , Paris, Présence Africaine, 1964 Un jeune homme excentrique. Essai d'autobiographie , Paris, Julliard, 1965 Sur le fascisme : I- La peste brune ; II- Fascisme et grand capital , Paris, Maspero, 1965 (réédition). English translation of La peste brune by Robert Schwartzwald: The Brown Plague. Travels in Late Weimar and Early Nazi Germany , Durham (NC), Duke UP, 1994.

L'anarchisme. De la doctrine à l'action , Paris, Gallimard, 1965 English translation by Mary Klopper: Anarchism: From Theory to Practice , with an introduction by Noam Chomsky, New York: Monthly Review Press, 1970 Ni Dieu ni maître. Histoire et anthologie de l'anarchie , Paris, Éditions de Delphes, 1965 Pour un marxisme libertaire , Paris, Laffont, 1969 Rosa Luxembourg et la spontanéité révolutionnaire , Paris, Flammarion, 1971 Autobiographie de jeunesse. D'une dissidence sexuelle au socialisme , Paris, Belfond, 1972 De l'Oncle Tom aux Panthères Noires , Paris, UGE, 1973 (réédition : Les Bons Caractères, 2010) Les assassins de Ben Barka. Dix ans d'enquête , Paris, Guy Authier, 1975 La Révolution française et nous , Paris, Maspero, 1976 Proudhon oui et non , Paris, Gallimard, 1978 Homosexualité et révolution , Paris, Le vent du ch'min, 1983 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i "Daniel Guérin Showed Us What a Socialist Writer Should Be" .

jacobin.com . Retrieved 18 November 2024 .

^ a b c "For a dialectic of homosexuality and revolution" .

The Anarchist Library . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "The Red and the Rainbow: The Life and Work of Daniel Guérin" .

Dissent Magazine . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ a b Le Bitoux, Jean (2 October 2020).

"Universalist, Bisexual Ambivalence: An Interview with Daniel Guérin" .

Salvage . Translated by Doherty, Caitlin . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ a b c d Budgen, Sebastian (25 September 2020).

"The Phallic Road to Socialism - Sebastian Budgen" .

Salvage . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ a b c d e Sibalis, Michael D (2006).

"Guerin, Daniel (1904-1988)" (PDF) .

GLBTQ . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 January 2017 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Berry, David (2014-07-03).

"Metamorphosis: The Making of Daniel Guérin, 1904–1930" .

Modern & Contemporary France .

22 (3): 321– 342.

doi : 10.1080/09639489.2013.856875 .

ISSN 0963-9489 .

S2CID 145567818 .

Berry, David (2022).

A Life in the Service of Revolution: Daniel Guérin, 1904-1988 . Oakland, CA: PM Press.

Copley, Antony R. H. (1989). "Daniel Guérin: Towards Self-Acceptance".

Sexual Moralities in France, 1780–1980: New Ideas on the Family, Divorce, and Homosexuality . London: Routledge. pp.

181– 197.

ISBN 978-0-415-00360-5 .

OCLC 883700728 .

Saintin, Alexandre (2013-08-08).

"The Socialist Intellectual Daniel Guérin in Germany: Before and after the Disaster" .

Vingtième Siècle. Revue d'Histoire (in French).

119 (119): 15– 28.

doi : 10.3917/ving.119.0015 .

ISSN 0294-1759 .

Schwartzwald, Robert (2005).

"GUÉRIN, DANIEL (1904–1988)" . In Marshall, Bill (ed.).

France and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History .

ABC-CLIO . pp.

541– 542.

ISBN 978-1-85109-411-0 .

External links [ edit ] Anarchism portal Communism portal Socialism portal DanielGuerin.info Designed by activists, researchers and relatives, this site is dedicated to the life and works of Daniel Guerin Anarchist Archives Anarchism: From Theory to Practice Daniel Guérin Archive at marxists.org The Anarchist Writings of Daniel Guerin Full text at the Internet Archive v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Daniel_Guérin&oldid=1306140372 " Categories : 1904 births 1988 deaths 20th-century anarchists 20th-century French essayists 20th-century French historians 20th-century French LGBTQ people 20th-century French male writers Anarchist writers Anarcho-communists Bisexual male politicians Bisexual male writers Economics writers French anarchists French anti-capitalists French anti-fascists French bisexual men French bisexual writers French communists French male essayists French Marxist historians French people of the Spanish Civil War French Section of the Workers' International politicians French socialists French Trotskyists Historians of anarchism Historians of communism Historians of fascism Historians of France Historians of the French Revolution Historians of Nazism Historians of Russia French LGBTQ rights activists French people of World War II LGBTQ anarchism LGBTQ socialism Libertarian Marxists Libertarian socialists Marxist theorists Political science writers Unified Socialist Party (France) politicians Workers and Peasants' Socialist Party politicians Writers from Paris Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2023 Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 04:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Daniel Guérin 19 languages Add topic

