Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Issues of focus Toggle Issues of focus subsection 1.1 Foreign/military 1.1.1 Immigration 1.1.2 North American Union 1.1.3 Trade 1.1.4 Cold War 1.1.5 China 1.1.6 Panama Canal 1.1.7 United Nations 1.2 Domestic 1.2.1 Constitutionalism 1.2.2 Health care 1.2.3 Washington, DC Congressional seat 1.2.4 Taxes/IRS 1.2.5 Social issues 2 Conservative Roundtable 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Conservative Caucus 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American public policy organization This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The Conservative Caucus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "The Conservative Caucus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Conservative Caucus Logo of the Conservative Caucus Abbreviation TCC Formation 1974 ; 51 years ago ( 1974 ) Founder Howard Phillips Type Public policy organization and lobbying group Purpose Emphasizing grassroots citizen activism Headquarters Vienna, Virginia Location United States Chairman Peter J. Thomas Budget $3.8 million Website Official Website The Conservative Caucus , or TCC , is an American public policy organization and lobbying group emphasizing grassroots citizen activism and headquartered in Vienna , Virginia , a suburb of Washington, D.C.

It was founded in 1974 by Howard Phillips , who led it until 2012 when he retired due to his health.  He was replaced by current chairman, Peter J. Thomas.

[ 1 ] Most of the organization's $3.8 million budget comes from the efforts of New Right fundraising gurus Richard Viguerie and Bruce Eberle.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The organization produced a weekly conservative television program, Conservative Roundtable, which was hosted by Mr. Phillips until his retirement.

[ 4 ] Howard Phillips was also President of The Conservative Caucus Research, Analysis and Education Foundation (TCCF), a 501(c)3 tax-deductible organization.

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Issues of focus [ edit ] TCC promotes an uncompromisingly conservative line on a wide range of issues. The following are a few it has emphasized: Foreign/military [ edit ] Immigration [ edit ] TCC opposes illegal immigration and legislation characterized by TCC as an amnesty for illegal immigrants, such as S. 2611 . The organization supports measures to secure the Mexican border, including a complete fence.

North American Union [ edit ] TCC opposes the North American Union (NAU), which the TCC sees as the merging of the United States with Mexico and Canada.  TCC also opposes the NAFTA Superhighway which it sees as facilitating smuggling, terrorist infiltration, and bypassing American port workers by using cheaper Mexican ports. TCC held a news conference on October 25, 2006 announcing formation of a coalition to oppose the NAU, which was featured by Lou Dobbs on CNN . The NAU is connected to the Security and Prosperity Partnership (SPP). TCC is a founder of the 'Coalition to Block the North American Union', and held a news conference in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada in August 2007 at the time of the SPP summit in Montebello, Quebec with the leaders of the United States, Mexico and Canada. Participating were representatives of many United States organizations as well as Connie Fogal, the Leader of the Canadian Action Party . The news conference was covered by Fox, CTV, Reuters, the Wall Street Journal and other U.S. and Canadian media outlets.

Trade [ edit ] TCC is opposed in principle to what is called excessive or unlimited free trade , seeing such policies as being dangerous to the economic well-being of the American middle class , the manufacturing sector, and of the United States as a whole.  TCC also specifically opposes various trade treaties, such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and others as being threats to US sovereignty.

Cold War [ edit ] Throughout the Cold War , TCC took a strong anti-communist stance, favoring active U.S. involvement around the world to undermine or overthrow pro-Soviet governments and bolster anti-Soviet allies.  TCC often voiced concerns that the U.S. and its allies had fallen behind the Eastern bloc in the arms race to a position of military inferiority, not merely quantitatively but qualitatively as well.

China [ edit ] TCC sees the People's Republic of China as a major military threat to U.S. security and interests. It suspects China of seeking to gain strategic control of the Panama Canal through a front company, Hutchison Whampoa . It also opposes Permanent Normal Trade relations with China and China's membership in the World Trade Organization .

Panama Canal [ edit ] TCC opposed the Panama Canal Treaties which transferred control of the Panama Canal from the U.S. to Panama . To this day, it lobbies to return a limited American military presence to protect the Canal due to its strategic importance in trade and defense.  TCC also fears that the Canal is vulnerable to terrorism.

United Nations [ edit ] TCC supports a U.S. withdrawal from the UN , perceiving the organization as having ambitions to be a world government hostile to US interests and sovereignty, and which routinely votes against American interests.

Domestic [ edit ] Constitutionalism [ edit ] TCC supports strict constructionism and original intent when it comes to constitutional interpretation .  In its view, the majority of federal agencies and activities are unconstitutional.  Through its "Constitutional Education Program", TCC seeks to educate citizens on the Constitution and its importance in protecting the liberty of all Americans.  TCC sponsors an annual 'Constitution Day' educational event on the anniversary of the signing of the U.S. Constitution (September 17, 1789), which in 2006 was televised on C-SPAN .

Health care [ edit ] A major focus of TCC activism in 2009 and 2010 was opposing President Obama's health care reform bills and any greater government involvement in health care. Following passage, TCC is campaigning for the repeal of the enacted reform bill.

Washington, DC Congressional seat [ edit ] TCC opposes efforts to create a full voting seat in the House of Representatives for the District of Columbia, based upon the Constitutional provisions that only states can have Congressional representation, and the Founding Fathers' intention to keep the nation's capital a neutral territory where all states may meet without fear of undue influence. TCC also opposed efforts to make the city into a state.

Taxes/IRS [ edit ] TCC favors abolishing the income tax and replacing it with a low revenue tariff.  This would eliminate the need for the Internal Revenue Service .

Social issues [ edit ] TCC is strongly anti-abortion and opposes gay marriage . It favors school prayer and championed former Alabama Supreme Court Chief Justice Roy Moore for his stance favoring the display of the Ten Commandments .

Conservative Roundtable [ edit ] Conservative Roundtable was a nationally [ 5 ] broadcast weekly conservative television program [ 6 ] produced by The Conservative Caucus beginning in 1991.

[ 7 ] Each episode featured Howard Phillips conducting "in-depth interviews of key news makers, including authors, members of Congress, candidates for office, policy experts, inventors and academics".

[ 4 ] By 2004, over 400 episodes had aired on television across the country.

[ 8 ] The show continued until 2012, when Howard Phillips stepped down from the Conservative Caucus for health reasons. The show's producer, Art Harman, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] commented that during the show's two decades in production it had reached "20 million households on 125 cable channels nationwide".

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Our Team" .

ConservativeCaucus . Retrieved 2024-09-11 .

^ "GuideStar - Login" . Archived from the original on 2007-09-28 . Retrieved 2006-03-25 .

^ "We're Coming for You, John Boehner - Richard A. Viguerie - POLITICO Magazine" .

Politico . 2018-10-03. Archived from the original on 2018-10-03 . Retrieved 2024-09-11 .

^ a b c "Conservative Roundtable (TV Series 1991–2012) - IMDb" .

IMDb .

^ "Conservative TV show nationwide schedule" .

www.conservativeusa.org . Archived from the original on 30 January 2012 . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ "Budget Guru on the Deficit - get the facts!" .

YouTube . 23 November 2011.

^ "Conservative TV Show Guests" .

www.conservativeusa.org . Archived from the original on 4 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ "Conservative TV Show Guests" .

www.conservativeusa.org . Archived from the original on 4 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ https://www.linkedin.com/in/artharman/ [ self-published source ] ^ "Budget Guru on the Deficit - get the facts!" .

YouTube . 23 November 2011.

External links [ edit ] Conservatism portal Howard Phillips' Blog Testimony to Congress on Constitutionality of D.C. voting representation Official Video Channel TCC's Healthcare Website TCC's Space Issues Website The Right Search Page , a "web search resource for conservative activists" Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Conservative_Caucus&oldid=1246709542 " Categories : Organizations established in 1974 Political organizations based in the United States New Right organizations (United States) Conservative organizations in the United States Hidden categories: All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from June 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2011 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 20 September 2024, at 16:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Conservative Caucus 1 language Add topic

