Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Favorable perceptions 2 Unfavorable perceptions Toggle Unfavorable perceptions subsection 2.1 Forced use of the right hand 2.2 Rise in acceptance of left-handedness 3 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 3.1 Scissors 3.2 Computer input devices 3.3 Knives 3.4 Sports 3.5 Machinery 4 Language Toggle Language subsection 4.1 Vocabulary 4.1.1 Ancient languages 4.1.2 European languages 4.1.3 Asian languages 4.1.4 Australian Aboriginal languages 4.2 Expressions and colloquialisms 5 Civic life Toggle Civic life subsection 5.1 Schooling 5.2 Employment 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bias against left-handed people 4 languages العربية Հայերեն हिन्दी Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Design and bias left-handed people Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Bias against people who are left-handed includes handwriting, which is one of the biggest sources of disadvantage for left-handed people, other than for those forced to work with certain machinery. About 90 percent of the world's population is right-handed, [ 1 ] and many common articles are designed for efficient use by right-handed people, and may be inconvenient, painful, or even dangerous for left-handed people to use. These may include school desks, kitchen implements, and tools ranging from simple scissors to hazardous machinery such as power saws .

[ 2 ] Beyond being inherently disadvantaged by a right-handed bias in the design of tools, left-handed people have been subjected to deliberate discrimination and discouragement. In certain societies, they may be considered unlucky or even malicious by the right-handed majority. Many languages still contain references to left-handedness to convey awkwardness, dishonesty, stupidity, or other undesirable qualities. In many societies, left-handed people have been historically forced as children to use their right hands for tasks which they would naturally perform with the left, such as eating or writing.

[ 3 ] Favorable perceptions [ edit ] Lloque Yupanqui , the third Sapa Inca , whose name means 'the glorified lefthander' In tantra Buddhism , the left hand represents wisdom.

[ 4 ] In early Roman times, the left side retained a positive connotation, as the Augures proceeded from the eastern side.

[ 5 ] Unfavorable perceptions [ edit ] The unfavorable associations and connotations of the use of the left hand among cultures are varied. In some areas, in order to preserve cleanliness where sanitation was an issue, the right hand, as the dominant hand of most individuals, was/is used for eating, handling food, and social interactions. The left hand would then be used for personal hygiene, specifically after urination and defecation.

Personal hygiene rules in Islam prefer this, as derived from hadith sources. These rules were imposed on all, no matter their dominant hand. Through these practices, the left hand became known as the "unclean" hand.

[ 6 ] Currently, amongst Muslims and in some societies including Nepal and India it is still customary to use the left hand for cleaning oneself with water after defecating. The right hand is commonly known in contradistinction from the left, as the hand used for eating.

[ 7 ] In many religions, including Christianity, the right hand of God is the favored hand. For example, Jesus sits at God's right side. God's left hand, however, is the hand of judgement . The Archangel Gabriel is sometimes called "God's left hand" and sits at God's left side. Those who fall from favor with God are sent to the left, as described in Matthew 25: 32–33, in which sheep represent the righteous and goats represent the fallen: "And he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right, but the goats on his left." In 19th-century Europe, homosexuals were referred to as "left-handed".

[ 8 ] In Protestant-majority parts of the United Kingdom, Catholics were called "left-footers", and vice versa in Catholic-majority parts of Ireland and Irish America .

[ 9 ] Various innocuous activities and experiences become rude or even signs of bad luck when the left hand becomes involved. In some parts of Scotland , it is considered bad luck to meet a left-handed person at the start of a journey.

[ 10 ] In Ghana , pointing, gesturing, giving or receiving items with the left hand is considered taboo or rude. A person giving directions will put their left hand behind them and even physically strain to point with their right hand if necessary.

[ 11 ] Forced use of the right hand [ edit ] Owing to cultural and social pressures, many left-handed children were forced to write and perform other activities with their right hands. This conversion can cause multiple problems in the developing left-handed child, including learning disorders , dyslexia , [ 12 ] stuttering [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] and other speech disorders .

[ 16 ] Shifts from left- to right-handed are more likely to be successful than right to left, although neither have a high success rate. Successful shifters are more likely to become ambidextrous than unsuccessful ones.

[ 17 ] Conversions can be successful with consistent daily practice in a variety of manual activities, but even if activity in the non-dominant left-hemisphere of the brain will increase during tasks, so too will activity in the dominant right-hemisphere. Consistent left-handers have no higher activity in these task centers than converted left-handers, so it may be inferred that "attempts to switch handedness by educational training far from weakening the functional expression of lefthandedness in higher-order motor areas of the (dominant) right hemisphere in fact enhance it".

[ 18 ] Many Asian countries force their children to become right-handed due to cultural perceptions of bad luck associated with the left hand . In India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Indonesia, it has traditionally been perceived as "rude" behaviour to use the left hand for eating, as the left hand is commonly used for tasks considered "unclean".

[ 19 ] In a 2007 study in Taiwan , about 59.3% of naturally left-handed children studied had been forced to convert to right-handedness. The study took into account economic status of the children's families and found that children whose parents had less education were more likely to be forced to convert. Even among children whose parents had higher levels of education, the conversion rate was 45.7%.

[ 20 ] The proportion of females in Japan subjected to forced conversion is significantly higher compared to males (95.1% to 81.0%).

[ 3 ] Malawians state their views that "the left hand is less skilled and less powerful than the right one" as main reasons for forcing left-handers to convert. Among students, teachers and parents, 75% said the left hand should not be used to perform habitual activities, and 87.6% of these believed left-handers should be forced to switch dominant hands. Parents and close relatives are most responsible for impressing these beliefs upon their children.

[ 21 ] In the Soviet Union, all left-handed students were forced to write with their right hand, as is the case with Vietnam.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] George VI (1895–1952, British King from 1936) was naturally left-handed as a child. He was forced to write with his right hand, as was common practice at the time, but was not expected to become king, so that was not a factor.

[ 25 ] Rise in acceptance of left-handedness [ edit ] On March 8, 1971, The Florence Times—Tri-Cities Daily reported that left-handed people "are becoming increasingly accepted and enabled to find their right (or left) place in the world".

[ 26 ] The Florence Times—Tri-Cities Daily also wrote, "we still have a long way to go before the last vestiges of discrimination against left-handedness are uprooted, however." [ 26 ] The frequency of left-handed writing in the United States, which was only 2.1 percent in 1932, had risen to over 11 percent by 1972.

[ 27 ] According to an article by The Washington Post from August 13, 1979, a University of Chicago psychologist, Jerre Levy , said, "In 1939, 2 percent of the population wrote with the left hand. By 1946, it was up to 7 1/2 percent. In 1968, 9 percent. By 1972, 12 percent. It's leveling off, and I expect the real number of left-handers will turn out to be about 14 percent." [ 28 ] According to the article by The Washington Post from August 13, 1979, "a University of Michigan study points out that left-handers may not be taking over the world but...7 percent of the men and 6 percent of the women over 40 who were interviewed were lefties, but the percentages jumped to well above 10 percent in the 18-to-39 age group." [ 28 ] According to the article by The Washington Post of August 13, 1979, Dr. Bernard McKenna of the National Education Association said, "There was recognition by medical authorities that left-handedness was normal and that tying the hand up in a child often caused stuttering." [ 28 ] In Japan, Tokyo psychiatrist Soichi Hakozaki coped with such deep-seated discrimination against left-handed people that he wrote The World of Left-Handers . Hakozaki reported finding situations in which women were afraid their husbands would divorce them for being left-handed.

[ 28 ] According to the aforementioned article, an official at the Japanese Embassy said that, before the war, there was discrimination against left-handers. "Children were not trained to use their left hand while eating or writing. I used to throw a baseball left-handed, but my grandparents wanted me to throw right-handed. I can throw either way. Today, in some local areas, discrimination may still remain, but on the whole, it seems to be over. There are many left-handers in Japan." [ 28 ] In a further article in The Washington Post of December 11, 1988, Richard M. Restak wrote that left-handedness has become more accepted and people have decided to leave southpaws alone and to stop working against left-handedness.

[ 27 ] In an article by The Gadsden Times from October 3, 1993, the newspaper mentioned a five-year-old named Daniel, writing, "the advantage that little Daniel does have of going to school in the '90s is that he will be allowed to be left-hander. That wasn't always the case in years past." [ 29 ] In a 1998 survey, 24 percent of younger-generation left-handed people reported some attempts to switch their handedness.

[ 30 ] In 1999, Swiss researchers took 1,700 Swiss adults ages 34–74 and divided them into age groups, with the youngest being 35–44 and the oldest being 65–74. The researchers found almost twice as many people in the youngest age group considered themselves left-handed when compared to the oldest age group. In addition, the incidence of the older group switching to their right hand for writing was more than triple that of the younger group.

[ 31 ] Researchers found that among the four age groups (35–44, 45–54, 55–64, and 65–74), the prevalence of left-handedness declined from 11.9% among 35 to 44 year olds and roughly 12.5% among 45 to 54 year olds to roughly 8% among 55 to 64 year olds and 6.2% among 65 to 74 year olds. Additionally, researchers found that only 26.6% of 35 to 44 year olds switched to right-handedness for writing and roughly 73% wrote with their left hand. Among 45 to 54 year olds, roughly 52% write with their right hand and roughly 48% write with their left hand. Roughly 85% of 55 to 64 year olds wrote with their right hand and roughly 15% of 55 to 64 year olds wrote with their left hand. 88.9% of 65 to 74 year olds wrote with their right hand while 11.1% wrote with their left hand.

[ 32 ] In the early 1990s, there was controversy among researchers over whether left-handed people die earlier or whether it is due or not due to fewer left-handed people among the elderly. The debate was controversial and researchers argued that left-handedness was less common among the elderly because some left-handed people might die in accidents or injuries due to using objects made for right-handed people. Researchers also argued that left-handed people were less common among elderly people because people in the earlier 20th century often were forced to become right-handed, a practice that disappeared in the late 20th century.

[ 33 ] In the late 20th century, many benefits were created for left-handed people in the United States: Specialty shops offering left-handed products appeared throughout the United States, and left-handed people could browse, in a counterclockwise direction if they wish, for such items as scissors and kitchen utensils. Additionally, public school and college purchasing agents specified that 10 percent of their desks are designed for left-handers.

[ 34 ] Equipment [ edit ] Left-handed (left) and right-handed scissors Because most people are right-handed, most everyday items are mass-produced for ease of use with the right hand. Tools, game equipment, musical instruments and other items must be specially ordered for left-handed use, if they are even produced and are usually more expensive than their right-handed counterparts. There are multiple specialty stores that sell only left-handed items.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Scissors [ edit ] Right-handed scissors are arranged so that, in the right hand, the fingers and thumb push the blades together laterally, creating the shearing action essential to scissors' utility. In the left hand, however, fingers and thumb tend to force right-handed blades apart, so that, rather than being sheared, the work-material is merely hacked, as by a knife, or slips between the blades uncut.

[ 37 ] Left-handers using right-handed scissors will often try to compensate by forcing the handles apart laterally, causing discomfort or injury to the first knuckle of the thumb.

[ 38 ] In addition, a right-handed person using right-handed scissors can easily see the cutting line, but for a left-handed user the upper blade obscures the view.

[ 39 ] Many scissors are offered as "ambidextrous" or "suitable for right- or left-handed use". Typically, these are merely right-handed scissors with modified handles to permit use in the left hand with less discomfort, but because the blades are still arranged for right-handed use, they still do not perform as well in the left hand.

[ 39 ] Computer input devices [ edit ] A right-handed trackball is difficult to use with the left hand.

Input devices for computers can present obstacles to left-handed operation if intended for right-handed use. Some computer set-ups have the mouse placed on the right side of the keyboard and unable to be repositioned to the left. The mouse itself is also sometimes shaped to fit the right hand better. The functions of mouse buttons, even on mice shaped to fit both hands, default to right-hand use. On two-button mice, the left button—under the index finger of a right-handed person—is the primary button, while the right button performs secondary functions. The on-screen pointers themselves are also configured for right-handed people. Most desktop operating systems allow a user to reverse the functionality of mouse buttons to accommodate left-handed use, but left-handed cursors sometimes need to be specially downloaded.

[ 40 ] Trackballs and touchpads are often shaped for right-handed use. Even with the ability to change the functionality of buttons, these devices may be difficult for left-handed use. For a left-handed person there are computer mice designed for left-handed use, but they are a much smaller segment of the marketplace.

[ 41 ] Frequently used keyboard shortcuts are designed to be used with the left hand on a QWERTY keyboard and requires, for left-handed mouse users, that the left hand be moved from the mouse to the keyboard and back. Examples of this are Undo (Ctrl/Command+Z), Cut (Ctrl/Command+X), Copy (Ctrl/Command+C) and Paste (Ctrl/Command+V).

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Some of these shortcuts have right-handed alternatives, such as Ctrl+Insert and Shift+Insert for copy and paste (on Windows systems). But for Cut the corresponding shortcut is Shift+Delete in all application except for Windows explorer itself where it is used to permanently delete a file.

On standard keyboards, the numpad for entry of numbers is located at the right side of the keyboard  making it hard to use for left handed users. Separate numpad keyboard that can be placed at the left side of the keyboard exist but are uncommon.

On public/shared computers (family, library, schools, shop floor, etc.) left-handed users are often forced to use the computer with a right-handed mouse.

Video game controllers often have the action buttons on the right with the directional controls on the left. In first-person shooters, many games default to the right pointer-finger being used to fire, simulating a right-handed person pulling the trigger of the weapon. Certain systems' layouts, such as Nintendo's Wii U and 3DS , have games in which right-handed stylus use is assumed and can cause difficulty for left-handed players.

[ 44 ] Knives [ edit ] Kitchen knives: (1) symmetrical, (2) right-handed, (3) left-handed. Cross sections seen from the handle.

European-style kitchen knives with smooth, rather than serrated, edge are usually ground symmetrically; Japanese kitchen knives have the edge ground asymmetrically, with the cutting edge closer to the user's body [ citation needed ] with ratios [ clarification needed ] ranging from 70 to 30 for the average chef's knife, to 90–10 for professional sushi chef knives, biased for a right-handed user; left-handed models are rare; they can be specially ordered or custom made, or reground.

[ 45 ] Sports [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A left-handed individual may be known as a southpaw, [ 46 ] particularly in a sports context. It is widely accepted that the term originated in the United States, in the game of baseball .

[ 47 ] Ballparks are often designed so that batters are facing east, so that the afternoon or evening sun does not shine in their eyes.

[ 48 ] This means that left-handed pitchers are throwing with their south-side arm.

[ 49 ] The Oxford English Dictionary lists a non-baseball citation for "south paw", meaning a punch with the left hand, as early as 1848, [ 50 ] just three years after the first organized baseball game, with the note "(orig. U.S., in Baseball)".

A left-handed advantage in sports can be significant and even decisive, but this advantage usually results from a left-handed competitor's unshared familiarity with opposite-handed opponents. Baseball is an exception since batters, pitchers, and fielders in certain scenarios are physically advantaged or disadvantaged by their handedness. Unlike in most sports, where action occurs in a two-dimensional plane without regard to handedness, runners in baseball move around the bases counterclockwise (always turning to their left). This means that, in most infield situations, fielders can throw naturally across their body from the right hand but need to take extra time to move into a correct position to throw left-handed. Thus, there is a distinct disadvantage to throwing left-handed from the second base, shortstop, third base, or catcher's positions, and a slight advantage to being left-handed at first base. Conversely, being left-handed as a batter is an advantage as long as most pitchers are right-handed, because most breaking pitches move away from the pitcher's dominant hand, and opposite-handed batting neutralizes this advantage.

[ original research?

] Some baseball players, such as Christian Yelich of the Milwaukee Brewers , maximize these efficiencies by batting left-handed and throwing right-handed.

[ 51 ] Natural right-handers who learn in childhood to bat left-handed make up a substantial portion of all professional baseball players and nearly a third of all hitters named to all-star teams.

The game of golf is most commonly played right-handed, and left-handed players typically must provide their own special golf clubs .

[ 10 ] The game can be played with both hands, provided the player has both left- and right-handed clubs, giving an advantage over one-handed players. Professional golfer Phil Mickelson plays left-handed, although he is naturally right-handed.

[ 52 ] Playing cards often have their pips printed only in the upper left corner assuming holding them with the right hand. Such design may be uncomfortable for left-handed people who may prefer all four corners of the card to be used.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] In snooker, when Ronnie O'Sullivan played with his left hand in the 1996 World Championship against Alain Robidoux , the Canadian accused him of disrespect and refused to shake hands after the match.

[ 55 ] A disciplinary hearing was held, at which O'Sullivan was asked to show he could play left-handed at a professional level.

[ 56 ] Machinery [ edit ] Power tools , machinery and other potentially dangerous equipment is typically manufactured with the right-handed user in mind. Common problems faced by left-handed operators include the inability to keep materials steady, and difficulty reaching the on/off switch, especially in emergency situations.

[ 2 ] Table saws , whose blades protrude from the top of a table and pose the risk of losing fingers or hands, have their cutting area on the right side. This makes it difficult for a left-handed operator to guide the material being cut, as it must be pushed to the right side to align with the fence to avoid kickback. On bandsaws , the blade teeth are on the left side of the blade, necessitating the material being cut to be pushed from the left side of the machine. However, at this angle, the casing of the machine containing the rest of the blade is on the operator's left side, making it extremely difficult to guide the wood with their left hand.

Handheld circular saws are made almost exclusively for right-handers, with the motor and grip on the right side. If held in the left hand, it is impossible for the operator to see what they are cutting. Tool manufacturer Porter-Cable produces a left-handed circular saw that can be purchased relatively inexpensively.

[ 2 ] Left-handed Remington 700 rifle action—note that the bolt handle is not visible from this side.

A table saw . Notice how the cutting surface, fence, etc. are on the right side.

Language [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bias against left-handed people" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vocabulary [ edit ] Ancient languages [ edit ] Historically, the left side, and subsequently left-handedness, was considered negative. The word left itself derives from the Anglo-Saxon word lyft , 'weak'.

[ 57 ] In Ancient Greek both words meaning 'left' were euphemisms : the word ἀριστερός , aristerós (the standard word in Modern Greek as well) is derived from ἄριστος , áristos , 'best', and the word εὺώνυμος , euōnymos , 'of good name', is another euphemism used in lieu of 'ill-named'. The Latin adjective sinister originally meant 'left' but took on meanings of 'evil' or 'unlucky' by the Classical Latin era, and this double meaning survives in European derivatives of Latin , and in the English word sinister . Alternatively, sinister comes from the Latin word sinus meaning 'pocket': a traditional Roman toga had only one pocket, located on the left side. The right hand has historically been associated with skill: the Latin word for right-handed is dexter , as in 'dexterity', meaning manual skill. These words continue to be used in describing the points of an escutcheon (heraldry) where the right side of a field is referred to as dexter while the left side is sinister . Even the word ambidexterity reflects the bias . Its intended meaning is "skillful on both sides". However, since it keeps the Latin root dexter , which means 'right', it ends up conveying the idea of being "right-handed on both sides". This bias is also apparent in the lesser-known antonym ambisinistrous , which means 'left-handed [i.e., clumsy] on both sides'.

[ 58 ] European languages [ edit ] In many modern European languages, including English, the word for the direction right also means 'correct' or 'proper', and also stands for authority and justice. In more technical contexts, sinistral may be used in place of left-handed and sinistrality in place of left-handedness .

[ 59 ] In French, droit(e) ( cognate to English direct ) means both 'right' and 'straight', as well as 'law' and the legal sense of 'right', while gauche means 'left' and is also a synonym of maladroit , literally 'not right', meaning 'clumsy'. Spanish, Italian, Portuguese and German have similar constructs. The Spanish term diestro and the Italian term destro mean both 'right-handed' and 'skillful'. The contemporary Italian word sinistra has both meanings of 'sinister' and 'left' (the masculine adjective for sinister being sinistro ), and maldestro means 'clumsy'. The Spanish siniestra has both, too, although the 'left' meaning is less common and is usually expressed by izquierda , [ 60 ] a Basque word that made its way into Portuguese as well. In some Spanish-speaking countries, to do something por izquierda means to engage in corrupt conduct or employ illegitimate means, whereas por derecha or a derechas means to do it the right (legitimate) way.

[ 61 ] In Romanian drept/dreaptă (coming from Latin directus ) means both 'right' and 'straight'. The word for 'left' is stâng/stângă , from Latin stancus (= stanticus ) meaning 'tired'.

[ 62 ] In German, recht means 'right' in both the adjectival sense (correct) and the nominal (legal entitlement). The word for 'left' is links , and is closely related to both link 'underhand, questionable', and linkisch 'clumsy'.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] The Dutch words for 'left' ( links, linker ) and 'right' ( recht, rechts, rechter ) have much the same meanings and connotations as in English. The adjective link means 'cunning, shifty' or 'risky'. A linkerd is a 'crafty devil'. To look at someone over the left shoulder ( iemand over de linkerschouder aanzien ) is to regard him or her as insignificant.

[ 65 ] In Irish, deas means 'right side' and 'nice'.

Ciotóg is the left hand and is related to ciotach , 'awkward'; [ 66 ] ciotógach (kyut-OH-goch) is the term for left-handed. In Welsh, the word chwith means 'left', but can also mean 'strange', 'awkward', or 'wrong'. The Scots term for left-handedness is corrie fistit . The term can be used to convey clumsiness.

Asian languages [ edit ] In Chinese culture, the adjective 'left' ( Chinese character : 左 , Mandarin : zuǒ ) sometimes means 'improper' or 'out of accord'. For instance, the phrase 'left path' ( 左 道 , zuǒdào ) stands for unorthodox or immoral means.

In Korean, the word for 'right' is oreun ( 오른 ), to be compared to the word meaning 'morally proper', orheun ( 옳은 ), which shares the same pronunciation.

[ 67 ] The word for 'left' is oen ( 왼 ), which comes from oeda ( 외다 ), which means 'left and right reversed, twisted(of mind)', also 'wrong' in Middle Korean.

In Sanskrit, the word वाम , vāma stands for 'left', 'wicked', 'north' and 'opposite'.

In Hindi, left hand is called बायां हाथ code: hin promoted to code: hi , bayā haath code: hin promoted to code: hi .
In Hebrew, as well as in other ancient Semitic and Mesopotamian languages, the term 'left' was a symbol of power or custody.

[ 68 ] There were also examples of left-handed assassins in the Old Testament (Ehud killing the Moabite king). The left hand symbolized the power to shame society, and was used as a metaphor for misfortune, natural evil , or punishment from the gods. This metaphor survived ancient culture and was integrated into mainstream Christianity by early Catholic theologians , such as Ambrose of Milan , [ 69 ] to modern Protestant theologians, such as Karl Barth , [ 70 ] to attribute natural evil to God in explaining God's omnipotence over the universe.

Australian Aboriginal languages [ edit ] In the Eastern Arrernte , arratye means 'right' (as in akwe-arratye , 'right hand') as well as 'correct', 'real', 'straight' or 'true'.

[ 71 ] In Alyawarr , arraty shares the same meanings as its Eastern Arrernte equivalent (as in arraty-angkwarr , 'right hand' and arraty-antey , 'right way').

[ 72 ] In Gurindji , jutu means 'right', 'right hand' and 'straight'. It is also the root word for jutumparra , which means both 'right-handed' and 'straight'.

[ 73 ] In Tiwi , palinganyini (feminine: palinganyinga ) means 'left-handed', but it can also be used to mean 'incorrect' (although jirti is a much more common term meaning 'bad' or 'incorrect').

[ 74 ] In Walmajarri , the word for 'right hand' is mayakarti , which literally translates to 'strong side', while the word for 'left hand' is jampukarti , which literally translates to 'weak side'.

[ 75 ] In Warlpiri , junga and yijardu both mean 'right' as well as 'actual', 'correct', 'straight' and 'true'.

[ 76 ] In the Yolŋu languages , one word is used to mean 'right' or 'right hand' as well as 'correct', 'immediate', 'straight' and 'vertical'. The only difference is the spelling of the words: dhunupa in Djambarrpuyŋu , junupa in Djinang , [ 77 ] and dhunupa in Golpa .

[ 78 ] Expressions and colloquialisms [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The left side is often associated with awkwardness and clumsiness. The Spanish expression tener dos pies izquierdos , in English, the expression "to have two left feet", refers to clumsiness in the domains of football or dancing. A "left-handed compliment" is considered one that is unflattering or dismissive in meaning. The Polish expression mieć dwie lewe ręce , Dutch twee linkerhanden hebben , German zwei linke Hände haben , Bulgarian dve levi ratse , French avoir deux mains gauches , Italian avere due mani sinistre , Hungarian kétbalkezes and Czech Mít obě ruce levé all mean 'to have two left hands'—that one is clumsy or is a very poor handyman; the English equivalent is 'to be all thumbs'. Moreover, the German idiom mit dem linken Fuß aufgestanden sein , the Spanish expression levantarse con el pie izquierdo , the French expression s'être levé du pied gauche , the Polish expression wstać lewą nogą and the Hungarian expression bal lábbal kelt fel (literally, 'to get up with the left foot') mean 'to have a bad day and do everything wrong or unsuccessfully', related to the English expression "to get up on the wrong side of the bed". The Welsh phrase tu chwith allan and the Polish expression na lewą stronę ('left side out') refers to an object being inside-out.

[ 79 ] In Russian and Polish, the use of the term nalyevo ( na lewo in Polish) means 'on the left', but can also connote taking bribes or "sneaky" behavior.

Balszerencse ( lit.

' left luck ' ) is Hungarian for 'bad luck'; balkézről született [person] ( lit.

' born from the left hand ' ) refers to an illegitimate child. In Hindi, the term left hand's play ( Hindi : बाएँ हाथ का खेल , romanized : Bāēṁ hātha kā khēla ) refers to a task that someone has perfected enough to perform with ease, implying the task is so easy, the person can perform it with the untrained hand.

[ 80 ] There are many colloquial terms used to refer to a left-handed person, e.g.

southpaw (USA). Some are just slang or jargon words, while other references may be offensive or demeaning, either in context or in origin. In some parts of the English-speaking world, cack-handed is slang for 'left-handed', and is also used to mean 'clumsy'. The origin of this term is disputed, but some suggest it is derived from the Latin cacare , in reference to the habit of performing ablutions with the left hand, leaving the right hand "clean".

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] However, other sources suggest that it is derived from the Old Norse word keikr , meaning 'bent backwards'.

[ 83 ] British people frequently use cack-handed to mean 'clumsy', although it also means 'left-handed'.

[ 84 ] Civic life [ edit ] Schooling [ edit ] Because most students in public schools are right-handed, most commonly used implements are designed for right-handers, from pencil sharpeners to scissors to desks . The consequences to left-handed students can vary from decreased academic performance or physical ailments to nothing at all.

[ 85 ] In many classrooms and lecture halls , desks are designed so that the writing surface is attached to the chair instead of separate from it. In this design, the desk is attached on the right side, offering an armrest for right-handed people to use while writing. In some of these desks, the writing surface does not extend fully to the left, necessitating a left-handed user to turn their body in order to write properly, sometimes causing back, neck and shoulder problems.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] This contorted posture may also cause the student to be accused of cheating .

[ 87 ] This right-handed bias is reflected in standardized tests as well.

Multiple-choice tests tend to put the question on the left side of the page and the answers on the right side. If the answers must be filled in within a separate booklet, it can be awkward and uncomfortable for a left-handed student to line up the booklet with the answers. The time it takes to find a comfortable, convenient position cuts into test-taking time, resulting in rushed answers and unchecked work.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] The authors Ardila, Alfredo and Rosselli, Diego in their article "Handedness in Colombia: Some associated conditions" claims, "Attending school results in a significant social pressure to use the right hand, not only in writing but also in other activities." [ 88 ] Employment [ edit ] In research done on the relations of handedness and employment, researchers may start their experiments believing left-handers earn lower wages than their right-handed counterparts, due to effects such as difficulty using right-handed tools and increased risk of illness.

[ 89 ] [ failed verification ] However, their findings are more complex. In studies in the United States and United Kingdom, it was found that left-handed men earn more than right-handed men; about 5% more in the UK. Conversely, left-handed women earn about 7.5% less than right-handed women.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] During the residency period in operation theatres, right-handed surgeons may be irritated by left-handed residents, and left-handed residents have lower performance scoring compared to their right-handed counterparts.

[ 91 ] See also [ edit ] Cross-dominance Footedness Laterality Ocular dominance (eyedness) Edinburgh Handedness Inventory Geschwind–Galaburda hypothesis Handedness and mathematical ability Musicians who play left-handed Situs inversus Southpaw stance (boxing) Handedness and sexual orientation References [ edit ] ^ Hardyck C, Petrinovich LF (1977). "Left-handedness".

Psychol Bull .

84 (3): 385– 404.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.84.3.385 .

PMID 859955 .

^ a b c "Finding Power Tools for Left Handed People" . Great Home Improvements. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011 . Retrieved January 14, 2011 .

^ a b Sato, Susumu; Demura, Shinichi; Sugano, Noriaki; Mikami, Hajime; Ohuchi, Tetsuhiko (2008).

"Characteristics of Handedness in Japanese Adults: Influence of Left-handed Relatives and Forced Conversion" .

International Journal of Sport and Health Science .

6 : 113– 9.

doi : 10.5432/ijshs.IJSHS20070298 .

^ Beer, Robert (2004).

The Encyclopedia of Tibetan Symbols and Motifs . Serindia Publications, Incorporated. p. 150.

ISBN 978-1-93247-610-1 .

^ "Sinistro" (in Italian).

^ Coren, Stanley (1990).

Left-handedness: behavioral implications and anomalies . Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.

ISBN 978-0-444-88438-1 .

^ Muhammad Saed Abdul-Rahman (2007).

Islam: Questions and Answers – Manners (Part 1) . London: MSA Publication Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-86179-336-2 .

OCLC 58477120 .

^ Evans, Dave (2007).

The History of British Magick after Crowley . Hidden Publishing.

^ Dolan, T. P. (2004).

"left-footer" .

A Dictionary of Hiberno-English: The Irish Use of English . Gill & Macmillan Ltd. p. 139.

ISBN 9780717135356 . Retrieved December 7, 2016 .

; "Notes and Queries: Where does the phrase 'left footer' come from?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved December 7, 2016 .

; Mencken, Henry Louis (1962).

The American language . A. A.Knopf. p.

745 .

; Partridge, Eric (May 2, 2006).

"left-footer" .

A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English . Vol. 142. Routledge. p. 674.

Bibcode : 1938Natur.142.1095F .

doi : 10.1038/1421095a0 .

ISBN 9781134963652 .

S2CID 4116274 . Retrieved December 7, 2016 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Wilson, Sir Daniel (1891).

The right hand: left-handedness . London: MacMillan and Co.

ISBN 978-0-665-25982-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Kita, S.; Essegbey, J. (2001). "Pointing left in Ghana: How a taboo on the use of the left hand influences gestural practice".

Gesture .

1 (1): 73– 95.

doi : 10.1075/gest.1.1.06kit .

^ Orton, S.T (1937).

Reading, writing, and speech problems in children . Vol. 141. London: Chapman and Hall. p. 997.

Bibcode : 1938Natur.141S.997.

.

doi : 10.1038/141997c0 .

ISBN 978-0-89079-179-0 .

PMC 5105521 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ; |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Lewis, Ruth (May 1949).

"The psychological approach to the preschool stutterer" .

Can Med Assoc J .

60 (5): 497– 500.

PMC 1591462 .

PMID 18125462 .

^ Bryngelson, Bryng; Clark, Thomas B. (1933).

"LEFT-HANDEDNESS AND STUTTERING" (PDF) .

The Journal of Heredity .

24 (10): 387– 390 . Retrieved January 3, 2011 .

[ dead link ] ^ Johnson, W. & L. Duke (1935). "Changes in handedness associated with onset or disappearance of stuttering; sixteen cases".

Journal of Experimental Education .

4 : 112– 132.

doi : 10.1080/00220973.1935.11010003 .

^ Ballard, PB (1912). "Sinistrality and speech".

Journal of Experimental Pediatrics .

1 : 298– 310.

^ Porac, C; Buller, T (1990). "Overt attempts to change hand preference: a study of group and individual characteristics".

Canadian Journal of Psychology .

44 (4): 512– 21.

doi : 10.1037/h0084268 .

PMID 2292088 .

^ Kloppel, S.; Vongerichten, A.; Eimeren, T. v.; Frackowiak, R. S. J.; Siebner, H. R. (2007).

"Can Left-Handedness be Switched? Insights from an Early Switch of Handwriting" .

Journal of Neuroscience .

27 (29): 7847– 53.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1299-07.2007 .

PMC 6672868 .

PMID 17634378 .

^ "Left-Handers Day: Amazing facts about lefties" . BBC. August 13, 2022.

^ Meng, LF (2007). "The rate of handedness conversion and related factors in left-handed children".

Laterality .

12 (2): 131– 8.

doi : 10.1080/13576500601005727 .

PMID 17365629 .

S2CID 26902219 .

^ Zverev, YP (2006). "Cultural and environmental pressure against left-hand preference in urban and semi-urban Malawi".

Brain and Cognition .

60 (3): 295– 303.

doi : 10.1016/j.bandc.2005.07.008 .

PMID 16481084 .

S2CID 42534615 .

^ А. П. Чуприков, В. Д. Мишиев. // Латеральность населения СССР в конце 70-х и начале 80-х годов. К истории латеральной нейропсихологии и нейропсихиатрии. Хрестоматия. Донецк, 2010, 192 с.

^ А. П. Чуприков, Е. А. Волков. // Мир леворуких. Киев. 2008.

^ "Search Programmes" .

EERA . Retrieved June 24, 2019 .

^ Kushner, Howard I. (2011).

"Retraining the King's left hand" .

The Lancet .

377 (9782): 1998– 1999.

doi : 10.1016/s0140-6736(11)60854-4 .

PMID 21671515 .

S2CID 35750495 .

^ a b "New Day Dawns For Southpaws" .

The Florence Times—Tri-Cities Daily . March 8, 1971. p. 4 . Retrieved June 22, 2018 .

^ a b Restak, Richard M. (December 11, 1988).

"Do We Want a Left-Handed President?" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 22, 2018 .

^ a b c d e Tracy, Lisa (August 13, 1979).

"On the Other Hand, Consider Who's Left" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 22, 2018 .

^ Pritchett, Leigh Bailey (October 3, 1993). "Southpaws tough it out in a right-handed world".

The Gadsden Times . pp. D8.

^ Roth, Melissa (July 25, 2005).

The Left Stuff: How the Left-Handed Have Survived and Thrived in a Right-Handed World that left handed people find hard to cope in . Government Institutes. p. 18.

ISBN 9781590771518 .

^ Swint, Sean (December 7, 1999).

"Elderly 'Lefties' May Still Feel Need to Switch to Right Hand" .

WebMD . Retrieved December 22, 2020 .

^ B Galobardes, M S Bernstein, and A MorabiaDivision of Clinical Epidemiology, University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland. bruna.galobardes@hcuge.ch "The association between switching hand preference and the declining prevalence of left-handedness with age.", American Journal of Public Health 89, no. 12 (December 1, 1999): pp. 1873-1875.

^ Hugdahl, Kenneth; Satz, Paul; Mitrushina, Maura; Miller, Eric N. (1993). "Left-Handedness and Old Age: Do Left-Handers Die Earlier?".

Neuropsychologia .

31 (4). Pergamon Press Ltd: 325– 333.

doi : 10.1016/0028-3932(93)90156-T .

PMID 8502368 .

S2CID 33623714 .

^ Ecenbarger, William (July 21, 1991).

"It's Not Right!" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved December 23, 2020 .

^ Anything Left Handed ^ Lefty's - The Left-Hand Store ^ "Lefthanded scissors explained" . dailymotion.com (video). December 2006.

^ "How Scissors are Left-Handed" .

Anything Left-Handed . Anything Left-Handed Ltd. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013 . Retrieved October 30, 2013 .

^ a b "Left-Handed Products" . Lefthandersday.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013 . Retrieved October 30, 2013 .

^ "Make Your Mouse Pointers Left-hand Friendly" . How-To Geek. April 30, 2010. Archived from the original on May 3, 2010 . Retrieved January 7, 2011 .

^ "Best Left Handed Mouse Rankings" . Ergonomically Speaking. April 27, 2020. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016 . Retrieved July 1, 2016 .

^ "Keyboard shortcuts in Windows" .

support.microsoft.com . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

^ "Mac keyboard shortcuts" .

Apple Support . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

^ "Shigeru Miyamoto Hears this Left-Handed Gamer's Pain" . Kotaku. June 17, 2014.

^ "How to Succeed at Knife-Sharpening Without Losing a Thumb" .

New York Times . September 23, 2006 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ 'What is a southpaw? ' https://www.sportsnhobbies.org/what-is-a-southpaw.htm ^ "Southpaws: Doing It Right the Wrong Way" . fightbeat.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2007.

^ "Rules of Major League Baseball, Section 1.04" (PDF) .

MLB.com .

^ Olmert, Michael (1996).

Milton's Teeth and Ovid's Umbrella: Curiouser & Curiouser Adventures in History . New York: Simon & Schuster. p.

108 .

ISBN 978-0-684-80164-3 .

^ Morris, Evan (1995).

"Word detective research" .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2006.

^ Rosiak, Todd.

"Right field: Christian Yelich's defensive versatility will be tested" .

Journal Sentinel . The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel . Retrieved October 1, 2018 .

^ "Personal section of PGA Tour official media guide" . PGA Tour. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011.

^ "Lefty's "Always right" double deck of playing cards" .

^ "Sinister Deck: The Left-Handed Card Deck With Famous Lefties" . November 19, 2023.

^ "Anger over left-leaning O'Sullivan" .

The Independent . April 22, 1996.

Archived from the original on May 1, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

^ "Bad breaks mount up for a troubled soul" .

The Independent . December 15, 2006.

Archived from the original on May 1, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2022 .

^ Minderovic, Zoran (1998).

"Encyclopedia of Childhood and Adolescence" (PDF) . Gale Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 25, 2011 . Retrieved January 19, 2011 .

^ "Ambisinistrous" . YourDictionary.com. Archived from the original on May 26, 2007 . Retrieved November 28, 2003 .

^ "Sinistral" . YourDictionary.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011.

^ "Etimología de izquierda" (in Spanish). deChile.com.

Archived from the original on June 19, 2006.

^ "Word Reference" . February 26, 2009.

^ "stanga - definiție - dexonline" .

^ Clark, M., ed. (2008).

Oxford German Dictionary . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-954568-1 .

^ Die Deutsche Sprache , "link" (Berlin: Duden 2013).

^ W. Martin and G. A. J. Tops, eds., Van Dale groot woordenboek Nederlands-Engels , 2d ed. (Utrecht, Antwerp: Van Dale, 1991).

^ "My Left Foot" . The Kingdom. July 24, 2003. Archived from the original on May 23, 2007.

^ YBM, Korea (2002).

Si-sa Elite Korean-English Dictionary .

ISBN 978-89-17-07460-4 .

^ Hamilton, Jeffries (1992).

Social Justice and Deuteronomy: the Case of Deuteronomy 15 . Atlanta: Scholar's Press. p. 145.

ISBN 978-1-55540-748-3 .

^ Ambrose of Milan: political letters and speeches / translated with an introduction and notes by J. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz . Liverpool, England: Liverpool University Press. 2005.

ISBN 978-0-85323-829-4 .

^ Ruether, Rosemary Radford (1968–1969). "The Left Hand of God in the Theology of Karl Barth—Karl Barth as a Mythopoeic Theologian".

The Journal of Religious Thought .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ "Learners' Wordlist of Eastern & Central Arrernte" .

^ "English - Alyawarr" .

^ "English - Gurindji" .

^ "English - Tiwi" .

^ "English - Walmajarri" .

^ "English - Warlpiri" .

^ "English - Djinang" .

^ "English - Golpa" .

^ "Geiriadur Prifysgol Cymru" (PDF) . p. 1735 . Retrieved July 28, 2008 .

^ "बाएँ हाथ का खेल (Baen hath ka khel) meaning in English - बाएँ हाथ का खेल मीनिंग - Translation" .

dict.hinkhoj.com . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ "Cack-handed" . world wide words.

^ "Definition of "cack-handed" " . The Free Dictionary.

^ "Cack-handed" . Merriam Webster Dictionary.

^ "Definition of CACK-HANDED" .

^ a b c Flower, Mei (July 28, 2005).

"Left Over, Left Out, Left Behind: The Daily Discrimination against Left-Handed Students" . blog critics. Archived from the original on February 2, 2011 . Retrieved January 6, 2011 .

^ a b "Common school problems" . gauche! Left-Handers in Society. Archived from the original on December 12, 2010 . Retrieved January 19, 2011 .

^ "School desk plague" . gauche! Left-Handers in Society.

Archived from the original on December 12, 2010 . Retrieved January 19, 2011 .

^ Ardila, Alfredo; Rosselli, Diego (January 2001).

"Handedness in Colombia: Some associated conditions" .

Laterality .

6 (1): 77– 87.

doi : 10.1080/713754398 .

PMID 15513161 .

S2CID 37340302 .

^ a b Waldfogel, Joel (August 16, 2006).

"Sinister and Rich: The evidence that lefties earn more" . Slate.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2010 . Retrieved January 19, 2010 .

^ Denny, Kevin; O'Sullivan, Vincent (July 2, 2004).

"The Economic Consequences of being Left-handed: Some Sinister Results" (PDF) . University College Dublin . Retrieved January 3, 2010 .

^ Zaghloul, Mohamed S.; Saquib, Juliann; Al-Mazrou, Abdulrahman; Saquib, Nazmus (January 2, 2018).

"A Qualitative assessment of the impact of handedness among left-handed surgeons in Saudi Arabia" .

Laterality .

23 (1): 39– 50.

doi : 10.1080/1357650X.2017.1309049 .

PMID 28363266 .

S2CID 11919889 .

External links [ edit ] Left Handers Club Handedness Research Institute v t e Handedness Types Right handedness Left-handedness Cross-dominance Ambidexterity Development Neuroanatomy of handedness Twins and handedness Effects Handedness and sexual orientation Handedness and mathematical ability Bias against left-handed people Related Edinburgh Handedness Inventory Laterality Footedness Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bias_against_left-handed_people&oldid=1298504589 " Categories : Handedness Prejudice and discrimination by type Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2021 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: requires URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2022 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2012 Articles that may contain original research from February 2022 All articles that may contain original research Articles with weasel words from February 2022 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles that may contain original research from July 2025 Articles needing additional references from February 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Romanian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Mandarin Chinese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Hindi-language text Lang and lang-xx code promoted to ISO 639-1 Articles containing Eastern Arrernte-language text Articles containing Alyawarr-language text Articles containing Gurindji-language text Articles containing Tiwi-language text Articles containing Walmajarri-language text Articles containing Warlpiri-language text Articles containing Djambarrpuyngu-language text Articles containing Djinang-language text Articles containing Golpa-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2014 Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from April 2013 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 22:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bias against left-handed people 4 languages Add topic

