Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Radio 2 Other methods 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Interstellar communication 9 languages العربية Беларуская Español Français Italiano עברית Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Communication between planetary systems Interstellar communication is the transmission of signals between planetary systems . Sending interstellar messages is potentially much easier than interstellar travel , being possible with technologies and equipment which are currently available. However, the distances from Earth to other potentially inhabited systems introduce prohibitive delays, assuming the limitations of the speed of light . Even an immediate reply to radio communications sent to stars tens of thousands of light-years away would take many human generations to arrive.

Radio [ edit ] The SETI project has for the past several decades been conducting a search for signals being transmitted by extraterrestrial life located outside the Solar System , primarily in the radio frequencies of the electromagnetic spectrum . Special attention has been given to the Water Hole , the frequency of one of neutral hydrogen 's absorption lines, due to the low background noise at this frequency and its symbolic association with the basis for what is likely to be the most common system of biochemistry (but see alternative biochemistry ).

The regular radio pulses emitted by pulsars were briefly thought to be potential intelligent signals; the first pulsar to be discovered was originally designated "LGM-1", for "Little Green Men." They were quickly determined to be of natural origin, however.

Several attempts have been made to transmit signals to other stars as well. (See "Realized projects" at Active SETI .) One of the earliest and most famous was the 1974 radio message sent from the largest radio telescope in the world, the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. An extremely simple message was aimed at a globular cluster of stars known as M13 in the Milky Way Galaxy and at a distance of 30,000 light years from the Solar System. These efforts have been more symbolic than anything else, however.

[ citation needed ] Further, a possible answer needs double the travel time , i.e. tens of years (near stars) or 60,000 years (M13).

Other methods [ edit ] NASA's Vision Mission for the Innovative Interstellar Explorer considered using optical-laser communication, as did the 1980s era TAU probe It has also been proposed that higher frequency signals, such as lasers operating at visible light frequencies, may prove to be a fruitful method of interstellar communication; at a given frequency it takes surprisingly small energy output for a laser emitter to outshine its local star from the perspective of its target.

[ citation needed ] Other more exotic methods of communication have been proposed, such as modulated neutrino or gravitational wave emissions. These would have the advantage of being essentially immune to interference by intervening matter.

Sending physical mail packets between stars may prove to be optimal for many applications.

[ 1 ] While mail packets would likely be limited to speeds far below that of electromagnetic or other light-speed signals (resulting in very high latency ), the amount of information that could be encoded in only a few tons of physical matter could more than make up for it in terms of average bandwidth . The possibility of using interstellar messenger probes for interstellar communication — known as Bracewell probes — was first suggested by Ronald N. Bracewell in 1960, and the technical feasibility of this approach was demonstrated by the British Interplanetary Society's starship study Project Daedalus in 1978.  Starting in 1979, Robert Freitas advanced arguments [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] for the proposition that physical space-probes provide a superior mode of interstellar communication to radio signals, then undertook telescopic searches for such probes in 1979 [ 4 ] and 1982.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Interplanetary Internet List of interstellar radio messages Universal translator Gravitational lens References [ edit ] ^ a b Freitas, Robert A. Jr. (1980).

"Interstellar Probes: A New Approach To SETI" .

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

33 : 95– 100.

Bibcode : 1980JBIS...33...95F .

^ Freitas, Robert A. Jr. (July–August 1983).

"Debunking the Myths of Interstellar Probes" .

AstroSearch .

1 : 8– 9.

^ Freitas, Robert A. Jr. (November 1983).

"The Case for Interstellar Probes" .

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

36 : 490– 495.

Bibcode : 1983JBIS...36..490F .

^ Freitas, Robert A. Jr.; Francisco Valdes (1980).

"A Search for Natural or Artificial Objects Located at the Earth-Moon Libration Points" .

Icarus .

42 (3): 442– 447.

Bibcode : 1980Icar...42..442F .

doi : 10.1016/0019-1035(80)90106-2 .

^ Valdes, Francisco; Robert A. Freitas Jr. (1983).

"A Search for Objects near the Earth-Moon Lagrangian Points" .

Icarus .

53 (3): 453– 457.

Bibcode : 1983Icar...53..453V .

doi : 10.1016/0019-1035(83)90209-9 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Interstellar communication at Wikimedia Commons v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e Interstellar communications Programs Active SETI Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Messages List of interstellar radio messages A Message from Earth Across the Universe Arecibo message Bracewell probe Cosmic Call CosmicOS Hello from Earth Pioneer plaque Teen Age Message Voyager Golden Record People Frank Drake Ann Druyan Hans Freudenthal Sebastian von Hoerner Nikolai Kardashev Jon Lomberg Carl Sagan Linda Salzman Sagan Iosif Shklovsky Aleksandr Zaitsev Other Alien language Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication Astrobiology Astrolinguistics Drake equation Extraterrestrial life Lincos Fermi paradox Prix Guzman San Marino Scale Category Space Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Interstellar_communication&oldid=1292251358 " Categories : Interstellar communication Science fiction themes Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Interstellar messages Telecommunications Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2008 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 00:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Interstellar communication 9 languages Add topic

