Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legacy 2 See also Toggle See also subsection 2.1 Related lists 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Rock Against Sexism 3 languages বাংলা Deutsch 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Activist group in the UK and US Rock Against Sexism Rock Against Sexism badge made by RAS Boston - 1980s Genre Punk rock , protest art , etc.

Location(s) UK , North America Years active 1978– Rock Against Sexism ( RAS ) was a political and cultural movement dedicated to promoting women in music, [ 1 ] and challenging sexism in the rock music community, pop culture and in the world at large.  It was primarily a part of the punk rock music and arts scene.

[ 2 ] RAS began in the UK in 1978, and by the mid-1980s also had a presence in North America .  It was strongly inspired and influenced by Rock Against Racism and the two movements had many of the same participants.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In the UK, it began amid controversy when rock and reggae shows hired bands that some participants in the scene felt were misogynist , and amid growing complaints that women musicians were expected to "flaunt their bodies, both in performances and adverts".

[ 4 ] This resulted in community discussions of sexism in music and art, which were not always taken seriously by the established music press.

[ 6 ] However, prominent Rock Against Racism organizers saw RAS as a "sister-organisation" and the two groups supported each other.

[ 4 ] In the US, Rock Against Sexism, centered in Boston , was an activist group of "artists, musicians, and others who sought to fight sexism and heterosexism in rock culture by promoting women musicians and alternatives to mainstream rock music." [ 2 ] [ 7 ] They sponsored local punk shows and radio shows, published a zine , organized protests and marched together as a contingent in larger events such as Boston and New York City gay pride .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The group hosted a monthly dance party at a local gay bar and benefits for the HIV/AIDS activist group ACT UP .

[ 10 ] Legacy [ edit ] Rock Against Sexism, in both the UK and US, promoted punk rock, performance art , art installations, and other community events by women and members of the LGBT community.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In the US, the Boston chapter held music workshops for women wanting to learn to play and start bands; "RAS prefigured the riot grrrl movement, giving women more access to punk subculture." [ 7 ] Both movements challenged heterosexism , homophobia , sexism and elitism , while confronting stereotypes of women and LGBT people.

[ 2 ] [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Punk ideology Queercore Women in punk rock Women in rock Women Who Rock: Making Scenes, Building Communities Oral History Archive Related lists [ edit ] Lists of women in music List of punk rock festivals List of historic rock festivals List of heavy metal festivals References [ edit ] ^ a b "Blast From the Past: The Petticoats" .

Maximumrocknroll . 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ a b c d "Rock Against Sexism at the Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America - Musicians" .

Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study , Harvard University . 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ "Mary Quaile Club presents Rock Against Sexism: I was there" .

Salford Star . 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ a b c Renton, David (2018).

Never Again - Rock Against Racism and the Anti-Nazi League 1976-1982 .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9781351383905 .

^ Bangs, Lester (1988).

Marcus, Greil (ed.).

Psychotic Reactions and Carburetor Dung: The Work of a Legendary Critic: Rock 'n' Roll as Literature and Literature as Rock 'n' Roll .

Anchor Press . p. 282.

ISBN 0-679-72045-6 .

Note: Original essay that mentions RAR and RAS is from April, 1979.

^ "No Fun!" .

www.punk77.co.uk . 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ a b c "Rock Against Sexism Records at the Feminist Movements collections, 1880s to the Present, at the Sallie Bingham Center for Women's History and Culture in the Rubenstein Library" .

Third Wave Archival Collections - Duke University Libraries . 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ Rock Against Sexism records, circa 1981-1994 and n.d. Rock against Sexism (Group : Boston, Mass.) Archival and manuscript material . Third Wave Archival Collections - Duke University Libraries . 24 March 2021.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ DeCosta, Tess (1991). "Queer Nation: Ladies First?".

Rock Against Sexism . Boston.

^ "Rock Against Sexism and WBZC's 'A Shot in the Arm for the Needle Exchange Defense Costs Fund' ".

Rock Against Sexism . Boston. 1991. pp.

18– 19.

^ Schilt, Kristen (2003).

" "A Little Too Ironic": The Appropriation and Packaging of Riot Grrrl Politics by Mainstream Female Musicians" (PDF) .

Popular Music and Society .

26 (1): 5.

doi : 10.1080/0300776032000076351 .

S2CID 37919089 .

External links [ edit ] The Women's Liberation Music Archive - Feminist music-making in the UK and Ireland in the 1970s and 80s : features Rock Against Sexism materials including pages from the RAS magazine, ‘Drastic Measures’, songs, event flyers, badges, and photos of bands.

v t e Rock festivals Subtypes List of folk festivals List of gothic festivals List of heavy metal festivals List of industrial music festivals List of jam band music festivals List of punk rock festivals Traveling ( italics = ongoing) Anger Management Tour Area Festival Big Day Out California Jam California Jam II Crüe Fest Deconstruction Tour Doomination Family Values Tour Festival Express Fuji Rock Festival G3 Gigantour Good Things Hard Electric Tour H.O.R.D.E.

Ilosaarirock Knotfest Kuopiorock Lilith Fair Mayhem Festival Magic Circle Festival Monsters of Rock Montebello Rock Nintendo Fusion Tour Provinssirock Qstock Rock am Ring and Rock im Park Rock in Rio Rock in Roma Rock Boat Ruido Fest Ruisrock Ozzfest Projekt Revolution Rock Never Stops Tour Sauna Open Air Metal Festival Sonisphere Festival Soundwave Summer Sanitarium Tour Taste of Chaos Tuska Open Air Metal Festival The Unholy Alliance Tour Uproar Festival Vive Latino Wacken Open Air Warped Tour Culture Deadheads Heavy metal Hippies La Onda Moshing Pogo (dance) Punk rock Headbanging Stage diving Crowd surfing Sign of the horns Summer of Love Rivethead Related events Rock concert Concert tour v t e Rock music Components Backbeat Distortion Rock band Electric guitar Electric bass Rhythm section Drum kit Genres by decade of origin (sub-subgenres not included) 1950s Instrumental rock Latin rock Pop rock Rock and roll British Rockabilly Surf music 1960s Anatolian rock Art rock Baroque rock Beat music Big-beat Blues rock Boogie rock Chamber pop Christian rock Comedy rock Country rock Electronic rock Experimental rock Flamenco rock Folk rock Garage rock Hard rock Heavy metal Jam Jazz rock Krautrock Noise rock Occult rock Progressive rock Psychedelic rock Raga rock Roots rock Samba rock Soft rock Southern rock Space rock Swamp rock 1970s Arena rock Cello rock Cock rock Dance-rock Funk rock Glam rock Heartland rock Industrial rock New wave Post-progressive Post-punk Power pop Pub rock (Australia) Pub rock (United Kingdom) Punk rock Shock rock Soft rock Visual kei Yacht rock 1980s Alternative rock Deathrock Dream pop Gothic rock Grebo Grunge Indie rock Jangle pop Rap rock Rock kapak Shoegaze Slacker rock Trop rock 1990s Britpop Emo Math rock Post-grunge Post-rock Stoner rock Sufi rock Viking rock Regional scenes North America American Palm Desert Scene Canadian Costa Rican Cuban Dominican Haitian Mexican Chicano rock Puerto Rican South America Argentine Brazilian Brazilian thrash metal Samba rock Tropicália Chilean Colombian Ecuadorian Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Europe Albanian Belarusian Belgian Bosnian British British rock and roll Britpop Post-Britpop Croatian Danish Dutch Indorock Nederbeat Ultra Estonian Finnish French German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Serbian Slovenian Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Yugoslavian Art rock Hard rock and heavy metal Extreme metal Neo-rockabilly New wave Post-punk Punk Asia Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Cambodian ( 1959–1975 ) Chinese Filipino Bisrock Indian Bengali Raga Indonesian Iranian Israeli Japanese Visual kei Korean Malaysian Rock kapak Nepalese Pakistani Sufi Russian Taiwanese Thai Turkish Africa Angolan Sahara desert region Zambian Oceania Australian New Zealand Radio formats Active rock Adult album alternative Album-oriented rock Classic rock Mainstream rock Modern rock Progressive rock (radio format) History Culture British Invasion List of years in rock music Origins of rock and roll Country music Jazz Rhythm and blues Electronics in rock music Social effects Rock Against Communism Rock Against Racism Rock Against Sexism Rock music and the fall of communism Rockism and poptimism Women in rock Related Beatlesque List of rock genres Motorik Outlaw country Progressive music Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Rock concert Rock festival Rock musical Rock opera Wagnerian rock Wall of Sound Category Portal v t e Punk rock Precursors Garage rock Proto-punk Subgenres and fusion genres 2 tone Afro-punk Anarcho-punk Crust punk Crack rock steady Crustcore D-beat Art punk Avant-punk Biker metal Christian punk Christian hardcore Cowpunk Dance-punk Dark cabaret Egg punk Emo Emo pop Emo rap Emo revival Folk punk Anti-folk Celtic punk Gypsy punk Garage punk Glam punk Hardcore punk Beatdown hardcore Bent edge Crossover thrash Digital hardcore Krishnacore Melodic hardcore Metalcore Deathcore Electronicore Crunkcore Nintendocore Mathcore Melodic metalcore Progressive metalcore Post-hardcore Emo revival Queercore Riot grrrl Shaman punk Taqwacore Thrashcore Horror punk Latino punk Nazi punk New wave Oi!

Street punk Pop-punk Skate punk Post-punk Post-punk revival Ultra Progressive punk Psychobilly Punk blues Punk funk Punk jazz Punk metal Punk pathetique Punk rap Emo rap Reggae punk Ska punk Third wave ska Street punk Surf punk Synth-punk Visual kei Related genres Alternative rock Gothic rock Grebo Grunge Industrial Noise rock Speed metal Thrash metal By country Australia Brazil Canada Estonia List of bands France Germany Greece Netherlands Spain Basque Radical Rock Sweden Könsrock Trallpunk United Kingdom Celtic punk Scottish Gaelic punk United States ( California ) Yugoslavia People and groups First wave punk musicians Second wave punk musicians List of punk bands #–K L–Z Punk filmmakers Women in punk rock Related articles List of punk compilation albums List of punk rock festivals Animal rights and punk subculture Conservative Punk Death of Brian Deneke DIY ethic Moshing Poseur Punk subculture Punk fashion Punk ideologies Punk visual art Punk literature Punk zine Puntala-rock Straight edge Punk films ( List of punk films ) Timeline of punk rock Scene Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rock_Against_Sexism&oldid=1300806875 " Categories : 1978 in the United Kingdom 1980s in North America Feminist art organizations in the United States Feminist art organizations Feminist organisations in the United Kingdom History of rock music Music and politics Musical advocacy groups Political movements Punk rock festivals Rock festivals in the United Kingdom Rock music Social movements Sexism Women's festivals Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 14:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rock Against Sexism 3 languages Add topic

