Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Furniture 3 Woodwork and interior decoration 4 Silver, porcelain and metalwork 5 Influence and decline 6 See also 7 Notes and citations 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Rocaille 18 languages Беларуская Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Italiano Magyar Nederlands Polski Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French style of exuberant decoration For the Fabergé egg, see Rocaille (Fabergé egg) .

Commode decoration by Charles Cressent (1745–1749), Metropolitan Museum Rocaille ( US : / r oʊ ˈ k aɪ , r ɒ ˈ k aɪ / ro(h)- KY , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] French: [ʁɔkɑj] ) was a French style of exuberant decoration, with an abundance of curves, counter-curves, undulations and elements modeled on nature,  that appeared in furniture and interior decoration during the early reign of Louis XV of France . It was a reaction against the heaviness and formality of the Louis XIV style . It began in about 1710, reached its peak in the 1730s, and came to an end in the late 1750s, replaced by Neoclassicism .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It was the beginning of the French Baroque movement in furniture and design, and also marked the beginning of the Rococo movement, which spread to Italy,  Bavaria and Austria by the mid-18th century.

Overview [ edit ] Rocaille was exuberant and inspired by nature like Rococo, but, unlike Rococo, it was usually symmetrical and not overloaded with decoration. It took its name from the mixture of rock, seashell and plaster that was used to create a picturesque effect in grottos during the Renaissance , and from the name of a seashell-shaped ornament which was frequent feature of Rocaille decoration.

[ 7 ] In 1736, the designer and jeweler Jean Mondon published the Premier Livre: De forme Rocquaille et Cartel ,  a collection of designs for ornaments of furniture and interior decoration. It was the first appearance in print of the term rocaille to designate the style.

[ 8 ] The style was used particularly in salons, a new style of room designed to impress and entertain guests.  The most prominent example was the salon of the Princess in Hôtel de Soubise in Paris, designed by Germain Boffrand and Charles-Joseph Natoire (1735–1740). The characteristics of French Rococo included exceptional artistry, especially in the complex frames made for mirrors and paintings, which sculpted in plaster and often gilded; sinuous curves and counter-cures, and the use of vegetal forms (vines, leaves, flowers) intertwined in complex designs. The leading furniture designers in the style included Juste-Aurele Meissonier and Charles Cressent , along with the wood craftsman Nicolas Pineau .

[ 9 ] Design for a clock case by Gilles-Marie Oppenordt (1715) Table design by Juste-Aurele Meissonier ( c.

1730 ) Design for the bedroom of the Prince, Hotel de Soubise , by Germain Boffrand (1735–1740) Fireplace and mantle design by Nicolas Pineau (1st half of 18th century) Designs for a porcelain writing set by Juste-Aurèle Meissonnier (1748) Floral and acanthus leaf design by Alexis Peyrotte (1750) Furniture [ edit ] Rocaille decoration was heavily loaded with decoration modeled on seashells, cascades of leaves and flowers, palm leaves, and other natural elements.  The decor on walls and furniture was usually made of carved wood or plaster which was gilded.  The French designer Bernard Toro produced a book of flamboyant early Rocaille patterns in 1716, which was widely circulated in Europe.  The first major craftsman in the style was Juste-Aurèle Meissonnier , followed by Jean Bérain the Elder , Gilles-Marie Oppenordt , Nicolas Pineau , and the sculptor-modelers Thomas Germain , Jacques Caffieri , and the German Jean-Claude Duplessis .

[ 6 ] The master cabinet makers or ébénistes of rocaille furniture included Mathieu Criaerd (1689–1776), who became a master in 1738. He was particularly known both for his fine marquetry or inlay, and for his chests with a Chinese or Japanese theme, with fine Chinese lacquer or Martin varnish, and ornaments of gilded and sculpted bronze.

[ 10 ] Another important figure of the rocaille style was the ébéntiste Charles Cressent (1685–1768), who was a master craftsman both in the guild of wood carvers and bronze ornament sculptors, a rare accomplishment earned respectively in 1708 and 1714. Cressent made furniture not only for Louis XV , but also for the King of Portugal and for the Elector of Bavaria. He is best known for his commodes, book cases and desks, which were often inlaid with rosewood and violet wood and equipped with particularly fine rocaille ornament of gilded bronze, including infants intermingled with birds and cascading vegetation. He introduced several stylistic innovations, including the espagnolettes à aigrette , small busts of young women, applied to the corners of his commodes and desks.  This became a common decoration used by other masters of the rocaille.

[ 11 ] Other notable furniture craftsmen included the members of the Cresson family, Louis Cresson (1706–1761), Rene Cresson (1705–1749) and Michel Cresson (1709–1781), all of whom provided exceptionally crafted chairs, armoires , commodes and other furnishings for royal residences.  Their children also became menuisiers and ébénistes during the reign of Louis XVI .

[ 10 ] Rocaille ornament of leaves, flowers and seashell Louis XV Rocaille armoire (1725–1730) by Charles Cressent , (1725–1730) Writing desk with Espagnolettes by Charles Cressent (1730–1735) Commode by Charles Cressent (1730), Waddesdon Manor Commode for the Dauphin by Mathieu Criaerd (1748) Commode by Charles Cressent (1745–1749), Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art Woodwork and interior decoration [ edit ] Rocaille decoration was common in the wooden wall panels and other interior decoration between 1730 and 1750. The trim was usually made of carved and gilded wood or stucco against a white background. The panels in the frames often also had decorative painting, usually of arabesques or colorful floral patterns, and often featured animals or exotic subjects, set in China, Japan, or Turkey.

Salon of the Hôtel de Soubise in Paris (1735–1740) Woodwork in the Hôtel de Varengeville by Nicolas Pineau (1735) Decoration on ceiling of office of the French Prime Minister, Hôtel Matignon (1720–1725) Salon of the Hôtel de Lassay, now residence of President of the National Assembly Silver, porcelain and metalwork [ edit ] Besides its use in furniture, the style appeared in porcelain and metalwork.  In 1738, the Manufacture de Vincennes was founded thanks to the support of Louis XV and Madame de Pompadour , in order to compete with the manufactories at Chantilly and Meissen .

[ 12 ] In 1756, the manufactury was moved to a building in Sèvres , built at the initiative of Madame de Pompadour, near her château .

The most remarkable rocaille metal work included the cast iron and gilded fences and gates created by iron maker Jean Lamour for the new Place Stanislas in Nancy between 1750 and 1758 as the Duchy of Lorraine was attached to France.  The square was completed with an ensemble of buildings whose balconies and suspended lamps matched the grillwork of the fence and gates.

[ 13 ] Silver candelabra by Juste-Aurèle Meissonnier (1734–1735) Frame for a wall clock by Jacques Caffieri (1745–1750) Gilded cast-iron fence of Place Stanislas in Nancy (France) by Jean Lamour (1750–1758) Gilded cast-iron lamp post of Place Stanislas in Nancy, France by Jean Lamour (1750–1758) Gate with two statues and elaborate wrought-iron grilles, in Würzburg (Germany), grilles by Johann Georg Oegg (1752) Vincennes soft porcelain with rocaille design and a Chinese scene (1749–1750) Vase of Vincennes porcelain by Jean-Claude Duplessis (1753) Astronomical clock of gilded bronze by Jacques Caffieri (1754), Museum of Versailles Two Nymphenburg porcelain holy water fonts, model probably by Franz Anton Bustelli (around 1760) Hungarian tiled faience stove , in the Baroque Rudnyánszky mansion from Budapest (18th century) Influence and decline [ edit ] The Rocaille influenced the Chippendale style in England, and the work of the Belgian-born Bavarian decorative artist François de Cuvilliés .  The style also became very popular for a time in Italy, particularly in Venice, and spread to Austria, Bavaria and Spain, where it took on a more exuberant and overcharged form.

The discovery of Greek antiquities beginning in 1738 at Herculanum and especially at Pompeii in 1748 turned French architecture in the direction of the more symmetrical and less flamboyant neo-classicism and the Louis XV style .  Furniture and decoration became more geometric; furniture legs became straight, resembling Roman or Grecian columns, and the ornate carving on the exterior of furniture was increasingly replaced by fine inlays of multicolored wood.

See also [ edit ] Liège–Aachen Baroque furniture [ de ] Baroque in Prince-Bishopric of Liège [ nl ] Notes and citations [ edit ] ^ "rocaille" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins . Retrieved 2019-08-19 .

^ "Rocaille" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins . Retrieved 2019-08-19 .

^ "rocaille" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2021-04-15.

^ "rocaille" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2019-08-19 .

^ Larousse Encyclopedia on-line ^ a b Lovreglio 2006 , p. 369.

^ Ducher 1988 , p. 136.

^ De Morant, Henry, Histoire des arts décoratifs , p. 355 ^ Kleiner, Fred (2010).

Gardner's art through the ages: the western perspective . Cengage Learning. pp.

583– 584.

ISBN 978-0-495-57355-5 . Retrieved 2011-02-21 .

^ a b Lovreglio 2006 , p. 128.

^ Lovreglio 2006 , p. 127.

^ Sèvres Porcelain Manufactory | People | Collection of Smithsonian Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum ^ De Morant 1970 , p. 376.

Bibliography [ edit ] De Morant, Henry (1970).

Histoire des arts décoratifs (in French). Librarie Hachette.

Ducher, Robert (1988).

Caractéristique des Styles (in French). Paris, France: Flammarion.

ISBN 2-08-011539-1 .

Renault, Christophe (2006).

Les Styles de l'architecture et du mobilier (in French). Paris, France: Gisserot.

ISBN 978-2-877-4746-58 .

Wiegant, Claude-Paul (1995).

Le Mobilier Français- Transition Louis XVI (in French). Paris, France: Massin.

ISBN 2-7072-0281-9 .

Lovreglio, Aurélia and Anne (2006).

Dictionnaire des Mobiliers et des Objets d'art du Moyen Âge au XXIe siècle (in French). Paris, France: Le Robert.

ISBN 2-84902-079-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rocaille .

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rocaille&oldid=1241622651 " Categories : Rococo art Baroque art 18th century in the arts 18th century in art Art movements Art movements in Europe Decorative arts Early modern period Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2023 Pages with French IPA CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 August 2024, at 07:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rocaille 18 languages Add topic

