Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description of the rock reliefs Toggle Description of the rock reliefs subsection 1.1 Investiture of Ardashir II 1.2 Shapur II and Shapur III 1.3 Iwan of Khosrow II 1.4 Scene of boar and deer hunting 1.5 Dowlatshah Relief 1.6 Taq-e Bostan Photos 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Taq-e Bostan 21 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Cebuano Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Slovenščina کوردی Türkçe Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°23′15″N 47°07′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 34.387528546°N 47.1320956476°E ﻿ / 34.387528546; 47.1320956476 ﻿ ( Taq-e Bostan, Kermanshah, Iran ) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large rock reliefs in Iran from the Sassanid era Taq-e Bostan Taq Bostan, a famous rock relief of Sassanid Iran Location Kermanshah, Iran Built ca. 4th century CE Architectural style(s) Persian architecture Location of Taq-e Bostan in Iran A Taq-e Bostan carving depicts women playing changs (Persian harps) while the king is hunting.

Taq-e Bostan ( Persian : طاق‌بستان , Kurdish : تاق وەسان , lit.

'Arch of stone') [ 1 ] is a site with a series of large rock reliefs in Kermanshah, Iran , carved around the 4th century CE during the Sasanian era .

This example of Sasanian art is located 5 km from the city center of Kermanshah . It is located in the heart of the Zagros Mountains , where it has endured almost 1,700 years of wind and rain. Originally, several natural springs were visible next to and below the reliefs and arches, some of which are now covered. Springs next to the reliefs still feed a large basin in front of the rock. The site has been turned into an archaeological park and a series of late Sasanian and Islamic column capitals have been brought together (some found at Taq Bostan, others at Mount Behistun and Kermanshah).

The carvings, some of the finest and best-preserved examples of Persian sculpture under the Sassanids, include representations of the investitures of Ardashir II (379–383) and Shapur III (383–388). Like other Sassanid symbols, Taq-e Bostan, and its relief patterns accentuate power, religious tendencies, glory, honour, the vastness of the court, game and fighting spirit, festivity, joy, and rejoicing.

Sassanid kings chose a beautiful setting for their rock reliefs along a historic Silk Road caravan route waypoint and campground. The reliefs are adjacent to sacred springs that empty into a large reflecting pool at the base of a mountain cliff.

Taq-e Bostan and its rock relief are one of the 30 surviving Sassanid relics of the Zagros Mountains . According to Arthur Pope , the founder of the Iranian Art and Archeology Institute in the United States of America, "art was characteristic of the Iranian people and the gift which they endowed the world with." Description of the rock reliefs [ edit ] The Taq-e Bostan complex comprise a rock relief standing on its own and several more reliefs associated with two rock cut arches.

[ citation needed ] Investiture of Ardashir II [ edit ] Main article: Coronation of Ardashir II The Coronation of Ardashir II .

Ardashir II appears in the middle, receiving the diadem from Shapur II on the right, with Mithra standing to the left. The fallen enemy is most likely the Roman emperor Julian .

The relief panel is approx. 4.07 m wide and 3.9 m high.

Shapur II and Shapur III [ edit ] The smaller arch or iwan (Taq-e Bustan II) has, on the upper part of the back wall, two Pahlavi inscriptions identifying two royal figures as Shapur II (Shapur the Great) and his son Shapur III. They are shown facing each other. The arch's vestibule measures 6 x 5 x 3.6 meters. It has been suggested as having been built during the reign of Shapur III and some put the date of its completion at 385 AD. However, the royal crown of Shapur III does not agree with those on his coins and is closer to that of his predecessor Ardashir II. It has been argued that the texts represent an usurpation of Ardashir's relief by Shapur III. The translation of the inscriptions follows: Shapur II inscription : This is the figure of Mazda -worshipping Lord Shapur, the king of kings of Iran and Aniran , whose race is from the Gods. Son of Mazda-worshipping Lord Hormizd , the king of kings of Iran and Aniran, whose race is from the Gods, grandson of Lord Nersi , the Shahanshah (king of kings).

Shapur III inscription: This is the figure of Mazda-worshipping Lord Shapur, the king of kings of Iran and Aniran, whose race is from the Gods. Son of Mazda-worshipping Lord Shapur, the king of kings of Iran and Aniran, whose race is from the Gods, grandson of Lord Hormizd, the king of kings.

Speculative Historical reenactment of a Sassanid cataphract , complete with a full set of scale armour for the horse. The rider is covered by extensive mail armour , (photographed in Oxford , U.K.) Iwan of Khosrow II [ edit ] Relief of a victorious Khosrow II mounted on his favorite horse, Shabdiz ; Taq-e Bostan The three figures on the back wall of the large iwan are usually considered to represent Khosrow II flanked by Ahura Mazda and Anahita .

Scene of boar and deer hunting [ edit ] Scene of boar hunting Khosrow II . The recurve bow used by the king is considered Hunnish .

[ 2 ] There are two hunting scenes on each side of the ivan.

Dowlatshah Relief [ edit ] The upper relief, added in the 19th century, shows the Qajar era Governor in Kermanshah , Mohammad-Ali Mirza Dowlatshah , in front of Fath-Ali Shah Qajar .

Potograph taken at Taq-e Bostan, late Qajar era Taq-e Bostan Photos [ edit ] Female musicians accompanying king during hunting Capital of a Sasanian column in Taq-e Bostan complex with geometrical design Capital of a column with figural decoration of a Sasanian king Details from a Sassanid relief on the incoronation of Ardashir showing a defeated Julian .

Relief of Fath-Ali Shah Qajar , added to the ancient complex in the 19th century.

Relief of Khosrow II Relief of Elaheh (Angel) Statue of Ardeshir II Capital of Khosrow II See also [ edit ] Taq Kasra Taq-e Gara Sassanid architecture Naghsh-e Rajab Naqsh-e Rostam Bishapur List of colossal sculptures in situ References [ edit ] ^ "Which one is correct, Taq bostan or Taq va san?" .

IRNA (in Persian). 2 March 2010. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016 . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

...in Kermanshahi Kurdish, 'san' means stone and the origin of this name came from stony arches ^ Nickel, Helmut.

"About the Sword of the Huns and the "Urepos" of the Steppes" (PDF) .

The Metropolitan Journal .

7 (1973). The Metropolitan Museum: 131– 134, note 3.

Dr.

Ali Akbar Sarfaraz , Dr. Bahman Firuzmandi " Mad, Hakhamanishi, Ashkani, Sasani " Marlik, 1996.

ISBN 964-90495-1-7 Gardeshgary magazine Vol. 13, September 2002 Iranian Cultural News Agency (CHN) Bruno Overlaet, Ardashir II or Shapur III?: reflections on the identity of a king in the smaller grotto at Taq-i Bustan, IRANICA ANTIQUA 46, 2011, p. 235–250 Ardashir II or Shapur III? Reflections on the Identity of a King in the Smaller Grotto at Taq-i Bustan, Iranica Antiqua 46, 2011, 235–250 Bruno Overlaet, Ahura Mazda or Shapur II? A Note on Taq-i Bustan I, the Investiture of Ardashir II (379–383), Iranica Antiqua 47, 2012, p. 133–151 Ahura Mazda or Shapur II? A Note on Taq-i Bustan I, the Investiture of Ardashir II (379–383), Iranica Antiqua 47, 2012, 133–151 Bruno Overlaet, And Man Created God? Kings, Priests and Gods on Sasanian Investiture Reliefs. Iranica Antiqua 48, 2013, 313–354.

And Man Created God? Kings, Priests and Gods on Sasanian Investiture Reliefs. Iranica Antiqua 48, 2013, 313–354.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Taq-e Bostan .

Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Series 5: Drawings and Maps, Records of Taq-e Bostan Site Archived 2012-02-27 at the Wayback Machine Collections Search Center, S.I.R.I.S., Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Photos of Taq-e Bostan Archived 2009-02-20 at the Wayback Machine Taq Bostan (Video) Kermanshah and Taq-e Bostan 34°23′15″N 47°07′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 34.387528546°N 47.1320956476°E ﻿ / 34.387528546; 47.1320956476 ﻿ ( Taq-e Bostan, Kermanshah, Iran ) v t e Kermanshah province , Iran Capital Kermanshah Counties and cities Dalahu County Kerend-e Gharb Gahvareh Eslamabad-e Gharb County Eslamabad-e Gharb Homeyl Gilan-e Gharb County Gilan-e Gharb Sarmast Harsin County Harsin Bisotun Javanrud County Javanrud Kangavar County Kangavar Kermanshah County Kermanshah Halashi Kuzaran Robat Paveh County Paveh Banevreh Bayangan Nowdeshah Nowsud Qasr-e Shirin County Qasr-e Shirin Sumar Ravansar County Ravansar Shaho Sahneh County Sahneh Mian Rahan Salas-e Babajani County Tazehabad Ezgeleh Sarpol-e Zahab County Sarpol-e Zahab Sonqor County Sonqor Satar Sights Kohneh Bridge Behistun Inscription Taq-e Bostan Temple of Anahita The Stone cave Hossein Kuhkan Dinavar Ganj Dareh Essaqwand Rock Tombs Sorkh Deh chamber tomb Malek Tomb Hulwan Median dakhmeh(Darbad,Sahneh) Ghar Parau Do-Ashkaft Cave Tekyeh Moaven al-molk Dokan Davood Inscription,Sar Pol-e-Zahab Tagh e gara,Patagh pass Sarab Niloufar Ghoori Ghale Cave Khaja Barookh's House Chiyajani Tappe Statue of Herakles in Behistun complex Emad al doleh Mosque Tekyeh Biglarbeygi Hunters cave,Behistun_complex Jamé Mosque of Kermanshah Godin Tepe Bas relief of Gotarzes II of Parthia Anubanini rock relief populated places List of cities, towns and villages in Kermanshah Province Authority control databases International VIAF Geographic Pleiades Other Kulturenvanteri monument Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taq-e_Bostan&oldid=1304850522 " Categories : Buildings and structures completed in the 4th century Sasanian architecture Persian art Archaeological sites in Iran Architecture in Iran Kurdish words and phrases Tourist attractions in Kermanshah province Sculpture of the ancient Near East Buildings and structures in Kermanshah Rock reliefs in Iran Buildings and structures on the Iran National Heritage List Hidden categories: CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Kurdish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 15:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taq-e Bostan 21 languages Add topic

