Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1947–1990: duty free establishment 1.2 1991–2021: EU duty free changes 2 Duty-free shopping away from ports Toggle Duty-free shopping away from ports subsection 2.1 Duty-free outside EU ports 3 Security considerations Toggle Security considerations subsection 3.1 Boarding Pass / Passports 4 Inbound duty-free 5 Legal basis Toggle Legal basis subsection 5.1 Visiting U.S. protectorates 6 Competition 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Duty-free shop 34 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of retail outlet "Duty Free" redirects here. For the British sitcom, see Duty Free (TV series) . For the documentary film, see Duty Free (film) .

A typical duty-free store, at Zürich Airport Duty-free store at Terminal 3 of Beijing Capital International Airport Duty-free stores at Ben Gurion Airport in Tel Aviv , Israel Duty-free stores at Oslo Airport in Oslo , Norway A duty-free shop or store is a retail outlet whose goods are exempt from the payment of certain local or national taxes and duties , on the requirement that the goods will be sold to travelers who will take them out of the country, who will then pay duties and taxes in their destination country (depending on its personal exemption limits and tariff regime). Which products can be sold duty-free vary by jurisdiction, as well as how they can be sold, and the process of calculating the duty or refunding the duty component.

Tax Free World Association (TFWA) announced that in 2011 the Asia-Pacific region made 35% of global duty-free and travel retail sales, more than either Europe or the Americas, which accounted for 34% and 23% respectively.

Fragrances and cosmetics , the largest category of goods, were 31% of all sales, while wines and spirits were 17%.

[ 1 ] [ needs update ] Some countries impose duties on all goods brought into the country, even if the goods were bought duty-free in another country, or when the value or quantity of such goods exceeds an allowed limit. Duty-free shops are often found in the international zone of international airports , sea ports , and train stations but goods can also be bought duty-free on board airplanes and passenger ships. They are not as commonly available for road or train travelers, although several border crossings between the United States and both Canada and Mexico have duty-free shops for car travelers. In some countries, any shop can participate in a reimbursement system, such as Global Blue and Premier Tax Free , wherein a sum equivalent to the tax is paid, but then the goods are presented to customs and the sum reimbursed on exit.

Duty-free are abolished for intra- EU (inside the EU tax union ) travelers but are retained for travelers whose final destination is outside the EU. They also sell to intra-EU travelers but with appropriate taxes. The world's largest airport by duty-free sales is South Korea's Incheon Airport , with US$1.85 billion in 2016, [ 2 ] narrowly overtaking Dubai Duty Free with 2016 sales of $1.82 billion.

[ 3 ] Haikou International Duty-Free City Shopping Complex is the world's biggest stand-alone duty-free store in terms of physical size. Located in Haikou , Hainan, China, the buildings have a total area of 280,000 square meters.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] History [ edit ] 1947–1990: duty free establishment [ edit ] Brendan O'Regan established the world's first duty-free shop at Shannon Airport in Ireland in 1947; [ 6 ] it remains in operation today. Designed to provide a service for trans-Atlantic airline passengers typically travelling between Europe and North America whose flights stopped for refuelling on outbound and inbound legs of their journeys, it was an immediate success and has been copied worldwide. Thirteen years later, two American entrepreneurs, Charles Feeney and Robert Warren Miller , founded what is now Duty Free Shoppers ( DFS ) on 7 November 1960. DFS started operations in Hong Kong and spread to Europe and other places around the globe. Securing the exclusive concession for duty-free sales in Hawaii in the early–1960s was a commercial breakthrough for DFS, which enabled the company to focus on Japanese travelers. DFS continued to innovate, expanding into off-airport duty-free stores and into large downtown Galleria stores; it grew to become the world's largest travel retailer . In 1996, LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton acquired the interests of Feeney and two other shareholders and as of 2012 [update] jointly owned DFS with Miller.

In this same period, several locales grew as duty-free shopping destinations. They are exemplified by Saint Martin and the US Virgin Islands in the Caribbean, Hong Kong and Singapore. Still others claim prices competitive to duty-free. Generally, goods are free of duty and tax levied on imports for sale anywhere in the shopping destination. Merchants may pay inventory/business or other taxes, but their customers usually pay none directly.

The mere absence of duty or other taxes on goods being sold does not assure that they are bargains. Costs of identical goods from different duty-free sources can vary widely. They often depend on the presence or absence of nearby competition, e.g., airport stores, especially if all at any airport are owned by a single firm such as Dufry.

[ 7 ] Also, prices can often be driven upward by the costs of buyer convenience, e.g., in-flight sales by airlines. Many airlines, such as Emirates , [ 8 ] El Al , [ 9 ] Singapore Airlines , [ 10 ] Middle East Airlines , [ 11 ] Ukraine International Airlines , [ 12 ] Delta , [ 13 ] and Avianca , [ 14 ] offer duty-free sales on their flights.

1991–2021: EU duty free changes [ edit ] In 1991, the EU decided to keep some duty free for a transition period until 1999.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 1999, after the creation of the European Union, the single market and the monetary union, these outlets were abolished for intra- EU travellers but are retained for travelers whose final destination is outside the EU. They also sell to intra-EU travelers but with appropriate taxes. Some special member state territories such as Åland , Livigno and the Canary Islands , are within the EU but outside the EU tax union , and thus still continue duty-free sales for all travelers.

In 2021, with Brexit duty free are reintroduced in three British nations : England , Wales and Scotland . This allows reduced taxes on: wine , Champagne or Prosecco , beer and spirits , as well as on: cigarettes , cigarillos , cigars , or tobacco .

[ 17 ] Duty-free shopping away from ports [ edit ] Some duty-free shops operate in central business districts away from airports or other ports. In Japan, for example, any visitor whose passport indicates that they have been in the country for less than six months can buy items without paying consumption tax, so long as the total purchase value exceeds ¥5,000 and the items will not be consumed in Japan. Duty-free shops are a mainstay in the Akihabara electronic shopping district of Tokyo .

In Thailand, the King Power chain has shops where duty-free items are pre-purchased and delivered separately to the airport to be picked up on departure. For certain other purchases, a VAT refund may be claimed at the airport upon departure.

[ 18 ] In the Philippines , there is one shopping mall called the Duty Free Philippines Fiestamall, which is located a few miles away from Ninoy Aquino International Airport as opposed to being at the airport itself. Until the opening of its upscale sister location Luxe in 2018, [ 19 ] it was the only shopping mall of its kind in the world. The goods that are sold in this mall are often imported products which come from around the world (mainly from United States, Asia and Australasia ) and are not found in any other shopping malls in the country, aside from duty-free malls. Tourists, visitors and returning citizens of Philippines often pay a visit to this mall shortly after their arrival (since only arriving passengers and their companions are allowed access).

[ 20 ] In order to gain entry, a passport is needed to be presented and registered at the Customer Registration Counter at the entrance of the mall. The customer will then be issued a shopping card; these shopping cards must be presented to the cashier for validation of purchases. Arriving customers are given a certain tax-free allowance on purchases and anything in excess will be subject to local and national taxes. In the past, the mall used to only accept US dollars and Philippine peso but in recent years, it had begun accepting other currencies, such as: Japanese yen , Brunei dollar , Australian dollar , British pound , Canadian dollar , Euro , Swiss franc , Saudi riyal , Bahraini dinar and Thai baht . Currency exchange booths are also available inside the mall if a customer wishes to exchange currencies into Philippine pesos or US dollars. Credits cards can also be used for purchasing goods.

[ 21 ] Duty-free shops usually sell a broad range of alcoholic drinks.

In Australia, duty-free shops, once common, have all but disappeared since the introduction of GST in 2000. Retailer James Richardson operates several duty-free shops in major cities, [ 22 ] but most duty-free shops are now located within international airports. Residents and tourists are allowed to purchase virtually any physical good within 60 days of departure, [ 23 ] which needs to be taken on the outward flight, and claim the GST component back through the Tourist Refund Scheme when passing through customs. Consumers are now free to fully use their items prior to departure. This is in contrast prior to 2000, where all purchases had to be packed by the duty-free store in a sealed clear plastic bag , and could only be broken open by customs staff just prior to departure.

[ 23 ] Duty-free outside EU ports [ edit ] Main article: Tax-free shopping Any traveller living in a country outside the EU VAT area is entitled to shop tax-free at participating shops in the EU. Tax free shopping differs from duty-free shopping as the traveller pays the VAT on goods in the shop in the usual way, and can then request a refund when exporting the goods. There are a number of tax-free operators who can support both the stores and the traveler through this process. To qualify, the traveller must: have residency in a non-EU country have a maximum stay of six months within the EU make purchases no more than three months prior to export obtain a form from the shop where he or she makes the purchase (depending on the tax-free operator) present the form, and in certain cases the goods, to a customs officer or DIVA machine when leaving the EU, where they will be stamped Only goods meant for personal use are eligible for the refund. The stamped forms and receipts can then be sent back to the retailers, or their agents, for a refund.

In most cases, a minimum purchase applies to use the tax-free shopping scheme. The actual amount of VAT reclaimable depends on the VAT rate applicable in the particular country to the goods purchased, and may be subject to a deduction for administration fees.

Security considerations [ edit ] Travelers on long-haul routes with at least one transit stop between their departure airport and destination airport should be careful to purchase their duty-free alcohol or perfume at the last transit port, as otherwise they may have it confiscated by security when they board at the transit port, as they will be exceeding the current limit on liquids in hand baggage. This does not apply to passengers transferring within the EU and Singapore on the same day, as long as the liquid item is sealed in a plastic security bag that shows the receipt. Arrivals duty-free shops are now becoming more common. Most of South and Central America, and the Caribbean have such shops, as does South East Asia and Oceania. Switzerland and Canada are looking to introduce them in 2010.

[ needs update ] This method of retail removes any security problems with the transit of liquids, as they are not carried on aircraft.

[ 24 ] Several airlines do not allow sales of certain sharp objects in-flight due to security risk. Other objects that have sharp parts, such as model airplanes, may be bought in-flight but received at the passengers' home address for the same reason.

Boarding Pass / Passports [ edit ] Proof of travel may be requested at the checkout point to prevent airport employees from making personal purchases.

Inbound duty-free [ edit ] Some countries or districts: Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Chile , China , Colombia , Iceland , Italy , Iran , India , Jamaica , Kenya , Lebanon , Malaysia , New Zealand , Norway , Panama , the Philippines , Sri Lanka , Switzerland , Taiwan , Turkey , the United Arab Emirates and Uzbekistan have inwards duty-free facilities, where arriving passengers can purchase duty-free items immediately before going through customs. This not only saves the inconvenience of having to carry these items around the world but also solves the security problem mentioned above. Other countries such as Canada and Sweden have been considering duty-free on arrival. The European Union does not permit arrivals duty-free stores; some EU airports sell goods on arrival in the baggage claim area described as "Tax-Free", but these goods are all tax-paid sales, the local sales tax is discounted. Normally, discounted liquors or tobacco products cannot be bought when arriving into an EU Member State as there is often a high local Excise Duty on these goods as well as the local sales tax (VAT/IVA/TVA) which is included in the price. In some EU Territories the tax on tobaccos and liquors is lower than in other EU countries, which is why the prices still seem competitive and look like duty-free prices. A good example is the difference in tobacco prices between the UK and Ireland, compared to Spain or Portugal.

[ needs update?

] Legal basis [ edit ] It is a common feature of most tax systems that taxes are not raised on goods to be exported. To do so could place the goods at a disadvantage to those from other countries, for example if the tax rate in the territory of sale is higher than the tax rate in the territory of consumption. Either the tax system allows the goods to be exported without taxes (stored prior to export in a bonded warehouse ), or taxes can be claimed back when they are exported (see VAT ).

Such exemption also applies to goods supplied for use on ships and aircraft, because they are consumed outside the country. Businesses supplying such goods can do so tax- and duty-free.

Goods sold to passengers on board ships or aircraft are tax free. The passenger can either consume them on board, or import them tax-free into the country they are traveling to, so long as they are within the traveler's duty-free allowance. Most tax regimes also allow travelers entering a country to bring in a certain amount of goods for personal use without paying tax on them, the so-called "duty-free allowance"; because it is not economically justifiable to collect the small amounts of tax involved, and would be an inconvenience to the passengers.

A duty-free shop works under the same system. The goods must be exported intact (they cannot be consumed in the country of sale), and they are importing into the destination country under that country's own tax rules. In some countries, in order to ensure that goods are exported intact, they are hand-delivered in a closed bag to the passenger at the gate after their ticket is scanned. In the United States, duty-free shops are technically considered class 9 Bonded Warehouses with regard to the U.S. Customs & Border Protection: Class 9. Bonded warehouse, known as duty-free stores, used for selling, for use outside the Customs territory, conditionally duty-free merchandise owned or sold by the proprietor and delivered from the Class 9 warehouse to an airport or other exit point for exportation by, or on behalf of, individuals departing from the Customs territory for destinations other than foreign trade zones. Pursuant to 19 U.S.C. 1555(b)(8)(C), Customs territory, for purposes of duty-free stores, means the Customs territory of the U.S. as defined in 101.1(e) of this chapter, and foreign trade zones (see part 146 of this chapter). All distribution warehouses used exclusively to provide individual duty-free sales locations and storage cribs with conditionally duty-free merchandise are also Class 9 warehouses.

Moreover, in the U.S. some duty-free stores will sell their goods to domestic passengers with appropriate taxes included. Alcohol and tobacco products are restricted to international passengers only and subject to the age limitations of 18 and 21 respectively, even though the age one must be to import those items into other countries may be lower.

Visiting U.S. protectorates [ edit ] U.S. citizens receive substantially higher duty exemptions than normal when they visit or transit these locales, e.g., Guam, U.S. Virgin Islands.

Competition [ edit ] According to Autogrill / World Duty Free case, duty free is a market where competition is kept both in the EEA market and in the global market. Even with the 2008 merger of the two biggest duty free operators, Autogrill and World Duty Free, they together own less than 10% of the global market and less than 20% of the EEA market.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Fuel tax , jet fuel used in international flights is sold wholesale List of duty-free shops References [ edit ] ^ "And the world's most lucrative airports are..." June 14, 2012. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012 . Retrieved June 15, 2012 .

^ "Incheon Airport duty free sales hit US$2bn in 2016 | Travel Retail Business" . January 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2017 .

^ Reporter, Cleofe Maceda, Senior Web (January 5, 2017).

"Dubai Duty Free sales drop on currency fluctuations" .

GulfNews .

Archived from the original on August 4, 2018 . Retrieved January 24, 2017 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "World's largest stand-alone duty-free store opens in China" .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

^ "World's largest duty-free complex opens in Hainan" .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

^ "Brendan O'Regan" .

The Times . February 13, 2008.

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 5, 2009 .

^ "Dufry - en" .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2016 . Retrieved July 10, 2015 .

^ "What are the hours for Dubai Duty Free? - General - FAQs - Emirates United Arab Emirates" .

Emirates United Arab Emirates .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2019 . Retrieved July 10, 2015 .

^ "El Al duty-free store" .

www.elal.com .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 25, 2024 .

^ "KRISSHOP - SINGAPORE AIRLINES" .

www.krisshopair.com . Archived from the original on July 8, 2019 . Retrieved May 4, 2017 .

^ "MEA - Tax Free" .

www.mea.com.lb . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved May 4, 2017 .

^ "Sky Shop - офіційний сайт МАУ" .

www.flyuia.com .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2017 . Retrieved May 4, 2017 .

^ http://www.deltadutyfree.com Archived 2016-10-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Avianca Duty Free Virtual Catalog" . Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved July 10, 2015 .

^ Schmidt, William E. (November 19, 1991).

"Europeans Decide to Allow Duty-Free Zones till 1999" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2022 . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ "EUR-Lex: Tax- and duty-free sales" . February 17, 1999.

Archived from the original on June 7, 2023 . Retrieved January 22, 2024 .

^ "Duty Free extended to the EU from January 2021" .

GOV.UK .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2022 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ "Thailand Tourist Information : Tips & Facts : Who Can Claim VAT Refunds?" . Archived from the original on July 23, 2015 . Retrieved July 10, 2015 .

^ Go, Miriam Grace (May 7, 2018).

"LOOK: Duty Free Philippines to open luxury store at SM Mall of Asia complex" .

RAPPLER . Retrieved January 9, 2025 .

^ "Duty Free Philippines: Who can shop at DFP?" . Archived from the original on January 13, 2013 . Retrieved May 4, 2017 .

^ "Duty Free Shopping in the Philippines" . Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved May 4, 2017 .

^ "JR/Duty Free :: JR/Duty Free - The JR Story" .

jrdutyfree.com.au . Archived from the original on October 30, 2018 . Retrieved September 26, 2015 .

^ a b "Australian Government Department of Immigration and Border Protection" .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2014 . Retrieved July 10, 2015 .

^ Kaye, Ken (March 24, 2007).

"Passengers lose their booze as TSA alcohol rules are ignored" .

Sun Sentinel . Archived from the original on May 28, 2011 . Retrieved December 28, 2010 .

^ Case No COMP/M.5123, AUTOGRILL / WORLD DUTY FREE, only the English text is available and authentic REGULATION (EC) No 139/2004 MERGER PROCEDURE Article 6(1)(b) NON-OPPOSITION External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Duty-free shops .

U.S. Customs and Border Protection Regulations for International Travel by U.S. Residents ("Know Before You Go") v t e Retail Key concepts Counter display unit Display stand Endcap Facing Free standing display unit Gondola History of retail Merchandising Visual merchandising Point of sale display Retail design Retail merchandising unit Self-service Shelf-ready packaging By product Agricultural supplies Alcohol Antiques Automotive fuel Automotive parts Beauty products Books Cannabis Catering Mobile Chocolate Clothes Comics Confectionery Consumer electronics Cycles Doujin shop Dry goods Equestrian supplies Eyewear Fish Flowers Food Foodservice Fruit stand Furniture Garden centre Gardening supplies General merchandise Gold Greengrocer Grocery Public grocery Guns Hardware Health food Herbal tea Hobby supplies Home decor Home improvement products Ironmongery Jewellery Lingerie Lumber Magic supplies Meat Medications Medicinal plants Music Musical instruments News Office supplies Outdoor equipment Party supplies Personal accessories Pets and pet supplies Real estate Religious goods Sexual goods Shoes Skateboarding supplies Sporting goods Survival equipment Tickets Resale Online Tobacco Toys Vaping products Vehicles Video games By format Anchor tenant Automat Automated retail Big-box store Boot fair Boutique Brick and mortar Bring and buy sale Butcher shop Car boot sale Cash and carry Cashierless store Category killer Chain store Charity shop Closeout store Company store Consignment shop Consignment store (East Asia) Convenience store Automated convenience store Corner store Mini-mart Mini market Superette Dark store Department store Junior department store Public department store Discount store E-commerce Estate sale Experiential commerce Experiential retail Factory outlet Factory store Flash retailing Free box Freeshop Free store Garage sale General store Give-away shop Haberdasher Head shop High Street Honesty box Hospice shop Hyperstore Immersive commerce Inspect and pay Jumble sale Junk shop Lifestyle store Main Street Mall kiosk Market Bazaar Christmas market Dark market Dry market Grey market Farmers' market Fish market Flea market Floating market Hypermarket Marketplace Online marketplace Market booth Market hall Market stall Market square Mart Meat market Mercado Morning market Pasar pagi Night market Pasar malam Open-air market Palengke Pannier market Public market Souk Street market Supermarket warehouse supermarket Tianguis Traditional market Wet market Megastore Micro-retailing Military cooperative Moving sale Non-store retailing Off-price Omnichannel retail strategy Online grocer Online retailing Opportunity shop Outlet store Pop-up retail Pop-up shop Pop-up store Pretail Resale shop Retail kiosk Rummage sale Second-hand shop Shop-in-shop Shopping center Big-box center Community center Festival center Festival marketplace Galleria Lifestyle center Neighborhood shopping center Outlet center Outlet mall Pedestrian mall Plaza Power center Retail park Shopping arcade Shopping complex Shopping mall Shopping plaza Shopping precinct Strip center Strip mall Strip plaza Theme center Showroom Smartstore Smart shop Specialty store Store-in-store Store-within-a-store Supercenter Superstore Swap meet Indoor swap meet Swap shop Tag sale Thrift store Unmanned store Variety store Dollar store Five and dime store Vending machine Warehouse club Warehouse store Web store White elephant sale Wholesale club Yard sale By type Arabber Boutique Braderie Butcher shop Concession stand Cooked food centre Costermonger Direct sellers Duty-free shop Food booth Food cart Food court Food hall Food kiosk Food stall Food stand Food truck Gift shop Hawker Hawker centre Ice cream truck Ice cream van Museum shop Pawn shop Peddler Pharmacies Refreshment stand Snack bar Snack kiosk Souvenir shop Surplus store Tack shop Tax-free shopping Tuck shop NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6dmv4
Cached time: 20250812002333
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.510 seconds
Real time usage: 0.723 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2539/1000000
Revision size: 27139/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 82007/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2875/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92321/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.306/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6318189/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  609.852      1 -total
 36.56%  222.970      1 Template:Reflist
 26.44%  161.217     19 Template:Cite_web
 18.47%  112.629      3 Template:Update_inline
 16.60%  101.234      3 Template:Fix
 13.46%   82.097      1 Template:Retail
 12.98%   79.155      1 Template:Navbox
 12.78%   77.940      1 Template:Short_description
  8.81%   53.722      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.40%   51.237      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1924703:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812002333 and revision id 1291823771. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Duty-free_shop&oldid=1291823771 " Categories : Duty-free shops Customs duties Borders Retail formats Special economic zones Tax avoidance 1947 introductions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2024 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 16:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Duty-free shop 34 languages Add topic

