Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Conditions required Toggle Conditions required subsection 2.1 Sources of dust 2.2 Concentration 2.3 Oxidant 2.4 Sources of ignition 3 Mechanism 4 Effects 5 Protection and mitigation 6 Notable incidents 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Dust explosion 23 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rapid combustion of fine particles suspended in the air Lab demonstration with burning lycopodium powder A dust explosion is the rapid combustion of fine particles suspended in the air within an enclosed location. Dust explosions can occur where any dispersed powdered combustible material is present in high-enough concentrations in the atmosphere or other oxidizing gaseous medium, such as pure oxygen . In cases when fuel plays the role of a combustible material, the explosion is known as a fuel-air explosion.

Dust explosions are a frequent hazard in coal mines , grain elevators and silos , and other industrial environments. They are also commonly used by special effects artists, filmmakers , and pyrotechnicians , given their spectacular appearance and ability to be safely contained under certain carefully controlled conditions.

Thermobaric weapons exploit this principle by rapidly saturating an area with an easily combustible material and then igniting it to produce explosive force. These weapons are the most powerful non-nuclear explosives in existence.

[ 1 ] Terminology [ edit ] If rapid combustion occurs in a confined space , enormous overpressures can build up, causing major structural damage and flying debris. The sudden release of energy from a " detonation " can produce a shockwave , either in open air or in a confined space. If the spread of flame is at subsonic speed, the phenomenon is sometimes called a " deflagration ", although looser usage calls both phenomena " explosions ".

[ citation needed ] Dust explosions may be classified as being either "primary" or "secondary" in nature. Primary dust explosions may occur inside process equipment or similar enclosures, and are generally controlled by pressure relief through purpose-built ducting to the external atmosphere. Secondary dust explosions are the result of dust accumulation inside a building being disturbed and ignited by the primary explosion, resulting in a much more dangerous uncontrolled explosion that can affect the entire structure. Historically, fatalities from dust explosions have largely been the result of secondary dust explosions.

[ 2 ] Conditions required [ edit ] Diagram showing the five requirements for a dust explosion There are five necessary conditions for a dust explosion: [ 3 ] A combustible dust The dust is dispersed in the air within certain flammability limits There is an oxidant (typically atmospheric oxygen) There is an ignition source The area is confined – a building can be an enclosure Sources of dust [ edit ] 1878 stereograph rendering of the Great Mill Disaster Mount Mulligan mine disaster in Australia 1921. These cable drums were blown 50 feet (15 m) from their foundations following a coal dust explosion.

Aftermath of 2008 explosion at Imperial Sugar in Port Wentworth, Georgia , US Many common materials which are known to burn can generate a dust explosion, such as coal dust and sawdust . In addition, many otherwise mundane organic materials can also be dispersed into a dangerous dust cloud, such as grain , flour , starch , sugar , powdered milk , cocoa , coffee , and pollen .

Powdered metals (such as aluminum , magnesium , and titanium ) can form explosive suspensions in air, if finely divided.

A gigantic explosion of flour dust destroyed a mill in Minnesota on May 2, 1878, killing 14 workers at the Washburn A Mill and another four in adjacent buildings.

[ 4 ] A similar problem occurs in sawmills and other places dedicated to woodworking .

Since the advent of industrial production–scale metal powder –based additive manufacturing (AM) in the 2010s, there is growing need for more information and experience with preventing dust explosions and fires from the traces of excess metal powder sometimes left over after laser sintering or other fusion methods.

[ 5 ] For example, in machining operations downstream of the AM build, excess powder liberated from porosities in the support structures can be exposed to sparks from the cutting interface.

[ 5 ] Efforts are underway not only to build this knowledgebase within the industry but also to share it with local fire departments, who do periodic fire-safety inspections of businesses in their districts and who can expect to answer alarms at shops or plants where AM is now part of the production mix.

[ 5 ] Although not strictly a dust, paper particles emitted during processing – especially rolling, unrolling, calendaring/slitting, and sheet-cutting – are also known to pose an explosion hazard. Enclosed paper mill areas subject to such dangers commonly maintain very high air humidities to reduce the chance of airborne paper dust explosions.

In special effects pyrotechnics , lycopodium powder [ 2 ] and non-dairy creamer [ 6 ] are two common means of producing safe, controlled fire effects.

To support rapid combustion, the dust must consist of very small particles with a high surface area to volume ratio , thereby making the collective or combined surface area of all the particles very large in comparison to a dust of larger particles.

Dust is defined as powders with particles less than about 500 micrometres in diameter, but finer dust will present a much greater hazard than coarse particles by virtue of the larger total surface area of all the particles.

Concentration [ edit ] Below a certain value, the lower explosive limit (LEL), there is insufficient dust to support the combustion at the rate required for an explosion.

[ 7 ] A combustible concentration at or below 25% of the LEL is considered safe.

[ 8 ] Similarly, if the fuel to air ratio increases above the upper explosive limit (UEL), there is insufficient oxidant to permit combustion to continue at the necessary rate.

Determining the minimum explosive concentration or maximum explosive concentration of dusts in air is difficult, and consulting different sources can lead to quite different results. Typical explosive ranges in air are from few dozens grams/m 3 for the minimum limit, to few kg/m 3 for the maximum limit.  For example, the LEL for sawdust has been determined to be between 40 and 50 grams/m 3 .

[ 9 ] It depends on many factors including the type of material used.

Oxidant [ edit ] Typically, normal atmospheric oxygen can be sufficient to support a dust explosion if the other necessary conditions are also present. High-oxygen or pure oxygen environments are considered to be especially hazardous, as are strong oxidizing gases such as chlorine and fluorine . Also, particulate suspensions of compounds with a high oxidative potential, such as peroxides , chlorates , nitrates , perchlorates , and dichromates , can increase risk of an explosion if combustible materials are also present.

Sources of ignition [ edit ] There are many sources of ignition, and a naked flame need not be the only one: over one half of the dust explosions in Germany in 2005 were from non-flame sources.

[ 7 ] Common sources of ignition include: electrostatic discharge (e.g. an improperly installed conveyor belt , which can act like a Van de Graaff generator ) friction electrical arcing from machinery or other equipment hot surfaces (e.g. overheated bearings ) fire self-ignition However, it is often difficult to determine the exact source of ignition when investigating after an explosion. When a source cannot be found, ignition will often be attributed to static electricity . Static charges can be generated by external sources, or can be internally generated by friction at the surfaces of particles themselves as they collide or move past one another.

Mechanism [ edit ] Video demonstration of a dust explosion, showing the size of an unignited dust cloud, size of the cloud ignited, a partially contained explosion, and a contained explosion Dust has a very large surface area compared to its mass. Since burning can only occur at the surface of a solid or liquid, where it can react with oxygen, this causes dust to be much more flammable than bulk materials. For example, a 1 kg (2.2 lb) sphere of a combustible material with a density of 1 g/cm 3 would be about 12.4 cm (4.9 in) in diametre, and have a surface area of 0.048 m 2 (0.52 sq ft). However, if it were broken up into spherical dust particles 50 μm in diametre (about the size of flour particles) it would have a surface area of 120 m 2 (1,300 sq ft). This greatly-increased surface area allows the material to burn much faster, and the extremely small mass of each particle allows them to catch on fire with much less energy than the bulk material, as there is no heat loss to conduction within the material.

When this mixture of fuel and air is ignited, especially in a confined space such as a warehouse or silo, a significant increase in pressure is created, often more than sufficient to demolish the structure. Even materials that are traditionally thought of as nonflammable (such as aluminium ), or slow burning (such as wood), can produce a powerful explosion when finely divided, and can be ignited by even a small spark.

Demonstration of an open-air dust explosion Experimental setup Finely-ground flour is dispersed Cloud of flour is ignited Fireball spreads rapidly Intense radiant heat has nothing to ignite here Fireball and superheated gases rise Aftermath of explosion, with unburnt flour on the ground Effects [ edit ] A dust explosion can cause major damage to structures, equipment, and personnel from violent overpressure or shockwave effects. Flying objects and debris can cause further damage. Intense radiant heat from a fireball can ignite the surroundings, or cause severe skin burns in unprotected persons. In a tightly enclosed space, the sudden depletion of oxygen can cause asphyxiation .  Where the dust is carbon based (such as in a coal mine), incomplete combustion may cause large amounts of carbon monoxide (the miners' after-damp ) to be created.  This can cause more deaths than the original explosion as well as hindering rescue attempts.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Protection and mitigation [ edit ] This American poster during World War I warned about grain dust explosions Much research has been carried out in Europe and elsewhere to understand how to control these dangers, but dust explosions still occur. The alternatives for making processes and plants safer depend on the industry.

In the coal mining industry, a methane explosion can initiate a coal dust explosion, which can then engulf an entire mine pit. As a precaution, incombustible stone dust may be spread along mine roadways, or stored in trays hanging from the roof, to dilute the coal dust stirred up by a shockwave to the point where it cannot burn. Mines may also be sprayed with water to inhibit ignition.

Some industries exclude oxygen from dust-raising  processes, a precaution known as "inerting". Typically this uses nitrogen , carbon dioxide , or argon , which are incombustible gases which can displace oxygen. The same method is also used in large storage tanks where flammable vapors can accumulate. However, use of oxygen-free gases brings a risk of asphyxiation of the workers. Workers who need illumination in enclosed spaces where a dust explosion is a high risk often use lamps designed for underwater divers , as they have no risk of producing an open spark due to their sealed waterproof design.

Good housekeeping practices, such as eliminating build-up of combustible dust deposits that could be disturbed and lead to a secondary explosion, also help mitigate the problem.

Best engineering control measures which can be found in the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Combustible Dust Standards [ 12 ] include: Wetting Oxidant concentration reduction Deflagration venting Deflagration pressure containment Deflagration suppression Deflagration venting through a dust retention and flame-arresting device Notable incidents [ edit ] Dust clouds are a common source of explosions, causing an estimated 2,000 explosions annually in Europe.

[ 13 ] The table lists notable incidents worldwide.

Event Date Location Country Source material Fatalities Injuries Notes Giacomelli Flour Warehouse explosion December 14, 1785 Turin Italy flour dust 0 2 Documented by Count Morozzo in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences of Turin. One of the earliest scientifically documented flour dust explosions. Occurred when a boy stirring flour by lamplight created a dust cloud that ignited. The explosion damaged the bakery and caused injuries, including burns to one boy and a broken leg to another who jumped from a scaffold. Count Morozzo attributed the explosion to extremely dry flour (after 5-6 months without rain) and provided an early scientific explanation of dust explosions.

[ 14 ] Tradeston Flour Mills explosion July 9, 1872 Glasgow , Scotland United Kingdom grain dust 18 16 Destroyed the mill building and damaged surrounding buildings, and started a fire that killed others. The investigation into the explosion was published across Europe and the Americas.

Great Mill Disaster May 2, 1878 Minneapolis, Minnesota United States grain dust 18 Destroyed the largest grain mill in the world and leveled five other mills, effectively reducing the milling capacity of Minneapolis by one-third to one-half. Prompted mills throughout the country to install better ventilation systems to prevent dust build-up.

Husted Mill and Elevator Disaster June 24, 1913 Buffalo, New York United States grain dust 33 80 This workday afternoon explosion destroyed a grain elevator and mill complex. The engineer of a passing railroad switch engine was blown from the cab and died. Windows of a passing Nickel Plate Road passenger train were broken, but no passengers were injured.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Milwaukee Works explosion May 20, 1919 Milwaukee , Wisconsin United States Feed grinding plant 3 4 The blast was felt for miles around and completely leveled the plant owned by the company.

Douglas Starch Works explosion May 22, 1919 Cedar Rapids, Iowa United States corn starch 43 30 The blast was felt for miles around and completely leveled the plant owned by the company.

Port Colborne explosion August 9, 1919 Port Colborne Canada grain 10 16 Blast also destroyed the steamer Quebec , which was near the grain elevator Large terminal grain elevator in Kansas City September 13, 1919 Kansas City, Missouri United States 14 10 Originated in basement of elevator, during a cleanup period, and travelled up through the elevator shaft Mount Mulligan mine disaster September 19, 1921 Mount Mulligan, Queensland Australia coal dust 75 The series of coal dust explosions within a mine rocked the close-knit township and was audible as far as 30 kilometres (19 mi) away.

Benxihu Colliery explosion April 26, 1942 Benxi , Liaoning Manchukuo (now China) coal dust and gas 1,549 34% of the miners working that day were killed. This is the world's worst-ever coal-mining accident.

Pillsbury Explosion and Fire January 2, 1972 Buffalo, New York United States wheat flour 3 8 New Year's weekend explosion at what was then the world's biggest flour mill. The blast occurred in a series of 500-foot-long, 10-story-tall concrete-and-steel bulk flour storage bins. Repairs took a year to complete.

[ 17 ] Westwego grain elevator explosion December 22, 1977 Westwego, Louisiana United States grain dust 36 13 [ 18 ] Galveston grain elevator explosion December 27, 1977 Galveston , Texas United States grain dust 20 [ 18 ] Bird's Custard factory explosion November 18, 1981 Banbury United Kingdom corn starch 9 [ 13 ] [ 19 ] Metz malt factory explosion October 18, 1982 Metz France barley dust 12 1 [ 20 ] Ingeniero White Silo Nº 5 explosion March 13, 1985 Ingeniero White Argentina grain dust 22 [ 21 ] Harbin textile factory explosion March 17, 1987 Harbin China flax dust 58 177 [ 22 ] Sukhodilska–Skhidna coal mine accident June 9, 1992 Sukhodilsk Ukraine coal dust and firedamp 63 37 [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Blaye grain explosion August 1997 Blaye France grain dust 11 1 Explosion in a grain storage facility at the Société d’Exploitation Maritime Blayaise killed 11 people in nearby offices and injured one.

[ 13 ] Debruce elevator explosion June 1998 Wichita, Kansas United States grain dust 7 10 Multiple explosions occurred in what was then the world's largest grain elevator. Dust collection systems were not properly maintained.

[ 25 ] West Pharmaceutical Services explosion January 29, 2003 Kinston, North Carolina United States polyethylene dust 6 38 CTA Acoustics dust explosion February 20, 2003 Corbin, Kentucky United States resin dust 7 37 Employees were doing housekeeping measures when a oven was left open, small fires caused by resin dust were common, the dust was blown into the extractor, and into the oven which caused the explosion.

[ 26 ] Imperial Sugar explosion February 7, 2008 Port Wentworth, Georgia United States sugar dust 14 42 [ 13 ] 2014 Kunshan explosion August 2, 2014 Kunshan China metal powder 146 114 Formosa Fun Coast explosion June 27, 2015 New Taipei Taiwan colored starch powder 15 498 Explosion when Holi -like colored powder was released at an outdoor music and color festival at the Formosa Fun Coast .

Bosley wood flour mill explosion July 17, 2015 Bosley , Cheshire United Kingdom wood flour 4 4 [ 27 ] [ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Air to fuel ratio Power tool References [ edit ] ^ Harding, Luke (2007-09-11).

"Russia unveils the 'father of all bombs' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2019-01-19 .

^ a b Eckhoff, Rolf K. (1997). Dust Explosions in the Process Industries (2nd ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann.

ISBN 0-7506-3270-4 .

^ "OSHA Fact Sheet: Hazard Alert: Combustible Dust Explosions" (PDF) .

osha.gov . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-11-01 . Retrieved 2018-01-23 .

^ Nathanson, Iric.

The 1878 Washburn A Mill Explosion . Archived from the original on 2014-04-08 . Retrieved 2014-04-08 .

^ a b c Simpson, Timothy W. (2017-08-17), "Will My AM Part Explode? Not if you're careful. Parts built from metallic powder require extra precautions" , Modern Machine Shop .

^ "Detonation Films – Why Coffee Creamer?" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 20, 2011 .

^ a b "Dust explosion protection" (PDF) .

bartec.de . 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-12-10.

^ NFPA 69 8.3.1 ^ "Dust explosion concentration – Physical meaning and use in risk assessment of powder minimum explosive concentration (MEC)" .

PowderProcess.net .

^ Murray, Charles Edward Robertson; Wilberforce, Daniel; Ritchie, David (1903), "Mount Kembla Colliery Disaster 31 July 1902 – Report of the Royal Commission, together with minutes of evidence and exhibits" , Historical and Cultural Collections – Publications , New South Wales Legislative Assembly: xxxvi , retrieved 19 May 2019 ^ Roberts, H C W (September 1952), Report on the causes of, and circumstances attending, the explosion which occurred at Easington Colliery, County Durham, on the 29th May, 1951.

, Cmd 8646, London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, pp. 9, 39– 40, hdl : 1842/5365 ^ "List of NFPA Codes & Standards" .

NFPA.org .

^ a b c d Hought, Julian (28 February 2011).

"Dust to Dust" . Retrieved 2015-07-02 .

^ Count Morozzo (1794–1802). "Account of a violent Explosion which happened in the Flour-Warehouse, at Turin, December the 14th, 1785".

The Repertory of arts and manufactures [ From the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences of Turin ]. Vol. II. S.l.: s.n. pp.

416– 424.

^ "Buffalo, NY Grain Elevator Explosion, June 1913 | GenDisasters ... Genealogy in Tragedy, Disasters, Fires, Floods Page 1" .

www.gendisasters.com . Retrieved 2022-02-28 .

^ Henry H., Baxter (1980).

Grain Elevators (PDF) . Buffalo, NY: Buffalo and Erie County Historical Society. p. 14.

^ "1 Dead, 2 Lost as Blast in Buffalo Rips World's Biggest Flour Mill" .

The New York Times . 1972-01-03.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2022-02-28 .

^ a b "Explosion suits settled".

The Day . New London, Connecticut. 24 April 1980. p. 26.

^ "Corn Starch Dust Explosion at General Foods Ltd, Banbury, Oxfordshire – 18th November 1981". Great Britain: January 1983. Occupational Health & Safety Information Service, UK.

ISBN 0-11-883673-0 ^ Explosion dans un silo d'une malterie (in French) ^ "En un emotivo acto presentaron el documental "Elevador 5 – 35 años" " .

La Nueva (in Spanish). 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .

^ "47 Die, 179 Injured in Blast at Linen Mill in Northeast China" .

Los Angeles Times . March 17, 1987 . Retrieved 2015-07-02 .

^ "Взрыв на шахте «Суходольская-Восточная»" . 25 March 2016.

^ "Самые масштабные аварии на шахтах за годы независимой Украины" . 2 March 2017.

^ OSHA report on the Debruce explosion ^ USCSB final report on the CTA Acoustics explosion ^ "Bosley explosion: Four missing in Wood Flour Mills blast" .

BBC News . July 17, 2015 . Retrieved 2015-12-02 .

^ Pilling, Kim (July 27, 2015).

"Bosley Wood flour mill explosion: Fourth body found in wreckage of building gutted by blast" .

Mirror Online . Retrieved 2015-12-02 .

Barton, John, ed. (2002).

Dust Explosion Prevention and Protection: A Practical Guide . Institution of Chemical Engineers.

ISBN 0-85295-410-7 .

Eckhoff, Rolf K. (1997).

Dust Explosions in the Process Industries (2nd ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann.

ISBN 0-7506-3270-4 .

Price, David J. (1921). "A Disastrous Explosion of Starch Dust".

American Miller and Processor .

49 ( 1– 6). National Miller Publications.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dust explosion .

Incidents in France and the US: Combustible dust explosion investigation products from the Chemical Safety Board Combustible Dust Policy Institute-ATEX OSHA case studies of dust explosions Protecting process plant, grain handling facilities, etc. from the risk of dust hazard explosions: Hazard Monitoring Equipment – Selection, Installation and Maintenance Seminars for Combustible Dust Safety HSE (UK) advice on safe handling of combustible dust Combustible Dust, CCOHS v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dust_explosion&oldid=1305732057 " Categories : Dust explosions Chemical processes Occupational safety and health Particulates Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dust explosion 23 languages Add topic

