Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Science of motion 2 Music 3 Works 4 References Toggle the table of contents Giambattista Benedetti 23 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian mathematician (1530–1590) Giambattista Benedetti Born 14 August 1530 ( 1530-08-14 ) Venice , Republic of Venice Died 20 January 1590 ( 1590-01-21 ) (aged 59) Turin , Duchy of Savoy , Holy Roman Empire Scientific career Fields Mathematician Giambattista (Gianbattista) Benedetti (14 August 1530 – 20 January 1590) was an Italian mathematician from Venice who was also interested in physics , mechanics , the construction of sundials , and the science of music .

[ 1 ] Resolutio omnium Euclidis problematum , 1553 Science of motion [ edit ] In his works Resolutio omnium Euclidis problematum (1553) [ 2 ] and Demonstratio proportionum motuum localium (1554), [ 3 ] Benedetti proposed a new doctrine of the speed of bodies in free fall. The accepted Aristotelian doctrine at that time was that the speed of a freely falling body is directly proportional to the total weight of the body and inversely proportional to the density of the medium. Benedetti's view was that the speed depends on just the difference between the specific gravity of the body and that of the medium. As opposed to the Aristotelian theory, his theory predicts that two objects of the same material but of different weights would fall at the same speed, and also that objects of different materials in a vacuum would fall at different though finite speeds.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] In a second edition of the Demonstratio (also 1554), he extended this theory to include the effect of the resistance of the medium, which he said was proportional to the cross section or the surface area of the body. Thus two objects of the same material but of different surface areas would only fall at equal speeds in a vacuum. He repeated this version of his theory in his later Diversarum speculationum mathematicarum et physicarum liber (1585). In this work he explains his theory in terms of the then current theory of impetus .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] It is thought that Galileo derived his initial theory of the speed of a freely falling body from his reading of Benedetti's works. Thus the account found in Galileo's De motu , his early work on the science of motion, follows Benedetti's initial theory as described above. It omits the later development which included the resistance of the medium and not just its density. In this early work, Galileo also subscribes to the theory of impetus.

[ 5 ] In 1562, the Jesuit Jean Taisnier published from the press of Johann Birkmann of Cologne a work entitled Opusculum perpetua memoria dignissimum, de natura magnetis et ejus effectibus, Item de motu continuo .

[ 6 ] This is considered a piece of plagiarism , as Taisnier presents, as though his own, the Epistola de magnete of Peter of Maricourt and the second edition of Benedetti's Demonstratio .

[ 7 ] Music [ edit ] In a letter to Cipriano de Rore dated from around 1563, Benedetti proposed a new theory of the cause of consonance , arguing that since sound consists of air waves or vibrations, in the more consonant intervals the shorter, more frequent waves concurred with the longer, less frequent waves at regular intervals. In the same letter, he proposed a measure of consonance by taking the product of the numerator and the denominator of a rational interval in lowest terms; this can be considered an early height function .

Isaac Beeckman and Marin Mersenne both adopted this theory in the next century. When they sought Descartes' opinion on Benedetti's theory, Descartes declined to judge the goodness of consonances by such a rational method. Descartes argued that the ear prefers one or another according to the musical context rather than because of any concordance of vibrations.

[ 8 ] [ page needed ] Centuries later, Hermann von Helmholtz , in Sensations of Tone (1863) suggested that consonance was due to the coincidence of overtones , which was refined by David Cope in the concept of interval strength (1997), suggesting a similar measure (smaller coefficients are more consonant), but a different mechanism (overtones coinciding, rather than the fundamental waves themselves coinciding periodically).

James Tenney used the logarithm of Benedetti's measure as his "harmonic distance" (1983): ⁠ log 2 ⁡ ⁡ ( a b ) {\displaystyle \log _{2}(ab)} ⁠ is the harmonic distance for the ratio b/a measured from an arbitrary tonal center 1/1 , and corresponds geometrically to the taxicab distance from the origin, where the coordinates are the logarithms of the terms of the ratio.

[ 9 ] Works [ edit ] Consideratione d'intorno al discorso della grandezza della terra, e dell'acqua , 1579 De gnomonum umbrarumque solarium usu (in Latin). Torino: eredi Niccolò Bevilacqua. 1574.

Consideratione d'intorno al discorso della grandezza della terra, e dell'acqua (in Italian). Torino: eredi Niccolò Bevilacqua. 1579.

Diversarum speculationum mathematicarum et physicarum liber (in Latin). Torino: eredi Niccolò Bevilacqua. 1585.

Demonstratio proportionum (in Italian). Venezia: Istituto veneto di scienze lettere ed arti. 1985.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Benedetti, Giovanni Battista" .

The Archimedes Project . Archived from the original on 2012-02-20 . Retrieved 2010-03-11 .

^ Resolvtio Omnivm Euclidis Problematvm aliorvmque ad hoc necessario inuentorum una tantummodo circini data apertura. Per Ioannem Baptistam de Benedictis Inventa (Venetiis, 1553). Page views at Internet Archive .

^ Demonstratio Proportionum Motuum Localium contra Aristotelem et Omnes Philosophos. Per Ioannem Baptistam de Benedictis inuenta (Venetiis, 1554 Idibus Februarii). Page views at Internet Archive .

^ a b Drabkin, I. E.

(1963). "Two Versions of G. B. Benedetti's Demonstratio Proportionum Motuum Localium".

Isis .

54 (2): 259– 262.

doi : 10.1086/349706 .

ISSN 0021-1753 .

JSTOR 228543 .

S2CID 144883728 .

^ Wallace, William A. (1998).

"Galileo's Pisan studies in science and philosophy" . In Peter K. Machamer (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Galileo . Cambridge University Press. pp.

27–52 .

ISBN 978-0-521-58841-6 .

^ J. Taisnier, Opusculum perpetua memoria dignissimum, de natura magnetis et ejus effectibus, Item de motu continuo (Apud Joannem Birckmannum, Cologne 1562). Pageviews at Google .

^ Duhem, Pierre (1911).

"Pierre de Maricourt" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Palisca, Claude V. (1973).

"Music and Science" . In Philip Paul Wiener (ed.).

Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas . Vol. 3. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

ISBN 978-0-684-16424-3 .

^ Tenney, James (1983).

"John Cage and the Theory of Harmony" (PDF) . p. 24.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Portugal Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN People Trove Italian People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giambattista_Benedetti&oldid=1298976134 " Categories : 16th-century Italian mathematicians 16th-century Italian scientists Italian music theorists Mathematicians from the Republic of Venice 1530 births 1590 deaths 16th-century Italian writers 16th-century Italian male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2022 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 22:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giambattista Benedetti 23 languages Add topic

