Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Entry into politics and journalism 1.3 Shift to conservatism 1.4 Later life 2 Influence 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 English translations of Donoso Cortés 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Juan Donoso Cortés 18 languages Asturianu Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Latina مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish writer and politician (1809–1853) In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Donoso Cortés and the second or maternal family name is Fernández Canedo .

The Most Excellent Juan Donoso Cortés Marqués de Valdegamas OIC LH TOSD Portrait by Federico Madrazo , 1849 Born Juan Francisco María de la Salud Donoso Cortés y Fernández Canedo ( 1809-05-06 ) 6 May 1809 Valle de la Serena , Spain Died 3 May 1853 (1853-05-03) (aged 43) Paris , French Empire Nationality Spanish Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western Philosophy Spanish philosophy School Spanish Traditionalism Counter-Enlightenment Ultramontanism Main interests Political theory , Political theology Notable works Essays on Catholicism, Liberalism, and Socialism Seat R of the Real Academia Española In office 16 April 1848 – 3 May 1853 Preceded by Javier de Burgos Succeeded by Rafael María Baralt Juan Francisco María de la Salud Donoso Cortés y Fernández Canedo, marqués de Valdegamas (6 May 1809 – 3 May 1853) was a Spanish counter-revolutionary author, diplomat, politician, and Catholic political theologian .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Cortés was born at Valle de la Serena ( Extremadura ) on 6 May 1809. His father, D.

Pedro Donoso Cortés was a lawyer and landowner, and a descendant of the conquistador Hernán Cortés . His mother, Maria Elena Fernández-Canedo was a provincial heiress.

[ 2 ] During his youth, Juan Donoso was tutored by the liberal Antonio Beltran in Latin, French, and other subjects required for entrance to a university. At 11, possibly due to issues at home, Juan Donoso left to study at the University of Salamanca . He only remained there a year before leaving to study at the Colegio de San Pedro de Caceres. In 1823, at age 14, he entered the University of Seville to study law, and would remain there until 1828. It was here that Donoso Cortés first encountered philosophy; he fell under the influence of liberal and traditionalist thinkers such as John Locke and Louis de Bonald .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Donoso returned home to work at his father's law practice for a couple of years. At this time he continued his eclectic reading habits. In October 1829, Cortés was offered at professorship in aesthetics and politics at the Colegio de San Pedro de Caceres. He criticized medieval feudalism but defended the Papacy and the Crusades , which he believed engendered vitality into European civilization.

[ 1 ] Influenced by the rationalism prevalent in Spain following upon the French invasions, he ardently embraced the principles of Liberalism and fell under the influence of Jean-Jacques Rousseau , whom he later characterized as "the most eloquent of sophists".

Entry into politics and journalism [ edit ] Cortés married Teresa Carrasco in 1830, however their marriage lasted only five years with the death of Teresa after the birth of their only child, Maria. It was also at this time that Juan Donoso entered politics along with his brother-in-law.

[ 1 ] He entered politics as an ardent liberal under the influence of Manuel José Quintana .

[ 4 ] After the death of King Ferdinand VII , Donoso, along with most of Spain's liberals, backed the late king's fourth wife, Maria Christina , and her claim to the throne of Spain. They were opposed by Ferdinand's clerical and conservative brother Carlos , and his conservative supporters who were known as Carlists . In 1832, Donoso wrote a memorandum to King Ferdinand defending female succession as being in line with the king's Pragmatic Sanction of 1830 . For his efforts, the new queen regent would appoint Donoso to a position in the Secretariat of State.

[ 5 ] Donoso backed María Cristina's (left), wife of the late King Ferdinand VII , succession to the Spanish throne over the late King's brother Carlos (right).

The death of King Ferdinand in 1833 precipitated the First Carlist War . Donoso protested the massacre of friars by anti-clerical liberals in Madrid in July 1834 in a memo to Maria Christina.

Donoso's views began to shift after the 1836 rising at La Granja , where soldiers in the royal palace forced Maria Cristina to reinstitute the liberal Constitution of 1812 . At this time Donoso was appointed as a cabinet secretary and elected to the Cortes as a member of the liberal Moderate Party , which represented bourgeois interests and supported a constitutional monarchy. At this time he gave a series of lectures for the party, A Defense of Representative Government , where he lauded representative government and rationalism, but at the same time defended dictatorship as sometimes being a necessary evil.

[ 6 ] The period between 1837 and 1840 saw the nadir of Donoso's journalistic career; writing for various publications such as El Correo Nacional , El Porvenir , and El Piloto . His drift into conservatism continued during this time; Donoso attacked Victor Hugo's depiction of Mary Stuart , he argued in favor of the use of rich articles in religious rites. His most extensive article during this time, "Classicism and Romanticism", written in El Correo Nacional in August or September 1838, urged a synthesis between classicist and romantic art forms. Donoso's articles brought him a great deal of notoriety and condemnation, with 65 members of the Cortes accusing Donoso of being subversive.

[ 7 ] Donoso recognized the power of the press and sought to influence public discussion through his publications, yet he was also one of the sharpest critics of the press and the freedom of the press . He believed that journalism was an almost sacred vocation but that this vocation was often abused and was used to spread mindless chatter and gossip. He was critical of the use of the press to spread revolutionary, socialistic, and anti-Christian ideas. Donoso went as far as to believe that freedom of the press itself was the result of the abandonment of Christian moral principles: editors were a new priesthood devoted to furthering the revolution and the authority of Christian doctrine was replaced with endless discussion. He was also critical of the use of the press by governments to achieve centralization and bureaucratization.

[ 8 ] Shift to conservatism [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Spain Ideologies Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism Sociological National Catholicism Integrism Maurism Mellismo Neocatólicos Noucentisme Spanish nationalism Traditionalism Principles Anti-communism Anti-Masonry Authority Familialism Family values Hispanidad Honour Spain Monarchy Patriotism Social hierarchy Spanish unionism Tradition History Spanish Empire Carlist Wars Bourbon Restoration 1923 Spanish coup d'état Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera Spanish Civil War Bando nacional White Terror Francoist Spain Búnker 20-N Intellectuals Albiñana Balmes Bleiberg Cela Donoso Cortés Entralgo Gonzalo Fernández de la Mora Gambra Gambra Gutiérrez Gaos Gil Robles Hervás de Maeztu Maravall Marías Menéndez d'Ors (Álvaro) Ortega y Gasset Panero Pradera Roca Barea Santayana de Tejada de Unamuno Vigón Vidal Vázquez de Mella Zubiri Literature Liberalism Is a Sin (1884) The Dehumanization of Art (1925) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The New State (1935) Manifesto Against the Death of the Spirit and the Earth (2002) Politicians Abascal Ayuso Aznar Casado Carrero Donoso Cortés Cosidó Fal Fernández-Miranda Fraga Franco Gambra Gil-Robles Girón Goicoechea González-Camino Marhuenda Maura Navarro Pérez Piñar Pradera Rajoy de Rivera Rodezno Ruiz-Jarabo Serrano Solana González-Camino de Tejada Tejero Utrera Valiente Vázquez de Mella Commentators Aznar Zubigaray Franco (Carmen) Losantos Marhuenda Torres d'Ors (Eugenio) Pemán Dalí Parties Active' Navarrese People's Union (UPN) People's Party (PP) Spanish Catholic Movement (MCE) Vox Workers' Front Defunct CEDA Conservative Party Democratic Union of Catalonia FET y de las JONS (factions) Liberal Republican Right New Force Patriotic Union People's Alliance Popular Action Regionalist League of Catalonia Spanish Renovation Traditionalist Communion Organisations Acción Española CitizenGo FAES Francisco Franco National Foundation Madrid Forum Movimiento Nacional (factions) Requeté Media ABC Arriba Época El Alcázar Heraldo de Aragón La Razón Revista Contemporánea Revista de Occidente Telva Trece Related topics Art and culture Immigration and crime Peronism Politics of Spain Liberalism Spanish irredentism Iberism Conservatism portal Spain portal v t e Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e By the end of the First Carlist War in 1839, Donoso had become disillusioned with liberalism, rationalism, and the bourgeoisie. He became something of a recluse and rarely left the royal palace. With the fall of the regency of Maria Christina, Donoso went into exile with the former Queen-regent; from March 1841 to the autumn of 1843, Donoso spent almost all of his time in Paris . During this time he began a history of the regency of Maria Christina, however it would never be finished. During this time Donoso came more strongly under the influence of the French traditionalists Joseph de Maistre and Louis de Bonald.

[ 7 ] Donoso returned to Spain in late 1843 and played a key role in granting majority status to Queen Isabella II , ending the regency of Baldomero Espartero . For his services to the crown Donoso was made private secretary to the young Queen and he was raised to the peerage . Shortly after, in May 1844, General Narváez came to power as prime minister. Donoso's liberalism saw a brief upsurge with the early reforms of Pope Pius IX , who appointed Pellegrino Rossi to be prime minister of the Papal States .

[ 7 ] The Revolutions of 1848 , along with the assassination of Rossi and the death Donoso's pious Carlist brother Pedro brought an end to any trace of liberalism in Donoso's thinking. In January 1849, Donoso gave a speech in the Cortes, "On Dictatorship," defending the actions of General Narvaez in suppressing any traces of revolutionary activity in Spain. Donoso spoke out vociferously against the chaos he saw unfolding across Europe in the Cortes; he attacked socialism as the result of the erosion of Christian morality and atheism. Donoso would later become a sharp critic of Narvaez and his speeches denouncing him in the Cortes would lead to Narvaez's resignation. During this time Donoso briefly served as ambassador to Berlin .

[ 9 ] Later life [ edit ] In 1851, Donoso was appointed as the Spanish ambassador to France, presenting his credentials to the court of President, and later Emperor, Louis Napoleon , who would reign under the title of Napoleon III. Donoso was initially a confidant of Napoleon, and may have helped finance his coup . However, as time went on it became clear that Donoso and Napoleon did not share a common intellectual purpose. Still, Donoso worked to obtain international recognition for the new regime and he represented Queen Isabella II at the Emperor's marriage to the Spanish countess Eugénie de Montijo .

[ 10 ] Donoso's life took on a newfound piety during this time: he went on pilgrimage, wore a hair shirt , volunteered with the Society of St. Vincent de Paul , visited slums and prisons, and donated much of his wealth to the poor. He also spent much of time writing in opposition to the Liberal French Catholics and their leader Bishop Dupanloup .

[ 10 ] The grave of Juan Donoso Cortés in the church of San Isidro el Real in Madrid, Spain.

It was during this time Donoso Cortés issued his Ensayo Sobre el Catolicismo, el Liberalismo, y el Socialismo Considerados en sus Principios Fundamentales (1851), [ 11 ] or Essays on Catholicism, Liberalism, and Socialism, Considered in their Fundamental Principles , the work for which he is most well-known. It was written at the insistence of Louis Veuillot , who was an intimate friend of Juan Donoso. The work placed Cortés in the first rank of Catholic apologists and made him a defender of Ultramontanism . It is an exposition of the impotence of all human systems of philosophy to solve the problem of human destiny and of the absolute dependence of humanity upon the Catholic Church for its social and political salvation.

[ 12 ] He excoriates liberalism as the bridge that ultimately leads to atheistic socialism.

[ 10 ] During his last years he also engaged in a series of correspondences that developed his thought further; firstly with the former Queen regent Maria Christina; with Cardinal Fornari , the papal nuncio to France; and Atanazy Raczyński , a Polish nobleman and Prussian ambassador to Spain, who was a close friend of Donoso. He also briefly engaged in a correspondence with Pope Pius IX, and warned the pope about the continuing threat from Gallicanism and democracy. Many of Donoso's ideas would be incorporated into Pius's encyclical Quanta Cura and its attached Syllabus of Errors .

[ 10 ] Juan Donoso Cortés died in the Spanish Embassy in Paris on 3 May 1853. His funeral was held in the Church of Saint Phillipe du Roule in Paris where he would be interred. His remains were transferred to Madrid on 11 May 1900, along with the remains of Goya , Moratin , and Melendez Valdes . His remains are currently interred in the pantheon of the royal cemetery of San Isidro el Real .

[ 13 ] Donoso Cortés's works were collected in five volumes at Madrid (1854–1855) under the editorship of Gavino Tejado.

[ 11 ] Influence [ edit ] In his work Political Theology (1922), political philosopher Carl Schmitt [ 14 ] [ 15 ] devotes large portions of his final chapter ("On the Counterrevolutionary Philosophy of the State") to Donoso Cortés, praising him for recognizing the importance of decision and of the concept of sovereignty .

[ 16 ] Schmitt also credited Donoso's Discourse on Dictatorship with initiating the demise of the progressive notion of history.

[ 17 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Obras de Don Juan Donoso Cortés, Marqués de Valdegamas, Ordenadas y Precedidas de una Noticia Biográfica por Gavino Tejado, Impr. de Tejado, 1854-1855: Vol I.

Vol. II.

Vol. III.

Vol. IV.

Vol. V.

Obras Completas de Donoso Cortés, Juan, Marqués de Valdegamas, 1809-1853, 2 Vols., Editorial Católica, 1946.

Obras Completas. Edición, Introducción y Notas de Carlos Valverde, 2 Vols., Editorial Católica, 1970.

English translations of Donoso Cortés [ edit ] Essay on Catholicism, Liberalism and Socialism, Considered in their Fundamental Principles, tr. Madeleine Vinton Goddard. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott & Co., 1862.

Essays on Catholicism, Liberalism and Socialism, Considered in their Fundamental Principles, tr. William McDonald. Dublin: M.H. Gill & Son, 1879.

Essays on Catholicism, Liberalism and Socialism: Considered in Their Fundamental Principles, Cornell University Library, 2010.

In Menczer, Béla, 1962.

Catholic Political Thought, 1789-1848.

University of Notre Dame Press.

"The Church, the State, and Revolution," pp. 160–176.

"Socialism," pp. 177–182.

On Order: Two Addresses Newly Translated into English by Juan Donoso Cortes.

Plutarch Press, 1989.

Selected Works of Juan Donoso Cortes: Contributions in Political Science.

Praeger, 2000.

Donoso Cortes: Readings in Political Theory, R.A. Herrera ed., Sapientia Press of Ave Maria University, 2007.

Letter to Cardinal Fornari on the Errors of Our Time , [n.d.] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Herrera 2007 , p. ix ^ Seguí Terol, María Rafaela (16 January 2017).

Juan Donoso Cortés . Universidad de Alicante.

ISBN 978-84-9717-495-4 . Retrieved 10 August 2024 .

^ Neill, Thomas Patrick (1951). "Donoso Cortés." In: They Lived the Faith; Great Lay Leaders of Modern Times.

Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, p. 244.

^ Verdeguer, Suárez (1989). "Los Comienzos Parlamentarios de Donoso Cortés", Revista de Estudios Políticos , No. 65, pp. 7–34.

^ Herrera 2007 , pp. ix–x ^ Herrera 2007 , pp. x–xi ^ a b c Herrera 2007 , pp. xi–xii ^ Herrera 2007 , pp. 3–4 ^ Herrera 2007 , pp. xii–xiii ^ a b c d Herrera 2007 , pp. xiv–xv ^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Donoso Cortés, Juan ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 419.

^ "Church and State," The Catholic World , Vol. V, No. 25, 1867, pp. 1–14.

^ Herrera 2007 , p. xvi ^ McNamara, Vincent J. (1995). "Comments on Carl Schmitt and Juan Donoso Cortes," Modern Age , Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 182–185.

^ Ulmen, Gary (2002). "Carl Schmitt and Donoso Cortes," Telos , No. 125, pp. 69–79.

^ Schmitt, Carl (2005).

Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty . University of Chicago Press. pp.

51 –66.

ISBN 0-226-73889-2 .

^ Herrera 2007 , p. 47 Sources [ edit ] Herrera, R. A., ed. (2007).

Donoso Cortes: Readings in Political Theory . Translated by McNamara, Vincent; Schwartz, Michael. Ave Maria, FL: Sapientia Press.

ISBN 978-1-932589-48-1 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Juan Francesco Maria de la Saludad Donoso Cortés ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Armas, Gabriel de (1953).

Donoso Cortés: su Sentido Trascendente de la Vida.

Madrid: Colección Cálamo.

Balakrishnan, Gopal (2000) "The Enemy: An Intellectual Portrait of Carl Schmitt." London: Verso Brophy, Liam (1950). "Donoso Cortes: Statesman and Apologist," The Irish Monthly , Vol. 78, No. 927, pp. 416–421.

Dempf, Alois (1937).

Christliche Staatsphilosophie in Spanien . Salzburg: Pustet.

Fagoaga, Miguel (1958).

El Pensamiento Social de Donoso Cortés.

Madrid: Editora Nacional.

Galindo Herrero, Santiago (1957).

Donoso Cortés y su Teoría Política.

Diputación Provincial de Badajoz, Badajoz.

Graham, John Thomas (1974).

Donoso Cortés; Utopian Romanticist and Political Realist.

University of Missouri Press.

Gutiérrez Lasanta, Francisco (1949).

Pensadores Políticos del Siglo XIX.

Madrid: Editora Nacional.

Herrera, Robert A. (1988). "The Great in the Small: Donoso Cortes' Variations on a Theme from the Civitas Dei," Augustiniana , No. 1-4, pp. 140–147.

Herrera, Robert A. (1995).

Donoso Cortés: Cassandra of the Age.

Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Pub. Co.

Kennedy, John J. (1952). "Donoso Cortés as Servant of the State," The Review of Politics , Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 520–550.

McNamara, Vincent J. (1992). "The Hegelianism of Young Donoso Cortés." In: Saints, Sovereigns, and Scholars.

New York and Geneva: Peter Lamb, pp. 337–348.

McNamara, Vincent J. (1992).

"Juan Donoso Cortés: un Doctrinario Liberal," Rev. Filosofía Univ. Costa Rica, Vol. 30, No. 72, pp. 209–216.

Monsegú, Bernardo (1958).

Clave Teológica de la Historia según Donoso Cortés.

Badajoz: Impr. de la Excma. Diputación Provincial.

Neill, Thomas P. (1955). "Juan Donoso Cortés: History and 'Prophecy'," The Catholic Historical Review, Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 385–410.

Regalado García, Antonio (1967). "The Counterrevolutionary Image of The World," Yale French Studies, No. 39, pp. 98–118.

Sánchez Abelenda, Raúl (1969).

La Teoría del Poder en el Pensamiento Político de Juan Donoso Cortés.

Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires.

Schmitt, Carl (2002). "A Pan-European Interpretation of Donoso Cortes," Telos , No. 125, pp. 100–115.

Schramm, Edmund (1936).

Donoso Cortés: Su Vida y su Pensamiento.

Madrid: Espasa Calpe.

Schramm, Edmund (1952).

Donoso Cortés: Ejemplo del Pensamiento de la Tradición.

Madrid: Ateneo.

Spektorowski, Alberto. "Maistre, Donoso Cortés, and the Legacy of Catholic Authoritarianism," Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol. 63, No. 2, pp. 283–302.

Suárez Verdeguer, Federico (1964).

Introducción a Donoso Cortés.

Madrid: Rialp.

Suárez Verdeguer, Federico (1997).

Vida y obra de Juan Donoso Cortés.

Pamplona: Ediciones Eunate.

Tarragó, Rafael E. (1999).

"Two Catholic Conservatives: The Ideas of Joseph de Maistre and Juan Donoso Cortes," Catholic Social Science Review , Vol. 4, pp. 167–177.

Tejada, Francisco Elías de (1949).

Para una Interpretación Extremeña de Donoso Cortés . Diputación Provincial de Cáceres.

Viereck, Peter (1956).

Conservatism from John Adams to Churchill.

Princeton: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc.

Westemeyer, Dietmar (1940).

Donoso Cortés: Staatsmann und Theologe . Münster: Regensberg.

Wilhelmsen, Frederick (1967).

"Donoso Cortes and the Meaning of Political Power," The Intercollegiate Review , Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 109–127.

Wilson, Francis G. (1960). "Donoso Cortes: The Continuing Crisis," Journal of Inter-American Studies , Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 45–63.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Juan Donoso Cortés at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Juan Donoso Cortés at Wikiquote Works by or about Juan Donoso Cortés at Wikisource Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry on Cortés v t e Real Academia Española seat R Juan Curiel (1714) Antonio Mateos Murillo (1775) Ramón Cabrera y Rubio (1814) José Miguel de Carvajal-Vargas (1814) Javier de Burgos (1830) Juan Donoso Cortés (1848) Rafael María Baralt (1853) Tomás Rodríguez Rubí (1860) Antonio María Fabié (1891) Ángel María Dacarrete [1] José Canalejas y Méndez [2] Enrique de Aguilera y Gamboa [3] Juan Gualberto López-Valdemoro de Quesada (1924) Enrique Díez Canedo (1935) Luis Martínez Kléiser (1946) Fernando Lázaro Carreter (1972) Javier Marías (2008) Javier Cercas (2024) [1] He was elected in 1900 but never took the seat; [2] He was elected in 1904 but never took the seat; [3] He was elected in 1918 but never took the seat v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐vgkr6
Cached time: 20250817053011
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.442 seconds
Real time usage: 1.815 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12988/1000000
Revision size: 24105/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 238094/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13062/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 91908/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.837/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22397998/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1455.910      1 -total
 32.20%  468.795      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.65%  198.709      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 13.28%  193.362      1 Template:Reflist
 11.08%  161.335      1 Template:Political_philosophy
 10.45%  152.191     10 Template:Lang
 10.33%  150.430      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.97%  130.528      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Spain
  7.81%  113.744      3 Template:Cite_book
  7.35%  107.067      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2978965:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053011 and revision id 1303679738. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juan_Donoso_Cortés&oldid=1303679738 " Categories : 1809 births 1853 deaths 19th-century Roman Catholics Counter-revolutionaries People from the Province of Badajoz Lay Dominicans Spanish politicians Spanish monarchists Spanish nationalists Spanish Roman Catholic writers Members of the Royal Spanish Academy Writers from Extremadura Ambassadors of Spain to France 19th-century Spanish male writers 19th-century Spanish philosophers University of Salamanca alumni Spanish political writers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 12:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Juan Donoso Cortés 18 languages Add topic

