Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Examples 3 Bundle objects 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Bundle (mathematics) 4 languages Қазақша 日本語 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Bundle (geometry) .

In mathematics , a bundle is a generalization of a fiber bundle dropping the condition of a local product structure. The requirement of a local product structure rests on the bundle having a topology . Without this requirement, more general objects can be considered bundles. For example, one can consider a bundle π: E → B with E and B sets . It is no longer true that the preimages π π − − 1 ( x ) {\displaystyle \pi ^{-1}(x)} must all look alike, unlike fiber bundles, where the fibers must all be isomorphic (in the case of vector bundles ) and homeomorphic .

Definition [ edit ] A bundle is a triple ( E , p , B ) where E , B are sets and p : E → B is a map.

[ 1 ] E is called the total space B is the base space of the bundle p is the projection This definition of a bundle is quite unrestrictive. For instance, the empty function defines a bundle. Nonetheless it serves well to introduce the basic terminology, and every type of bundle has the basic ingredients of above with restrictions on E , p , B and usually there is additional structure.

For each b ∈ B , p −1 ( b ) is the fibre or fiber of the bundle over b .

A bundle ( E* , p* , B* ) is a subbundle of ( E , p , B ) if B* ⊂ B , E* ⊂ E and p* = p | E* .

A cross section is a map s : B → E such that p ( s ( b )) = b for each b ∈ B , that is, s ( b ) ∈ p −1 ( b ) .

Examples [ edit ] If E and B are smooth manifolds and p is smooth, surjective and in addition a submersion , then the bundle is a fibered manifold . Here and in the following examples, the smoothness condition may be weakened to continuous or sharpened to analytic, or it could be anything reasonable, like continuously differentiable ( C 1 ), in between.

If for each two points b 1 and b 2 in the base, the corresponding fibers p −1 ( b 1 ) and p −1 ( b 2 ) are homotopy equivalent , then the bundle is a fibration .

If for each two points b 1 and b 2 in the base, the corresponding fibers p −1 ( b 1 ) and p −1 ( b 2 ) are homeomorphic , and in addition the bundle satisfies certain conditions of local triviality outlined in the pertaining linked articles, then the bundle is a fiber bundle . Usually there is additional structure, e.g. a group structure or a vector space structure , on the fibers besides a topology. Then is required that the homeomorphism is an isomorphism with respect to that structure, and the conditions of local triviality are sharpened accordingly.

A principal bundle is a fiber bundle endowed with a right group action with certain properties. One example of a principal bundle is the frame bundle .

If for each two points b 1 and b 2 in the base, the corresponding fibers p −1 ( b 1 ) and p −1 ( b 2 ) are vector spaces of the same dimension, then the bundle is a vector bundle if the appropriate conditions of local triviality are satisfied. The tangent bundle is an example of a vector bundle.

Bundle objects [ edit ] More generally, bundles or bundle objects can be defined in any category : in a category C , a bundle is simply an epimorphism π: E → B .  If the category is not concrete , then the notion of a preimage of the map is not necessarily available. Therefore these bundles may have no fibers at all, although for sufficiently well behaved categories they do; for instance, for a category with pullbacks and a terminal object 1 the points of B can be identified with morphisms p :1→ B and the fiber of p is obtained as the pullback of p and π. The category of bundles over B is a subcategory of the slice category ( C ↓ B ) of objects over B , while the category of bundles without fixed base object is a subcategory of the comma category ( C ↓ C ) which is also the functor category C ², the category of morphisms in C .

The category of smooth vector bundles is a bundle object over the category of smooth manifolds in Cat , the category of small categories .  The functor taking each manifold to its tangent bundle is an example of a section of this bundle object.

See also [ edit ] Fiber bundle Fibration Fibered manifold Notes [ edit ] ^ Husemoller 1994 p 11.

References [ edit ] Goldblatt, Robert (2006) [1984].

Topoi, the Categorial Analysis of Logic . Dover Publications.

ISBN 978-0-486-45026-1 . Retrieved 2009-11-02 .

Husemoller, Dale (1994) [1966], Fibre bundles , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 20, Springer, ISBN 0-387-94087-1 Vassiliev, Victor (2001) [2001], Introduction to Topology , Student Mathematical Library, Amer Mathematical Society, ISBN 0821821628 v t e Topology Fields General (point-set) Algebraic Combinatorial Continuum Differential Geometric low-dimensional Homology cohomology Set-theoretic Digital Key concepts Open set / Closed set Interior Continuity Space compact connected Hausdorff metric uniform Homotopy homotopy group fundamental group Simplicial complex CW complex Polyhedral complex Manifold Bundle (mathematics) Second-countable space Cobordism Metrics and properties Euler characteristic Betti number Winding number Chern number Orientability Key results Banach fixed-point theorem De Rham cohomology Invariance of domain Poincaré conjecture Tychonoff's theorem Urysohn's lemma Category Mathematics portal Wikibook Wikiversity Topics general algebraic geometric Publications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bundle_(mathematics)&oldid=1298417671 " Categories : Category theory Fiber bundles This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 10:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bundle (mathematics) 4 languages Add topic

