Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Philosophical and religious works Toggle Philosophical and religious works subsection 2.1 Views on God and omniscience 2.2 Views of the afterlife 2.3 Talmudic works 3 Works in mathematics and astronomy/astrology Toggle Works in mathematics and astronomy/astrology subsection 3.1 Estimation of stellar distances and refutation of Ptolemy's model 4 In modern fiction 5 Awards 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gersonides 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Levi ben Gerson ) Medieval Jewish philosopher For the printers of Hebrew books, see Gersonides (printers) .

Gersonides Born Levi ben Gershon (לוי בן גרשון) 1288 Bagnols-sur-Cèze Died 1344 (aged 55–56) Perpignan Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy Region Jewish philosophy Main interests Religious philosophy , mathematics Levi ben Gershon (1288 – 20 April 1344), better known by his Graecized name as Gersonides , or by his Latinized name Magister Leo Hebraeus , [ 1 ] or in Hebrew by the abbreviation of first letters as R a LB a G , [ 2 ] was a medieval French Jewish philosopher , Talmudist, mathematician , physician and astronomer / astrologer . He was born at Bagnols in Languedoc , France . According to Abraham Zacuto and others, he was the son of Gerson ben Solomon Catalan .

Biography [ edit ] As in the case of the other medieval Jewish philosophers , little is known of his life. His family had been distinguished for piety and exegetical skill in Talmud, but though he was known in the Jewish community by commentaries on certain books of the Bible , he never seems to have accepted any rabbinical post. It has been suggested [ by whom?

] that the uniqueness of his opinions may have put obstacles in the way of his advancement to a higher position or office. He is known to have been at Avignon and Orange during his life, and is believed to have died in 1344, though Zacuto asserts that he died at Perpignan in 1370.

Gersonides is known for his unorthodox views and rigid Aristotelianism , which eventually led him to rationalize many of the miracles in the Bible. His commentary on the Bible was sharply criticized by the most prominent scholars, such as Abarbanel , Chisdai Crescas , and Rivash , the latter accusing him of heresy and almost banning his works.

[ 3 ] Philosophical and religious works [ edit ] Part of a series on Jewish philosophy Hellenistic Positions: Hasmonean Sadducean Pharisee Boethusian People: Aristobulus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Medieval Influenced by: Brethren of Purity ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ismaili philosophy Jewish Kalam Kabbalah Rabbinic Judaism Spanish and European: Hasdai ibn Shaprut Ibn Gabirol Abraham bar Hiyya Bahya ibn Paquda Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Joseph ibn Tzaddik Abraham ibn Ezra Maimonides Nachmanides Samuel ibn Tibbon Joseph ben Judah Shem-Tov ibn Falaquera Gersonides Moses of Narbonne Isaac ben Sheshet Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Elia del Medigo Judah Minz Isaac Abarbanel Judah Leon Abravanel Yemenite: Natan'el al-Fayyumi Mansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari Other: Isaac Israeli Saadia Gaon al-Muqqamaṣ Hibatullah ibn Malka Ibn Kammuna Positions: Maimonidean / Anti-Maimonidean Kabbalist Karaism Talmudic Tosafist Modern Positions: Orthodox Sephardic Chabad Chassidic Conservative Reform Existentialist Reconstructionist Holocaust Renewal Neo-Hasidic Mussar Rambamist People: Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa Baruch Spinoza Salomon Maimon Joseph Solomon Delmedigo Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chelm Eliezer ben Elijah Ashkenazi Tzvi Ashkenazi Jacob Emden Samuel Hirsch Shneur Zalman of Liadi Simcha Bunim of Peshischa Samson Raphael Hirsch Jacob Abendana Isaac Cardoso David Nieto Isaac Orobio de Castro Moses Mendelssohn Samuel David Luzzatto Elijah Benamozegh Moses Hess Eliezer Berkovits Eliyahu Dessler Monsieur Chouchani Emmanuel Levinas Martin Buber Gershom Scholem Abraham Isaac Kook Joseph Soloveitchik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Topics Anger Chosen people Cosmology Eschatology Ethics Faith God Happiness Holiness Holocaust Messiah Microcosm–macrocosm Righteousness v t e Part of his writings consist of commentaries on the portions of Aristotle then known, or rather of commentaries on the commentaries of Averroes . Some of these are printed in the early Latin editions of Aristotle's works. His most important treatise, that by which he has a place in the history of philosophy, is entitled Sefer Milhamot Ha-Shem , ("The Wars of the Lord"), and occupied twelve years in composition (1317–1329). A portion of it, containing an elaborate survey of astronomy as known to the Arabs , was translated into Latin in 1342 at the request of Pope Clement VI .

The Wars of the Lord is modeled after the plan of the great work of Jewish philosophy,  the Guide for the Perplexed of Maimonides .  It may be regarded as a criticism of some elements of Maimonides' syncretism of Aristotelianism and rabbinic Jewish thought.  Ralbag's treatise strictly adhered to Aristotelian thought.

[ 4 ] The Wars of the Lord review: 1. the doctrine of the soul, in which Gersonides defends the theory of impersonal reason as mediating between God and man, and explains the formation of the higher reason (or acquired intellect, as it was called) in humanity—his view being thoroughly realist and resembling that of Avicebron ; 2. prophecy; 3. and 4. God's knowledge of facts and providence, in which is advanced the theory that God does not decide individual facts. While there is general providence for all, special providence only extends to those whose reason has been enlightened; 5. celestial substances, treating of the strange spiritual hierarchy which the Jewish philosophers of the middle ages accepted from the Neoplatonists and the pseudo-Dionysius , and also giving, along with astronomical details, much of astrological theory; and 6. creation and miracles, in respect to which Gersonides deviates widely from the position of Maimonides.

Gersonides was also the author of commentaries on the Pentateuch , Joshua , Judges , I & II Samuel , I & II Kings , Proverbs , Job , Ecclesiastes , Song of Songs , Ruth , Esther , Daniel , Ezra-Nehemiah , and Chronicles . He makes reference to a commentary on Isaiah , but it is not extant.

Views on God and omniscience [ edit ] In contrast to the theology held by other Jewish thinkers, Jewish theologian Louis Jacobs argues, Gersonides held that God does not have complete foreknowledge of human acts. "Gersonides, bothered by the old question of how God's foreknowledge is compatible with human freedom, holds that what God knows beforehand is all the choices open to each individual.  God does not know, however, which choice the individual, in his freedom, will make." [ 5 ] Another neoclassical Jewish proponent of self-limited omniscience was Abraham ibn Daud . "Whereas the earlier Jewish philosophers extended the omniscience of God to include the free acts of man, and had argued that human freedom of decision was not affected by God's foreknowledge of its results, Ibn Daud, evidently following Alexander of Aphrodisias , excludes human action from divine foreknowledge. God, he holds, limited his omniscience even as He limited His omnipotence in regard to human acts".

[ 6 ] The view that God does not have foreknowledge of moral decisions which was advanced by ibn Daud and Gersonides (Levi ben Gershom) is not quite as isolated as Rabbi Bleich indicates, and it enjoys the support of two highly respected Acharonim , Rabbi Yeshayahu Horowitz ( Shelah haKadosh ) and Rabbi Chaim ibn Attar ( Or haHayim haKadosh ).  The former takes the views that God cannot know which moral choices people will make, but this does not impair His perfection. The latter considers that God could know the future if He wished, but deliberately refrains from using this ability in order to avoid the conflict with free will.

[ 7 ] Rabbi Yeshayahu Horowitz explained the apparent paradox of his position by citing the old question, "Can God create a rock so heavy that He cannot pick it up?" He said that we cannot accept free choice as a creation of God's, and simultaneously question its logical compatibility with omnipotence.

See further discussion in Free will in Jewish thought .

Views of the afterlife [ edit ] Gersonides posits that people's souls are composed of two parts: a material, or human, intellect; and an acquired, or agent, intellect. The material intellect is inherent in every person, and gives people the capacity to understand and learn. This material intellect is mortal, and dies with the body. However, he also posits that the soul also has an acquired intellect. This survives death, and can contain the accumulated knowledge that the person acquired during his lifetime. For Gersonides, Seymour Feldman points out, Man is immortal insofar as he attains the intellectual perfection that is open to him. This means that man becomes immortal only if and to the extent that he acquires knowledge of what he can in principle know, e.g. mathematics and the natural sciences. This knowledge survives his bodily death and constitutes his immortality.

[ 8 ] Talmudic works [ edit ] Gersonides was the author of the following Talmudic and halakhic works: Shaarei Tsedek (published at Leghorn, 1800): a commentary on the thirteen halachic rules of Rabbi Yishmael ; Mechokek Safun , an interpretation of the aggadic material in the fifth chapter of Tractate Bava Basra ; A commentary to tractate Berachos ; two responsa.

Only the first work is extant.

[ 9 ] Works in mathematics and astronomy/astrology [ edit ] Gersonides was the first to make a number of major mathematical and scientific advances, though since he wrote only in Hebrew and few of his writings were translated to other languages, his influence on non-Jewish thought was limited.

[ 10 ] Gersonides wrote Maaseh Hoshev in 1321 dealing with arithmetical operations including extraction of square and cube roots , various algebraic identities, certain sums including sums of consecutive integers, squares, and cubes, binomial coefficients, and simple combinatorial identities. The work is notable for its early use of proof by mathematical induction , and pioneering work in combinatorics.

[ 11 ] The title Maaseh Hoshev literally means the Work of the thinker, but it is also a pun on a biblical phrase meaning "clever work".  Maaseh Hoshev is sometimes mistakenly referred to as Sefer Hamispar (The Book of Number), which is an earlier and less sophisticated work by Rabbi Abraham ben Meir ibn Ezra (1090–1167).  In 1342, Gersonides wrote On Sines, Chords and Arcs , which examined trigonometry , in particular proving the sine law for plane triangles and giving five-figure sine tables .

[ 10 ] One year later, at the request of the bishop of Meaux , he wrote The Harmony of Numbers in which he considers a problem of Philippe de Vitry involving so-called harmonic numbers , which have the form 2 m ·3 n . The problem was to characterize all pairs of harmonic numbers differing by 1. Gersonides proved that there are only four such pairs: (1,2), (2,3), (3,4) and (8,9).

[ 12 ] He is also credited to have invented the Jacob's staff , [ 13 ] an instrument to measure the angular distance between celestial objects. It is described as consisting …of a staff of 4.5 feet (1.4 m) long and about one inch (2.5 cm) wide, with six or seven perforated tablets which could slide along the staff, each tablet being an integral fraction of the staff length to facilitate calculation, used to measure the distance between stars or planets, and the altitudes and diameters of the Sun, Moon and stars.

[ 14 ] Gersonides observed a solar eclipse on March 3, 1337. After he had observed this event he proposed a new theory of the sun which he proceeded to test by further observations. Another eclipse observed by Gersonides was the eclipse of the Moon on 3 October 1335. He described a geometrical model for the motion of the Moon and made other astronomical observations of the Moon, Sun and planets using a camera obscura . Some of his beliefs were well wide of the truth, such as his belief that the Milky Way was on the sphere of the fixed stars and shines by the reflected light of the Sun.

Gersonides was also the earliest known mathematician to have used the technique of mathematical induction in a systematic and self-conscious fashion and anticipated Galileo's error theory.

[ 11 ] The lunar crater Rabbi Levi is named after him.

Gersonides believed that astrology was real, and developed a naturalistic, non-supernatural explanation of how it works.

Julius Guttman explained that for Gersonides, astrology was: founded on the metaphysical doctrine of the dependence of all earthly occurrences upon the heavenly world. The general connection imparted to the prophet by the active intellect is the general order of the astrological constellation. The constellation under which a man is born determines his nature and fate, and constellations as well determine the life span of nations. …The active intellect knows the astrological order, from the most general form of the constellations to their last specification, which in turn contains all of the conditions of occurrence of a particular event. Thus, when a prophet deals with the destiny of a particular person or human group, he receives from the active intellect a knowledge of the order of the constellations, and with sufficient precision to enable him to predict its fate in full detail. …This astrological determinism has only one limitation. The free will of man could shatter the course of action ordained for him by the stars; prophecy could therefore predict the future on the basis of astrological determination only insofar as the free will of man does not break through the determined course of things.

[ 15 ] Estimation of stellar distances and refutation of Ptolemy's model [ edit ] Gersonides appears to be the only astronomer before modern times to have surmised that the fixed stars are much further away than the planets. Whereas all other astronomers put the fixed stars on a rotating sphere just beyond the outer planets, Gersonides estimated the distance to the fixed stars to be no less than 159,651,513,380,944 earth radii, [ 16 ] or about 100,000 lightyears in modern units.

Using data he collected from his own observations, Gersonides refuted Ptolemy's model in what the notable physicist Yuval Ne'eman has considered as "one of the most important insights in the history of science, generally missed in telling the story of the transition from epicyclic corrections to the geocentric model to Copernicus' heliocentric model ". Ne'eman argued that after Gersonides reviewed Ptolemy's model with its epicycles he realized that it could be checked, by measuring the changes in the apparent brightnesses of Mars and looking for cyclical changes along the conjectured epicycles. These thus ceased being dogma, they were a theory that had to be experimentally verified, "à la Popper". Gersonides developed tools for these measurements, essentially pinholes and the camera obscura .

The results of his observations did not fit Ptolemy's model at all. Concluding that the model was inadequate, Gersonides tried (unsuccessfully) to improve on it. That challenge was finally answered, of course, by Copernicus and Kepler three centuries later, but Gersonides was the first to falsify the Alexandrian dogma - the first known instance of modern falsification philosophy. Gersonides also showed that Ptolemy's model for the lunar orbit, though reproducing correctly the evolution of the Moon's position, fails completely in predicting the apparent sizes of the Moon in its motion. Unfortunately, there is no evidence that the findings influenced later generations of astronomers, even though Gersonides' writings were translated and available.

[ 17 ] In modern fiction [ edit ] Gersonides is an important character in the novel The Dream of Scipio by Iain Pears , where he is depicted as the mentor of the protagonist Olivier de Noyen, a non-Jewish poet and intellectual. A (fictional) encounter between Gersonides and Pope Clement VI at Avignon during the Black Death is a major element in the book's plot.

Awards [ edit ] 1985: National Jewish Book Award Scholarship for The Wars of the Lord [ 18 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hyman, Arthur; Walsh, James J.; Williams, Thomas (24 September 2010).

Philosophy in the Middle Ages: The Christian, Islamic, and Jewish Traditions . Hackett.

ISBN 9781603844512 .

^ "Ralbag" is the acronym of "Rabbi Levi Ben Gershon", with vowels added to make it easily pronounceable, the normal traditional Jewish practice with the names of prominent Rabbis. (See: Rubin, Aaron D. (2013). "Abbreviations". In Khan, Geoffrey (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Hebrew language and linguistics . Vol. 1. Leiden; Boston: Brill. p. 2.

ISBN 978-90-04-17642-3 .

) ^ The Rishonim, The Artscroll history series, Pg. 179 ^ Taikh, Samuel; Hersh Goldwurm (2001).

The Rishonim: biographical sketches of the prominent early rabbinic sages and leaders from the tenth-fifteenth centuries .

Brooklyn : Mesorah Publications . p. 182.

OCLC 60850988 .

^ Jacobs, Louis (1990).

God, Torah, Israel: traditionalism without fundamentalism .

Cincinnati : Hebrew Union College Press.

ISBN 978-0-87820-052-8 .

OCLC 21039224 .

[ page needed ] ^ Guttmann, Julius (1964).

Philosophies of Judaism: The History of Jewish Philosophy from Biblical Times to Franz Rosenzweig .

New York City : Holt, Rinehart and Winston . pp.

150– 151.

OCLC 1497829 .

^ Tradition: A Journal of Orthodox Jewish Thought , Vol. 31, No.2, Winter 1997, From Divine Omniscience and Free Will , Cyril Domb, pp. 90–91 [ verification needed ] ^ ben Gershom, Levi (1984).

The Wars of the Lord: Book one, Immortality of the soul . trans. Seymour Feldman.

Philadelphia : Jewish Publication Society of America . p.

81 .

ISBN 978-0-8276-0220-5 .

OCLC 220214037 .

^ Kellner, Menachem (2010-07-01), "INTRODUCTION" , Torah in the Observatory: Gersonides, Maimonides, Song of Songs , Academic Studies Press, p. 11, doi : 10.1515/9781618110183-003 , ISBN 978-1-61811-018-3 , retrieved 2025-03-02 ^ a b Charles G. Simonson (Winter 2000).

"The Mathematics of Levi ben Gershon, the Ralbag" (PDF) .

Bekhol Derakhekha Daehu .

10 . Bar-Ilan University Press: 5– 21.

^ a b Rabinovitch, Nachum L. (1970). "Rabbi Levi Ben Gershon and the Origins of Mathematical Induction".

Archive for History of Exact Sciences .

6 (3): 237– 248.

doi : 10.1007/BF00327237 .

JSTOR 41133303 .

S2CID 119948133 .

^ Peterson, Ivar.

"Medieval Harmony" .

Ivar Peterson's MathTrek . Archived from the original on 2012-08-04 . Retrieved 2010-12-26 .

^ Krehbiel, David G. (Spring 1990).

"Jacob's Staff" .

The Ontario Land Surveyor .

^ Levi ben Gerson ^ Guttmann, Julius (1964).

Philosophies of Judaism: The History of Jewish Philosophy from Biblical Times to Franz Rosenzweig .

New York City : Holt, Rinehart and Winston . p. 217.

OCLC 1497829 .

^ Albert Van Helden, Measuring the Universe: Cosmic Dimensions from Aristarchus to Halley (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1985), p. 40.

^ Yuval Ne'eman : Astronomy in Sefarad [1] ^ "Past Winners" .

Jewish Book Council . Retrieved 2020-01-24 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Gersonides".

The Encyclopaedia Judaica . Keter Publishing.

Feldman, Seymour .

The Wars of the Lord (3 volumes). Jewish Publication Society.

Gerson Lange (ed. & transl.), Sefer Maassei Choscheb: Die Praxis des Rechners – Ein hebräisch-arithmetisches Werk des Levi ben Gerschom aus dem Jahre 1321 (Frankfurt am Main: Buchdruckerei Louis Golde, 1909) online link .

Seligsohn, M.

; Kaufmann Kohler ; Isaac Broydé (2002) [c. 1916].

"Levi ben Gershon" . In Isidore Singer ; Cyrus Adler (eds.).

Jewish Encyclopedia .

LCCN 16014703 .

OCLC 4743907 .

Guttman, Julius (1964).

Philosophies of Judaism , pp. 214–215. JPS.

Lévi ben Gershom ( Gersonide ), Les Guerres du Seigneur, livres III et IV , introduction, traduction [française] et notes par Charles Touati . Paris-La Haye, Mouton & Co., 1968.

Charles Touati , La pensée philosophique et théologique de Gersonide , Paris, 1973.

Samuelson, Norbert M.

(1977).

Gersonides' The Wars of the Lord, Treatise III: On God's knowledge . Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

ISBN 978-0-88844-268-0 .

Bernard R. Goldstein (ed. & transl.), The Astronomy of Levi ben Gerson (1288-1344) - A Critical Edition of Chapters 1-20 with Translation and Commentary (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985 [= Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences , nr. 11]).

Eisen, Robert (1995).

Gersonides on Providence, Covenant, and the Chosen People: A Study in Medieval Jewish Philosophy and Biblical Commentary . State University of New York.

Taikh, Samuel; Hersh Goldwurm (2001).

The Rishonim: biographical sketches of the prominent early rabbinic sages and leaders from the tenth–fifteenth centuries .

Brooklyn : Mesorah Publications .

OCLC 60850988 .

.

C. Sirat, S. Klein-Braslavy, Olga Weijers, Ph. Bobichon, G. Dahan, M. Darmon, G. Freudenthal R. Glasner, M. Kellner, J.-L. Mancha, Les méthodes de travail de Gersonide et le maniement du savoir chez les scolastiques , Librairie philosophique Vrin, Paris, 2003.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Gersonides at Wikimedia Commons Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Rudavsky, Tamar M. (2007).

"Gersonides: Levi ben Gerson" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) Milhamot HaShem First Edition ( PDF ) This is the text excluding the astronomical text (Book V, Part I).  The quality varies.

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Gersonides" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Detailed bibliography of works on and by Gersonides Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine Milchamot Hashem Abrahams, Israel (1911).

"Gersonides, Levi" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.).

v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy v t e Rishonim North Africa Isaac Alfasi (Rif) Chananel ben Chushiel Dunash ben Labrat Zechariah Aghmati Nissim ben Jacob Samuel ben Jacob ibn Jam Shemariah ben Elhanan Spain (except Catalonia) Maimonides Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Ezra Yom Tov Asevilli (Ritva) Joseph ibn Migash (Ri Migash) Meir Abulafia (Ramah) Bahya ibn Paquda Bahya ben Asher David Abudirham Joseph Albo Isaac ben Moses Arama (Akeidat Yitzchak) Rabbenu Yerucham Shem Tov ben Abraham ibn Gaon (Migdal Oz) Meir ben Solomon Abi-Sahula Isaac ibn Ghiyyat Maimon ben Joseph Isaac Aboab I Abraham ibn Daud Moses ibn Ezra Jonah ibn Janah Abraham Saba Catalonia Nachmanides Menachem HaMeiri Nissim of Gerona (Ran) Shlomo ibn Aderet (Rashba) Yonah Gerondi (Rabbeinu Yonah) Zerachiah ha-Levi of Girona (Baal HaMaor) Hasdai Crescas Aharon HaLevi (Ra'ah) Isaac ben Sheshet (Rivash) Simeon ben Zemah Duran (Tashbatz) Vidal of Tolosa (Maggid Mishneh) Joseph ibn Habib (Nimmukei Yosef) Azriel of Gerona Judah ben Yakar Judah ben Barzillai Provence Hachmei Provence Abraham ben David (Raavad) Gersonides (Ralbag) David Kimhi (Radak) Abba Mari Isaac ben Abba Mari (HaIttur) Abraham ben Nathan (HaManhig) David ben Levi of Narbonne (HaMichtam) Moses ben Joseph (Rambi) Abraham ben Isaac of Narbonne (Raavad II, HaEshkol) Levi ben Abraham ben Hayyim Moshe ha-Darshan Meshullam ben Jacob Asher ben Meshullam Abraham of Montpellier Joseph Caspi Isaac the Blind Samuel ibn Tibbon Isaac of Narbonne Aaron ben Jacob ha-Kohen Jonathan of Lunel France (except Provence) Rabbi Abin ha-Gadol Rashi List of Tosafists Rabbeinu Tam Rashbam Solomon ben Meir Samson ben Joseph of Falaise Yom Tov of Falaise Eliezer ben Samuel (Yereim) Isaac ben Samuel (Ri HaZaken) Moses ben Jacob of Coucy (Semag) Judah ben Nathan (Rivan) Bechor Shor Abraham ben Joseph of Orleans Elijah of Paris Judah ben Yom Tov Haim ben Hananel HaCohen Yechiel of Paris Rivam Peretz ben Elijah Eliezer of Toul Chaim Paltiel Jacob of Orléans Samson of Chinon Jacob of Chinon Eliezer of Touques Isaac ben Abraham of Dampierre Elhanan ben Isaac of Dampierre Baruch ben Isaac Samson ben Abraham of Sens Isaac ben Eliezer Halevi Meir ben Samuel Moses of Évreux Samuel of Évreux Samuel ben Solomon of Falaise Judah ben Isaac Messer Leon Joseph ben Samuel Bonfils Menahem ben Helbo Simeon Kara Shemaiah of Soissons Elijah ben Menahem HaZaken Ephraim ben Samson Germany Meshullam ben Kalonymus Gershom ben Judah (Rabbeinu Gershom) Simeon bar Isaac of Mainz Asher ben Jehiel (Rosh) Jacob ben Asher (Baal HaTurim) Mordechai ben Hillel (Mordechai) Meir of Rothenburg (Maharam MeRotenberg) Yaakov ben Moshe Levi Moelin (Maharil) Eliezer ben Nathan (Ra'aven) Eliezer ben Joel HaLevi (Raavyah) Eleazar of Worms (Rokeach) Meir HaKohen (Hagahot Maimuniot) Judah ben Samuel of Regensburg (Yehudah haHasid) Yaakov ben Yakar Isaac ben Mordecai of Regensburg Ephraim ben Isaac of Regensburg Samson ben Eliezer Eliezer ben Isaac ha-Gadol Judah ben Kalonymus Yehuda HaKohen ben Meir Meir ben Baruch Halevi Israel Bruna Israel of Bamberg Ephraim of Bonn Judah ben Asher Joel ben Isaac ha-Levi Jacob ben Judah Landau Samuel ben Natronai Alexander Suslin Jacob Weil Isaac ben Asher ha-Levi Simha of Speyer Isaac Asir HaTikvah England Aaron of Canterbury Aaron of York Elias of London Eliyahu Menachem of London Hagin Deulacres Jacob ben Judah of London Josce of London Moses ben Isaac ben ha-Nessiah Moses of London Yom Tov of Joigny Berechiah de Nicole Austria Israel Isserlein (Terumat HaDeshen) Isaac of Vienna (Or Zarua) Avigdor Cohen of Vienna Isaac Tyrnau Italy Nathan ben Jehiel (the Aruch) Isaiah di Trani (Rid) Isaiah di Trani the Younger (Riaz) Obadiah of Bertinoro Menahem Recanati Zedekiah Anaw (Shibbolei HaLeket) Benjamin Anaw Judah Anav Moses ben Meir of Ferrara Eliezer ben Samuel of Verona Hillel ben Samuel Joseph Colon Trabotto Isaac ben Melchizedek Judah Messer Leon Elsewhere Isaac Abarbanel Elijah Mizrachi Tobiah ben Eliezer (Lekach Tov) Zerahiah the Greek Isaac ben Dorbolo Isaac ben Samuel of Acre Moses Taku Isaac ben Jacob ha-Lavan Nathan ben Abraham I Hillel ben Eliakim Judah Leon ben Moses Mosconi Nethanel ben Isaiah‎ Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐pqq6r
Cached time: 20250817070459
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.685 seconds
Real time usage: 0.806 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4688/1000000
Revision size: 24645/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 165713/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25281/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 145988/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.454/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8829133/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  668.511      1 -total
 24.41%  163.156      1 Template:Reflist
 23.70%  158.421      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 16.15%  107.939      1 Template:Jewish_philosophy
 15.86%  106.045      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.55%  103.927      9 Template:Cite_book
  8.80%   58.853      1 Template:Short_description
  7.73%   51.653      9 Template:Longitem
  7.39%   49.428     10 Template:Hlist
  6.75%   45.092      1 Template:Death_year_and_age Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:61626:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817070459 and revision id 1291993923. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gersonides&oldid=1291993923 " Categories : 1288 births 1344 deaths 14th-century French mathematicians 14th-century French philosophers 14th-century French rabbis 14th-century Jewish theologians Bible commentators French astrologers 14th-century astrologers Medieval French astronomers Jewish astronomers Medieval Jewish philosophers Philosophers of Judaism 14th-century Jewish biblical scholars Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2009 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2016 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gersonides 23 languages Add topic

