Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Organizational structure Toggle Organizational structure subsection 2.1 Executive Office 2.2 Directorate of Analysis 2.3 Directorate of Operations 2.4 Directorate of Science & Technology 2.5 Directorate of Support 2.6 Directorate of Digital Innovation 2.7 Office of Congressional Affairs 3 Training 4 Budget 5 Relationship with other intelligence agencies Toggle Relationship with other intelligence agencies subsection 5.1 Foreign intelligence services 6 History Toggle History subsection 6.1 Immediate predecessors 6.2 Creation 6.3 Korean War 6.4 1953 Iranian coup d'état 6.5 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état 6.6 Syria 6.7 Indonesia 6.8 Democratic Republic of the Congo 6.9 1960 U-2 incident 6.10 Bay of Pigs 6.11 Cuba: Terrorism and sabotage 6.12 Brazil 6.13 Tibet 6.14 Indochina and the Vietnam War (1954–1975) 6.15 Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s 6.16 Congressional investigations 6.17 Chad 6.18 Afghanistan 6.19 Nicaragua 6.20 Lebanon 6.21 Pakistan 6.22 India–Pakistan geopolitical tensions 6.23 Poland, 1980–1989 6.24 Operation Gladio 6.25 Operation Desert Storm 6.26 Fall of the Soviet Union 6.26.1 Aldrich Ames 6.27 Osama bin Laden 6.27.1 Al-Qaeda and the Global War on Terrorism 6.27.2 September 11 attacks and its aftermath 6.28 Failures in intelligence analysis 6.29 Yugoslav wars 6.30 Iraq War 6.31 2004, DNI takes over CIA top-level functions 6.32 Operation Neptune Spear 6.33 Syrian Civil War 6.34 Reorganization 6.35 Drones 6.36 Encryption devices sold through front company 7 Open-source intelligence 8 Outsourcing and privatization 9 Controversies 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Central Intelligence Agency 116 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°57′07″N 77°08′46″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.95194°N 77.14611°W ﻿ / 38.95194; -77.14611 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intelligence and covert action agency of the United States "CIA" redirects here. For other uses, see CIA (disambiguation) .

Central Intelligence Agency Seal of the Central Intelligence Agency Flag of the Central Intelligence Agency George Bush Center for Intelligence in Langley, Virginia Agency overview Formed September 18, 1947 ; 77 years ago ( 1947-09-18 ) Preceding agencies Office of Strategic Services [ 1 ] Strategic Services Unit Central Intelligence Group Type Independent (component of the Intelligence Community ) Headquarters George Bush Center for Intelligence , Langley, Virginia, U.S.

38°57′07″N 77°08′46″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.95194°N 77.14611°W ﻿ / 38.95194; -77.14611 Motto (Official): The Work of a Nation. The Center of Intelligence.

(Unofficial): And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free [ 2 ] Employees 21,575 (estimate) [ 3 ] Annual budget $15 billion (as of 2013 [update] ) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Agency executives John Ratcliffe , Director Michael Ellis , Deputy Director Vacant , General Counsel Parent department Office of the President of the United States Parent agency Office of the Director of National Intelligence Child agencies Directorate of Operations Directorate of Science and Technology Operations Support Branch Website cia .gov The Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA / ˌ s iː .

aɪ ˈ eɪ / ) is a civilian foreign intelligence service of the federal government of the United States tasked with advancing national security through collecting and analyzing intelligence from around the world and conducting covert operations . The agency is headquartered in the George Bush Center for Intelligence in Langley, Virginia , and is sometimes metonymously called "Langley". A major member of the United States Intelligence Community (IC), the CIA has reported to the director of national intelligence since 2004, and is focused on providing intelligence for the president and the Cabinet .

The CIA is headed by a director and is divided into various directorates, including a Directorate of Analysis and Directorate of Operations . Unlike the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the CIA has no law enforcement function and focuses on intelligence gathering overseas, with only limited domestic intelligence collection .

[ 6 ] The CIA is responsible for coordinating all human intelligence (HUMINT) activities in the IC. It has been instrumental in establishing intelligence services in many countries, and has provided support to many foreign organizations. The CIA exerts foreign political influence through its paramilitary operations units, including its Special Activities Center . It has also provided support to several foreign political groups and governments, including planning, coordinating, training and carrying out torture , and technical support. It was involved in many regime changes and carrying out terrorist attacks and planned assassinations of foreign leaders.

During World War II , U.S. intelligence and covert operations had been undertaken by the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). The office was abolished in 1945 by President Harry S. Truman , who created the Central Intelligence Group in 1946. Amid the intensifying Cold War , the National Security Act of 1947 established the CIA, headed by a director of central intelligence (DCI). The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 exempted the agency from most Congressional oversight, and during the 1950s, it became a major instrument of U.S. foreign policy. The CIA employed psychological operations against communist regimes, and backed coups to advance American interests . Major CIA-backed operations include the 1953 coup in Iran , the 1954 coup in Guatemala , the Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba in 1961, and the 1973 coup in Chile . In 1975, the Church Committee of the U.S. Senate revealed illegal operations such as MKUltra and CHAOS , after which greater oversight was imposed. In the 1980s, the CIA supported the Afghan mujahideen and Nicaraguan Contras , and since the September 11 attacks in 2001 has played a role in the Global War on Terrorism .

The agency has been the subject of numerous controversies , including its use of political assassinations , torture , domestic wiretapping , propaganda , mind control techniques , and drug trafficking , among others.

Purpose When the CIA was created, its purpose was to create a clearinghouse for foreign policy intelligence and analysis, collecting, analyzing, evaluating, and disseminating foreign intelligence, and carrying out covert operations.

[ 7 ] As of 2013, the CIA had five priorities: [ 3 ] Counterterrorism Nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction Indications and warnings for senior policymakers Counterintelligence Cyber intelligence Organizational structure Main article: Organizational structure of the Central Intelligence Agency The organization of the Central Intelligence Agency The CIA has an executive office and five major directorates: The Directorate of Digital Innovation The Directorate of Analysis The Directorate of Operations The Directorate of Support The Directorate of Science and Technology Executive Office Further information: Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency The director of the Central Intelligence Agency (D/CIA) is appointed by the president with Senate confirmation and reports directly to the director of national intelligence (DNI); in practice, the CIA director interfaces with the DNI, Congress , and the White House , while the deputy director (DD/CIA) is the internal executive of the CIA and the chief operating officer (COO/CIA), known as executive director until 2017, leads the day-to-day work [ 8 ] as the third-highest post of the CIA.

[ 9 ] The deputy director is formally appointed by the director without Senate confirmation, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] but as the president's opinion plays a great role in the decision, [ 10 ] the deputy director is generally considered a political position, making the chief operating officer the most senior non-political position for CIA career officers.

[ 11 ] The Executive Office also supports the U.S. military , including the U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command , by providing it with information it gathers, receiving information from military intelligence organizations, and cooperating with field activities. The associate deputy director of the CIA is in charge of the day-to-day operations of the agency. Each branch of the agency has its own director.

[ 8 ] The Office of Military Affairs (OMA), subordinate to the associate deputy director, manages the relationship between the CIA and the Unified Combatant Commands , who produce and deliver regional and operational intelligence and consume national intelligence produced by the CIA.

[ 12 ] Directorate of Analysis The Directorate of Analysis , through much of its history known as the Directorate of Intelligence (DI), is tasked with helping "the President and other policymakers make informed decisions about our country's national security" by looking "at all the available information on an issue and organiz[ing] it for policymakers".

[ 13 ] The directorate has four regional analytic groups, six groups for transnational issues, and three that focus on policy, collection, and staff support.

[ 14 ] There are regional analytical offices covering the Near East and South Asia , Russia , and Europe; and the Asia–Pacific , Latin America , and Africa .

Directorate of Operations Main article: Directorate of Operations (CIA) The Directorate of Operations is responsible for collecting foreign intelligence (mainly from clandestine HUMINT sources), and for covert action. The name reflects its role as the coordinator of human intelligence activities between other elements of the wider U.S. intelligence community with their HUMINT operations. This directorate was created in an attempt to end years of rivalry over influence, philosophy, and budget between the United States Department of Defense (DOD) and the CIA. In spite of this, the Department of Defense announced in 2012 its intention to organize its own global clandestine intelligence service, the Defense Clandestine Service (DCS), [ 15 ] under the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). Contrary to some public and media misunderstanding, DCS is not a "new" intelligence agency but rather a consolidation, expansion and realignment of existing Defense HUMINT activities, which have been carried out by DIA for decades under various names, most recently as the Defense Human Intelligence Service.

[ 16 ] This Directorate is known to be organized by geographic regions and issues, but its precise organization is classified.

[ 17 ] Directorate of Science & Technology Main article: Directorate of Science & Technology The Directorate of Science & Technology was established to research, create, and manage technical collection disciplines and equipment. Many of its innovations were transferred to other intelligence organizations, or, as they became more overt, to the military services.

The development of the U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft, for instance, was done in cooperation with the United States Air Force . The U-2's original mission was clandestine imagery intelligence over denied areas such as the Soviet Union .

[ 18 ] Directorate of Support Main article: Directorate of Support The Directorate of Support has organizational and administrative functions to significant units including: The Office of Security The Office of Communications The Office of Information Technology Directorate of Digital Innovation The Directorate of Digital Innovation (DDI) focuses on accelerating innovation across the Agency's mission activities. It is the Agency's newest directorate. The Langley, Virginia -based office's mission is to streamline and integrate digital and cybersecurity capabilities into the CIA's espionage, counterintelligence, all-source analysis, open-source intelligence collection, and covert action operations.

[ 19 ] It provides operations personnel with tools and techniques to use in cyber operations. It works with information technology infrastructure and practices cyber tradecraft .

[ 20 ] This means retrofitting the CIA for cyberwarfare . DDI officers help accelerate the integration of innovative methods and tools to enhance the CIA's cyber and digital capabilities on a global scale and ultimately help safeguard the United States. They also apply technical expertise to exploit clandestine and publicly available information (also known as open-source data ) using specialized methodologies and digital tools to plan, initiate and support the technical and human-based operations of the CIA.

[ 21 ] Before the establishment of the new digital directorate, offensive cyber operations were undertaken by the CIA's Information Operations Center.

[ 22 ] Little is known about how the office specifically functions or if it deploys offensive cyber capabilities.

[ 19 ] The directorate had been covertly operating since approximately March 2015 but formally began operations on October 1, 2015.

[ 23 ] According to classified budget documents, the CIA's computer network operations budget for fiscal year 2013 was $685.4 million. The NSA's budget was roughly $1 billion at the time.

[ 24 ] Rep.

Adam Schiff , the California Democrat who served as the ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee , endorsed the reorganization. "The director has challenged his workforce, the rest of the intelligence community, and the nation to consider how we conduct the business of intelligence in a world that is profoundly different from 1947 when the CIA was founded," Schiff said.

[ 25 ] Office of Congressional Affairs For more information, see CIA's relationship with the United States Congress .

The Office of Congressional Affairs ( OCA ) serves as the liaison between the CIA and the US Congress . The OCA states that it aims to ensure that Congress is fully and currently informed of intelligence activities.

[ 26 ] The office is the CIA's primary interface with Congressional oversight committees, leadership, and members. It is responsible for all matters pertaining to congressional interaction and oversight of US intelligence activities. It claims that it aims to: [ 27 ] ensure that Congress is kept informed of intelligence issues and activities by providing timely briefings and notifications facilitate prompt and complete responses to congressional requests for information and inquiries maintain a record of the Agency's interaction with Congress track legislation that could affect the Agency educate Agency personnel about their responsibility to keep Congress fully and currently informed Training Further information: CIA University , National Intelligence University , and Warrenton Training Center The CIA established its first training facility, the Office of Training and Education, in 1950. Following the end of the Cold War , the CIA's training budget was slashed, which had a negative effect on employee retention .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In response, Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet established CIA University in 2002.

[ 28 ] [ 13 ] CIA University holds between 200 and 300 courses each year, training both new hires and experienced intelligence officers, as well as CIA support staff.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The facility works in partnership with the National Intelligence University , and includes the Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis , the Directorate of Analysis' component of the university.

[ 13 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] For later stage training of student operations officers, there is at least one classified training area at Camp Peary , near Williamsburg, Virginia . Students are selected, and their progress evaluated, in ways derived from the OSS, published as the book Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services .

[ 32 ] Additional mission training is conducted at Harvey Point , North Carolina .

[ 33 ] The primary training facility for the Office of Communications is Warrenton Training Center , located near Warrenton, Virginia . The facility was established in 1951 and has been used by the CIA since at least 1955.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Budget Main article: United States intelligence budget Details of the overall United States intelligence budget are classified.

[ 3 ] Under the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, the Director of Central Intelligence is the only federal government employee who can spend "un-vouchered" government money .

[ 36 ] The government showed its 1997 budget was $26.6 billion for the fiscal year.

[ 37 ] The government has disclosed a total figure for all non-military intelligence spending since 2007; the fiscal 2013 figure is $52.6 billion. According to the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures , the CIA's fiscal 2013 budget is $14.7 billion, 28% of the total and almost 50% more than the budget of the National Security Agency. CIA's HUMINT budget is $2.3 billion, the SIGINT budget is $1.7 billion, and spending for security and logistics of CIA missions is $2.5 billion. "Covert action programs," including a variety of activities such as the CIA's drone fleet and anti- Iranian nuclear program activities, accounts for $2.6 billion.

[ 3 ] There were numerous previous attempts to obtain general information about the budget.

[ 38 ] As a result, reports revealed that CIA's annual budget in Fiscal Year 1963 was $550 million (inflation-adjusted US$ 5.6 billion in 2024), [ 39 ] and the overall intelligence budget in FY 1997 was US$26.6 billion (inflation-adjusted US$ 52.1 billion in 2024).

[ 40 ] There have been accidental disclosures; for instance, Mary Margaret Graham , a former CIA official and deputy director of national intelligence for collection in 2005, said that the annual intelligence budget was $44 billion, [ 41 ] and in 1994 Congress accidentally published a budget of $43.4 billion (in 2012 dollars) in 1994 for the non-military National Intelligence Program, including $4.8 billion for the CIA.

[ 3 ] After the Marshall Plan was approved, appropriating $13.7 billion over five years, 5% of those funds or $685 million were secretly made available to the CIA. A portion of the enormous M-fund, established by the U.S. government during the post-war period for reconstruction of Japan, was secretly steered to the CIA.

[ 42 ] Relationship with other intelligence agencies Foreign intelligence services The role and functions of the CIA are roughly equivalent to those of the Federal Intelligence Service (BND) in Germany , MI6 in the United Kingdom , the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS) in Australia , the Directorate-General for External Security (DGSE) in France , the Foreign Intelligence Service in Russia , the Ministry of State Security (MSS) in China , the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) in India , the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) in Pakistan , the General Intelligence Service in Egypt , Mossad in Israel , and the National Intelligence Service (NIS) in South Korea .

The CIA was instrumental in the establishment of intelligence services in several U.S. allied countries, including Germany's BND and Greece's EYP (then known as KYP).

[ 43 ] [ citation needed ] The closest links of the U.S. intelligence community to other foreign intelligence agencies are to Anglophone countries: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Special communications signals that intelligence-related messages can be shared with these four countries.

[ 44 ] An indication of the United States' close operational cooperation is the creation of a new message distribution label within the main U.S. military communications network. Previously, the marking of NOFORN (i.e., No Foreign Nationals) required the originator to specify which, if any, non-U.S. countries could receive the information. A new handling caveat, USA/AUS/CAN/GBR/NZL Five Eyes , used primarily on intelligence messages, indicates that the material can be shared with Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, and New Zealand.

The task of the division called " Verbindungsstelle 61 " of the German Bundesnachrichtendienst is keeping contact to the CIA office in Wiesbaden .

[ 45 ] History Main articles: History of the Central Intelligence Agency and CIA activities by country Immediate predecessors Further information: Office of Strategic Services The 140 stars on the CIA Memorial Wall in the CIA headquarters, each representing a CIA officer killed in action CIA director Allen Dulles on the cover of Time magazine in 1953 During World War II , U.S. intelligence and covert operations were undertaken by the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).

[ 46 ] Many future CIA officers, including four directors of Central Intelligence, served in the OSS.

[ 47 ] On September 20, 1945, shortly after the end of World War II, Truman signed an executive order dissolving the OSS.

[ 48 ] By October 1945 its functions had been divided between the Departments of State and War . The division lasted only a few months.

The first public mention of the "Central Intelligence Agency" appeared on a command-restructuring proposal presented by Jim Forrestal and Arthur Radford to the U.S. Senate Military Affairs Committee at the end of 1945.

[ 49 ] Army Intelligence agent Colonel Sidney Mashbir and Commander Ellis Zacharias worked together for four months at the direction of Fleet Admiral Joseph Ernest King , and prepared the first draft and implementing directives for the creation of what would become the Central Intelligence Agency.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Despite opposition from the military establishment, the State Department , and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), [ 53 ] Truman established the National Intelligence Authority [ 54 ] in January 1946. Its operational extension was known as the Central Intelligence Group (CIG), [ 55 ] which was the direct predecessor of the CIA.

[ 56 ] Creation The Central Intelligence Agency was created on July 26, 1947, when President Truman signed the National Security Act into law. A major impetus for the creation of the agency was growing tensions with the USSR following the end of World War II .

[ 57 ] Lawrence Houston, head counsel of the SSU , CIG, and, later CIA, was principal draftsman of the National Security Act of 1947 , [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] which dissolved the NIA and the CIG, and established both the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency.

[ 55 ] [ 61 ] In 1949, Houston helped to draft the Central Intelligence Agency Act ( Pub. L.

81–110 ), which authorized the agency to use confidential fiscal and administrative procedures, and exempted it from most limitations on the use of federal funds. The act also exempted the CIA from having to disclose its "organization, functions, officials, titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed," and created the program "PL-110" to handle defectors and other "essential aliens" who fell outside normal immigration procedures.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] At the outset of the Korean War , the CIA still only had a few thousand employees, around one thousand of whom worked in analysis. Intelligence primarily came from the Office of Reports and Estimates, which drew its reports from a daily take of State Department telegrams, military dispatches, and other public documents. The CIA still lacked its intelligence-gathering abilities.

[ 64 ] On August 21, 1950, shortly after, Truman announced Walter Bedell Smith as the new Director of the CIA. The change in leadership took place shortly after the start of the Korean War in South Korea , as the lack of a clear warning to the President and NSC about the imminent North Korean invasion was seen as a grave failure of intelligence.

[ 64 ] The CIA had different demands placed on it by the various bodies overseeing it. Truman wanted a centralized group to organize the information that reached him.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] The Department of Defense wanted military intelligence and covert action, and the State Department wanted to create global political change favorable to the US. Thus the two areas of responsibility for the CIA were covert action and covert intelligence. One of the main targets for intelligence gathering was the Soviet Union , which had also been a priority of the CIA's predecessors.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] U.S. Air Force General Hoyt Vandenberg , the CIG's second director, created the Office of Special Operations (OSO) and the Office of Reports and Estimates (ORE).

[ 66 ] Initially, the OSO was tasked with spying and subversion overseas with a budget of $15 million (equivalent to $196 million in 2024), [ 68 ] the largesse of a small number of patrons in Congress. Vandenberg's goals were much like the ones set out by his predecessor: finding out "everything about the Soviet forces in Eastern and Central Europe – their movements, their capabilities, and their intentions." [ 69 ] On June 18, 1948, the National Security Council issued Directive 10/2 [ 70 ] calling for covert action against the Soviet Union , [ 71 ] and granting the authority to carry out covert operations against "hostile foreign states or groups" that could, if needed, be denied by the U.S. government. To this end, the Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) was created inside the CIA.

[ 72 ] The OPC was unique; Frank Wisner , the head of the OPC, answered not to the CIA Director , but to the secretaries of defense, state, and the NSC. The OPC's actions were a secret even from the head of the CIA. Most CIA stations had two station chiefs, one working for the OSO, and one working for the OPC.

[ 73 ] The agency was unable to provide sufficient intelligence about the Soviet takeovers of Romania and Czechoslovakia , the Soviet blockade of Berlin , or the Soviet atomic bomb project . In particular, the agency failed to predict the Chinese entry into the Korean War with 300,000 troops.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] The famous double agent Kim Philby was the British liaison to American Central Intelligence.

[ 76 ] Through him, the CIA coordinated hundreds of airdrops inside the iron curtain, all compromised by Philby.

Arlington Hall , the nerve center of CIA cryptanalysis, was compromised by Bill Weisband , a Russian translator and Soviet spy.

[ 77 ] However, the CIA was successful in influencing the 1948 Italian election in favor of the Christian Democrats .

[ 78 ] The $200 million Exchange Stabilization Fund (equivalent to $2.6 billion in 2024), [ 68 ] earmarked for the reconstruction of Europe, was used to pay wealthy Americans of Italian heritage. Cash was then distributed to Catholic Action , the Vatican's political arm, and directly to Italian politicians. This tactic of using its large fund to purchase elections was frequently repeated in the subsequent years.

[ 79 ] Korean War See also: History of the Central Intelligence Agency § Korean War At the beginning of the Korean War , CIA officer Hans Tofte claimed to have turned a thousand North Korean expatriates into a guerrilla force tasked with infiltration, guerrilla warfare, and pilot rescue.

[ 80 ] In 1952 the CIA sent 1,500 more expatriate agents north.

Seoul station chief Albert Haney would openly celebrate the capabilities of those agents and the information they sent.

[ 80 ] In September 1952 Haney was replaced by John Limond Hart, a Europe veteran with a vivid memory for bitter experiences of misinformation.

[ 80 ] Hart was suspicious of the parade of successes reported by Tofte and Haney and launched an investigation which determined that the entirety of the information supplied by the Korean sources was false or misleading.

[ 81 ] After the war, internal reviews by the CIA corroborated Hart's findings. The CIA's station in Seoul had 200 officers, but not a single speaker of Korean .

[ 81 ] Hart reported to Washington that Seoul station could not be salvaged. Loftus Becker, deputy director of intelligence, was sent personally to tell Hart that the CIA had to keep the station open to save face. Becker returned to Washington, D.C., pronouncing the situation to be "hopeless".

[ 81 ] He then resigned. Air Force Colonel James Kallis stated that CIA director Allen Dulles continued to praise the CIA's Korean force, despite knowing that they were under enemy control.

[ 82 ] When China entered the war in 1950, the CIA attempted a number of subversive operations in the country, all of which failed due to the presence of double agents. Millions of dollars were spent in these efforts.

[ 83 ] These included a team of young CIA officers airdropped into China who were ambushed, and CIA funds being used to set up a global heroin empire in Burma's Golden Triangle following a betrayal by another double agent.

[ 83 ] 1953 Iranian coup d'état Main article: 1953 Iranian coup d'état The CIA aided the British in overthrowing Iranian Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh in 1953 In 1951, Mohammad Mosaddegh , a member of the National Front , was elected Iranian prime-minister.

[ 84 ] As prime minister, he nationalized the Anglo-Persian Oil Company which his predecessor had supported. The nationalization of the British-funded Iranian oil industry, including the largest oil refinery in the world, was disastrous for Mosaddegh. A British naval embargo closed the British oil facilities, which Iran had no skilled workers to operate. In 1952, Mosaddegh resisted the royal refusal to approve his Minister of War and resigned in protest. The National Front took to the streets in protest. Fearing a loss of control, the military pulled its troops back five days later, and Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi gave in to Mosaddegh's demands. Mosaddegh quickly replaced military leaders loyal to the Shah with those loyal to him, giving him personal control over the military. Given six months of emergency powers, Mosaddegh unilaterally passed legislation. When that six months expired, his powers were extended for another year. In 1953, Mossadegh dismissed parliament and assumed dictatorial powers. This power grab triggered the Shah to exercise his constitutional right to dismiss Mosaddegh. Mosaddegh launched a military coup , and the Shah fled the country.

Under CIA Director Allen Dulles , Operation Ajax was put into motion. Its goal was to overthrow Mossadegh with military support from General Fazlollah Zahedi and install a pro-western regime headed by the Shah of Iran. Kermit Roosevelt Jr. oversaw the operation in Iran.

[ 85 ] On August 16, a CIA paid mob led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini would spark what a U.S. embassy officer called "an almost spontaneous revolution" [ 86 ] but Mosaddegh was protected by his new inner military circle, and the CIA had been unable to gain influence within the Iranian military. Their chosen man, former General Fazlollah Zahedi, had no troops to call on.

[ 87 ] After the failure of the first coup, Roosevelt paid demonstrators to pose as communists and deface public symbols associated with the Shah. This August 19 incident helped foster public support of the Shah and led gangs of citizens on a spree of violence intent on destroying Mossadegh.

[ 88 ] An attack on his house forced Mossadegh to flee. He surrendered the next day, and his coup came to an end.

[ 89 ] 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Main article: 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état When democratically elected President Jacobo Árbenz attempted a modest redistribution of land in Guatemala , he was overthrown in the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état .

The return of the Shah to power, and the impression that an effective CIA had been able to guide that nation to friendly and stable relations with the West, triggered planning for Operation PBSuccess, a plan to overthrow Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz .

[ 90 ] The plan was exposed in major newspapers before it happened after a CIA agent left plans for the coup in his Guatemala City hotel room.

[ 91 ] The Guatemalan Revolution of 1944–54 overthrew the U.S. backed dictator Jorge Ubico and brought a democratically elected government to power. The government began an ambitious agrarian reform program which sought to grant land to millions of landless peasants. The program threatened the land holdings of the United Fruit Company , who lobbied for a coup by portraying these reforms as communist.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] On June 18, 1954, Carlos Castillo Armas led 480 CIA-trained men across the border from Honduras into Guatemala. The weapons had also come from the CIA.

[ 96 ] The CIA mounted a psychological campaign to convince the Guatemalan people and government that Armas's victory was a fait accompli . Its largest aspect was a radio broadcast entitled "The Voice of Liberation" which announced that Guatemalan exiles led by Castillo Armas were shortly about to liberate the country.

[ 96 ] On June 25, a CIA plane bombed Guatemala City, destroying the government's main oil reserves. Árbenz ordered the army to distribute weapons to local peasants and workers.

[ 97 ] The army refused, forcing Jacobo Árbenz's resignation on June 27, 1954. Árbenz handed over power to Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz .

[ 97 ] The CIA then orchestrated a series of power transfers that ended with the confirmation of Castillo Armas as president in July 1954.

[ 97 ] Armas was the first in a series of military dictators that would rule the country, leading to the brutal Guatemalan Civil War from 1960 to 1996, in which some 200,000 people were killed, mostly by the U.S.-backed military.

[ 102 ] Syria Main article: CIA activities in Syria President John F. Kennedy presenting the National Security Medal to Allen Dulles on November 28, 1961 In 1949, Colonel Adib Shishakli rose to power in Syria in a CIA-backed coup. Four years later, he would be overthrown by the military, Ba'athists , and communists . The CIA and MI6 started funding right-wing members of the military but suffered a huge setback in the aftermath of the Suez Crisis . CIA Agent Rocky Stone, who had played a minor role in the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, was working at the Damascus embassy as a diplomat but was the station chief. Syrian officers on the CIA dole quickly appeared on television stating that they had received money from "corrupt and sinister Americans" "in an attempt to overthrow the legitimate government of Syria." [ 103 ] Syrian forces surrounded the embassy and rousted Agent Stone, who confessed and subsequently made history as the first American diplomat expelled from an Arab nation. This strengthened ties between Syria and Egypt, helping establish the United Arab Republic , and poisoning the well for the US for the foreseeable future.

[ 103 ] Indonesia Main article: CIA activities in Indonesia See also: Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 The United States was suspicious of Sukarno , Indonesia 's president, because of his declaration of neutrality in the Cold War.

[ 104 ] After Sukarno hosted the Bandung Conference , promoting the Non-Aligned Movement , the Eisenhower White House responded with NSC 5518 authorizing "all feasible covert means" to move Indonesia into the Western sphere.

[ 105 ] The U.S. had no clear policy on Indonesia. Eisenhower sent his special assistant for security operations, F. M. Dearborn Jr., to Jakarta. His report that there was high instability, and that the US lacked stable allies, reinforced the domino theory. Indonesia suffered from what he described as "subversion by democracy".

[ 106 ] The CIA decided to attempt another military coup in Indonesia, where the Indonesian military was trained by the US, had a strong professional relationship with the US military, had a pro-American officer corps that strongly supported their government, and a strong belief in civilian control of the military, instilled partly by its close association with the US military.

[ 107 ] On September 25, 1957, Eisenhower ordered the CIA to start a revolution in Indonesia with the goal of regime change. Three days later, Blitz , a Soviet-controlled weekly in India, [ 108 ] reported that the US was plotting to overthrow Sukarno. The story was picked up by the media in Indonesia. One of the first parts of the operation was an 11,500-ton US Navy ship landing at Sumatra , delivering weapons for as many as 8,000 potential revolutionaries.

[ 109 ] In support of the Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Indonesia - Permesta Movement, formed by dissident military commanders in Central Sumatera and North Sulawesi with the aim of overthrowing the Sukarno regime, a B-26 piloted by CIA agent Allen Lawrence Pope attacked Indonesian military targets in April and May 1958.

[ 110 ] The CIA described the airstrikes to the President as attacks by "dissident planes." Pope's B-26 was shot down over Ambon, Indonesia on May 18, 1958, and he bailed out. When he was captured, the Indonesian military found his personnel records, after-action reports, and his membership card for the officer's club at Clark Field . On March 9, John Foster Dulles , the Secretary of State and brother of DCI Allen Dulles , made a public statement calling for a revolt against communist despotism under Sukarno. Three days later, the CIA reported to the White House that the Indonesian Army's actions against the CIA-supported revolution were suppressing communism.

[ 111 ] After Indonesia, Eisenhower displayed mistrust of both the CIA and its director, Allen Dulles. Dulles too displayed mistrust of the CIA itself. Abbot Smith, a CIA analyst who later became chief of the Office of National Estimates, said, "We had constructed for ourselves a picture of the USSR, and whatever happened had to be made to fit into this picture. Intelligence estimators can hardly commit a more abominable sin." On December 16, Eisenhower received a report from his intelligence board of consultants that said the agency was "incapable of making objective appraisals of its own intelligence information as well as its own operations." [ 112 ] Democratic Republic of the Congo Main article: CIA activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo The Congo became independent from Belgium in 1960.

[ 113 ] The United States feared that its new prime minister, Patrice Lumumba , was susceptible to Soviet influence, so the CIA supported Joseph Mobutu in organizing a coup that deposed Lumumba on September 14, 1960.

[ 114 ] Lumumba was assassinated by his Congolese and Belgian enemies in 1961, with CIA acquiescence.

[ 115 ] The CIA continued to back the Mobutu regime throughout the Cold War, despite its corruption, mismanagement, and human rights abuses.

[ 116 ] 1960 U-2 incident Main article: 1960 U-2 incident Suspended from the ceiling of the glass-enclosed atrium: three models of the U-2 , Lockheed A-12 , and D-21 drone . These models are exact replicas at one-sixth scale of the real planes. All three had photographic capabilities. The U-2 was one of the first espionage planes developed by the CIA. The A-12 set unheralded flight records. The D-21 drone was one of the first crewless aircraft ever built.

Lockheed Martin donated all three models to the CIA.

After the bomber gap came the missile gap . Eisenhower wanted to use the U-2 to disprove the Missile Gap, but he had banned U-2 overflights of the USSR after meeting Secretary Khrushchev at Camp David . Another reason the President objected to the use of the U-2 was that, in the nuclear age, the intelligence he needed most was on their intentions, without which, the US would face a paralysis of intelligence. He was particularly worried that U-2 flights could be seen as preparations for first-strike attacks. He had high hopes for an upcoming meeting with Khrushchev in Paris. Eisenhower finally gave in to CIA pressure to authorize a 16-day window for flights, which was extended an additional six days because of poor weather. On May 1, 1960, the Soviet Air Forces shot down a U-2 flying over Soviet territory. To Eisenhower, the ensuing coverup destroyed his perceived honesty and his hope of leaving a legacy of thawing relations with Khrushchev. Eisenhower later said that the U-2 coverup was the greatest regret of his presidency.

[ 117 ] : 160 Bay of Pigs Main article: Bay of Pigs invasion See also: CIA assassination attempts on Fidel Castro See also: History of the Central Intelligence Agency § Cuba Sam Giancana (pictured), Santo Trafficante , and others, who were recruited by the CIA to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba [ 118 ] The CIA welcomed Fidel Castro on his visit to Washington, D.C.

, and gave him a face-to-face briefing. The CIA hoped that Castro would bring about a friendly democratic government and planned to support his government with money and guns. By December 11, 1959, however, a memo reached the DCI's desk recommending Castro's "elimination." Dulles replaced the word "elimination" with "removal," and set the scheme into action. By mid-August 1960, Dick Bissell sought, with the full backing of the CIA, to hire the Mafia to assassinate Castro.

[ 119 ] The Bay of Pigs Invasion was a failed military invasion of Cuba undertaken by the CIA-sponsored paramilitary group Brigade 2506 on April 17, 1961. A counter-revolutionary military, trained and funded by the CIA, Brigade 2506 fronted the armed wing of the Democratic Revolutionary Front (DRF) and intended to overthrow Castro's increasingly communist government . Launched from Guatemala , the invading force was defeated within three days by the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces , under Castro's direct command. US President Dwight D. Eisenhower was concerned at the direction Castro's government was taking, and in March 1960, Eisenhower allocated $13.1 million to the CIA to plan his overthrow. The CIA proceeded to organize the operation with the aid of various Cuban counter-revolutionary forces, training Brigade 2506 in Guatemala. Over 1,400 paramilitaries set out for Cuba by boat on April 13 for a marine invasion . Two days later on April 15, eight CIA-supplied B-26 bombers attacked Cuban airfields. On the night of April 16, the land invasion began in the Bay of Pigs , but by April 20, the invaders finally surrendered. The failed invasion strengthened the position of Castro's leadership as well as his ties with the USSR. This led eventually to the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. The invasion was a major embarrassment for US foreign policy .

The Taylor Board was commissioned to determine what went wrong in Cuba. The Board came to the same conclusion that the Jan '61 President's Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities had concluded, and many other reviews prior, and to come, that Covert Action had to be completely isolated from intelligence and analysis. The Inspector General of the CIA investigated the Bay of Pigs. He concluded that there was a need to improve the organization and management of the CIA drastically.

Cuba: Terrorism and sabotage Main article: Operation Mongoose See also: Operation 40 After the failure of the attempted invasion at the Bay of Pigs, the CIA proposed Operation Mongoose , a program of sabotage and terrorist attacks against civilian and military targets in Cuba, with the stated intent to bring down the Cuban administration and institute a new government.

[ 120 ] It also sought to force the Cuban government to introduce intrusive civil measures and divert resources to protect its citizens from the attacks.

[ 121 ] It was authorized by President Kennedy in November 1961.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] The operation saw the CIA engage in an extensive campaign of terrorist attacks against civilians and economic targets, killing significant numbers of civilians, and carry out covert operations against the Cuban government.

[ 123 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] The CIA established a base for the operation, with the cryptonym JMWAVE , at a disused naval facility on the University of Miami campus. The operation was so extensive that it housed the largest number of CIA officers outside of Langley, eventually numbering some four hundred. It was a major employer in Florida, with several thousand agents in clandestine pay of the agency.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] The terrorist activities carried out by agents armed, organized and funded by the CIA were a further source of tension between the U.S. and Cuban governments. They were a major factor contributing to the Soviet decision to place missiles in Cuba, leading to the Cuban Missile Crisis .

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] The attacks continued through 1965.

[ 132 ] Though the level of terrorist activity directed by the CIA lessened in the second half of the 1960s, in 1969 the CIA was directed to intensify its operations against Cuba.

[ 133 ] Exile terrorists were still in the employ of the CIA in the mid-1970s, including Luis Posada Carriles .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] He remained on the CIA's payroll until mid-1976, [ 134 ] [ 136 ] and is widely believed to be responsible for the October 1976 Cubana 455 flight bombing , killing 73 people – the deadliest instance of airline terrorism in the western hemisphere prior to the attacks of September 2001 in New York.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Despite the damage done and civilians killed in the CIA's terrorist attacks, by the measure of its stated objective the project was a complete failure.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Brazil Main article: 1964 Brazilian coup d'état The CIA and the United States government were involved in the 1964 Brazilian coup d'état . The coup occurred from March 31 to April 1, which resulted in the Brazilian Armed Forces ousting President João Goulart . The United States saw Goulart as a left-wing threat in Latin America. Secret cables written by the US Ambassador to Brazil, Lincoln Gordon , confirmed that the CIA was involved in covert action in Brazil. The CIA encouraged "pro-democracy street rallies" in Brazil, for instance, to create dissent against Goulart.

[ 137 ] Tibet The CIA Tibetan program consisted of political plots, propaganda distribution, paramilitary operations, and intelligence gathering based on U.S. commitments made to the Dalai Lama in 1951 and 1956.

[ 138 ] Indochina and the Vietnam War (1954–1975) Main articles: CIA activities in Vietnam , Vietnam War , Phoenix Program , Operation Barrel Roll , CIA activities in Laos , and Laotian Civil War The OSS Patti mission arrived in Vietnam near the end of World War II and had significant interaction with the leaders of many Vietnamese factions, including Ho Chi Minh .

[ 139 ] During the period of U.S. combat involvement in the Vietnam War, there was considerable argument about progress among the Department of Defense under Robert McNamara , the CIA, and, to some extent, the intelligence staff of Military Assistance Command Vietnam .

[ 140 ] Sometime between 1959 and 1961, the CIA started Project Tiger, a program of dropping South Vietnam agents into North Vietnam to gather intelligence. These were failures; the Deputy Chief for Project Tiger, Captain Do Van Tien, admitted that he was an agent for Hanoi .

[ 141 ] In the face of the failure of Project Tiger, the Pentagon wanted CIA paramilitary forces to participate in their Op Plan 64A. This resulted in the CIA's foreign paramilitaries being put under the command of the DOD, a move seen as a slippery slope inside the CIA, a slide from covert action towards militarization.

[ 142 ] The antiwar movement rapidly expanded across the United States during the Johnson presidency . Johnson wanted CIA Director Richard Helms to substantiate Johnson's hunch that Moscow and Beijing were financing and influencing the American antiwar movement.

[ 143 ] Thus, in the fall of 1967, the CIA launched a domestic surveillance program code-named Chaos that would linger for a total of seven years. Police departments across the country cooperated in tandem with the agency, amassing a "computer index of 300,000 names of American people and organizations, and extensive files on 7,200 citizens." Helms hatched a "Special Operations Group" in which "[eleven] CIA officers grew long hair, learned the jargon of the New Left, and went off to infiltrate peace groups in the United States and Europe." [ 144 ] A CIA analyst's assessment of Vietnam was that the U.S. was "becoming progressively divorced from reality... [and] proceeding with far more courage than wisdom".

[ 145 ] From 1968 to 1972, the CIA's Phoenix Program involved the killing, without trial, of between twenty and forty thousand South Vietnamese civilians suspected to be members of what Americans called the "Infrastructure" – the non-military administrative and political components of the Communists' organizational structure. Thousands were tortured prior to being killed, by such methods as the repeated application of electrical shock to the brain, and the drilling of a dowel through the ear canal into the brain until the person died.

[ 146 ] Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s See also: History of the Central Intelligence Agency § Nixon Nixon Oval Office meeting with H.R. Haldeman "Smoking Gun" Conversation, June 23, 1972 ( full transcript ) President Gerald Ford meeting with CIA Director–designate George H. W. Bush , December 17, 1975 Conditions worsened in the mid-1970s, around the time of Watergate . A dominant feature of political life during that period were the attempts of Congress to assert oversight of the U.S. presidency and the executive branch of the U.S. government. Revelations about past CIA activities, such as assassinations and attempted assassinations of foreign leaders (most notably Fidel Castro and Rafael Trujillo) and illegal domestic spying on U.S. citizens, provided the opportunities to increase Congressional oversight of U.S. intelligence operations.

[ 147 ] In 1971, the NSA and CIA were engaged in domestic spying; the DOD was eavesdropping on Henry Kissinger . The White House and Camp David were wired for sound. Nixon and Kissinger were eavesdropping on their aides, as well as reporters. Famously, Nixon's Plumbers had in their number many former CIA officers, including Howard Hunt , Jim McCord , and Eugenio Martinez . On July 7, 1971, John Ehrlichman , Nixon's domestic policy chief, told DCI Cushman, Nixon's hatchet-man in the CIA, to let Cushman "know that [Hunt] was, in fact, doing some things for the President... you should consider he has pretty much carte blanche ".

[ 148 ] Hastening the CIA's fall from grace was the burglary of the Watergate headquarters of the Democratic Party by former CIA officers, and President Richard Nixon 's subsequent attempt to use the CIA to impede the FBI's investigation of the burglary. In the famous "smoking gun" recording that led to President Nixon's resignation, Nixon ordered his chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman , to tell the CIA that further investigation of Watergate would "open the whole can of worms about the Bay of Pigs" .

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] In this way Nixon and Haldeman ensured that the CIA's No. 1 and No. 2 ranking officials, Richard Helms and Vernon Walters , communicated to FBI Director L. Patrick Gray that the FBI should not follow the money trail from the burglars to the Committee to Re-elect the President , as it would uncover CIA informants in Mexico. The FBI initially agreed to this due to a long-standing agreement between the FBI and CIA not to uncover each other's sources of information, though within a couple of weeks the FBI resumed its investigation. Nonetheless, when the smoking gun tapes were made public, damage to the public's perception of CIA's top officials, and thus to the CIA as a whole, could not be avoided.

[ 151 ] On November 13, 1972, after Nixon's landslide re-election, Nixon told Kissinger "[I intend] to ruin the Foreign Service. I mean ruin it – the old Foreign Service – and to build a new one." He had similar designs for the CIA and intended to replace Helms with James Schlesinger .

[ 152 ] Nixon had promised that Helms could stay on until his 60th birthday, the mandatory retirement age. On February 2, Nixon broke that promise, carrying through with his intention to "remove the deadwood" from the CIA. "Get rid of the clowns" was his order to the incoming CI. Kissinger had been running the CIA since the beginning of Nixon's presidency, but Nixon impressed on Schlesinger that he must appear to Congress to be in charge, averting their suspicion of Kissinger's involvement.

[ 153 ] Nixon also hoped that Schlesinger could push through broader changes in the intelligence community that he had been working towards for years, the creation of a Director of National Intelligence, and spinning off the covert action part of the CIA into a separate organ. Before Helms would leave office, he would destroy every tape he had secretly made of meetings in his office, and many of the papers on Project MKUltra . In Schlesinger's 17-week tenure, in his assertion to President Nixon that it was "imperative to cut back on 'the prominence of CIA operations' around the world," the director fired more than 1,500 employees.

[ 154 ] As Watergate threw the spotlight on the CIA, Schlesinger, who had been kept in the dark about the CIA's involvement, decided he needed to know what skeletons were in the closet This became the Family Jewels . It included information linking the CIA to the assassination of foreign leaders, the illegal surveillance of some 7,000 U.S. citizens involved in the antiwar movement ( Operation CHAOS ), its experiments on U.S. and Canadian citizens without their knowledge , secretly giving them LSD (among other things) and observing the results.

[ 147 ] This prompted Congress to create the Church Committee in the Senate, and the Pike Committee in the House. President Gerald Ford created the Rockefeller Commission , [ 147 ] and issued an executive order prohibiting the assassination of foreign leaders. DCI Colby leaked the papers to the press, later he stated that he believed that providing Congress with this information was the correct thing to do, and ultimately in the CIA's interests.

[ 155 ] In December 1974 the New York Times reported that the CIA had collected intelligence files on at least 10,000 Americans and engaged in dozens of other illegal activities beginning in the 1950s, including break-ins, wiretapping and mail inspections, in violation of its 1947 charter which prohibited it from taking action on American soil and against US citizens.

[ 156 ] Congressional investigations Acting Attorney General Laurence Silberman learned of the existence of the Family Jewels and issued a subpoena for them, prompting eight congressional investigations on the domestic spying activities of the CIA.

Bill Colby 's short tenure as DCI would end with the Halloween Massacre . His replacement was George H. W. Bush . At the time, the DOD had control of 80% of the intelligence budget.

[ 157 ] Communication and coordination between the CIA and the DOD would suffer greatly under Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. The CIA's budget for hiring clandestine officers had been squeezed out by the paramilitary operations in Southeast Asia, and the government's poor popularity further strained hiring. This left the agency bloated with middle management, and anemic in younger officers. With employee training taking five years, the agency's only hope would be on the trickle of new officers coming to fruition years in the future. The CIA would see another setback as communists would take Angola.

William J. Casey , a member of Ford's Intelligence Advisory Board, obtained Bush's approval to allow a team from outside the CIA to produce Soviet military estimates as a "Team B". The "B" team was composed of hawks. Their estimates were the highest that could be justified, and they painted a picture of a growing Soviet military when the Soviet military was indeed shrinking. Many of their reports found their way to the press.

Chad Main article: CIA activities in Chad Chad's neighbor Libya was a major source of weaponry to communist rebel forces. The CIA seized the opportunity to arm and finance Chad's Prime Minister, Hissène Habré , after he created a breakaway government in western Sudan .

[ 158 ] Afghanistan See also: CIA activities in Afghanistan and Operation Cyclone Further information: Allegations of CIA assistance to Osama bin Laden Critics assert that funding the Afghan mujahideen in Operation Cyclone played a role in causing the September 11 attacks .

In Afghanistan , the CIA funneled several billion dollars' worth of weapons, [ 159 ] including FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles , [ 160 ] to Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI)—which funneled them to tens of thousands of Afghan mujahideen resistance fighters in order to fight the Soviets and the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan during the Soviet-Afghan War .

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] In total, the CIA sent approximately 2,300 Stingers to Afghanistan, creating a substantial black market for the weapons throughout the Middle East, Central Asia, and even parts of Africa that persisted well into the 1990s. Perhaps 100 Stingers were acquired by Iran. The CIA later operated a program to recover the Stingers through cash buybacks.

[ 164 ] Nicaragua See also: History of the Central Intelligence Agency § Iran/Contra Further information: Contras and Reagan Doctrine Under President Jimmy Carter , the CIA was conducting covertly funded support for the Contras in their war against the Sandinistas . In March 1981, Reagan told Congress that the CIA would protect El Salvador by preventing the Sandinistas from shipping arms to communist rebels in El Salvador. The CIA also began arming and training the Contras in Honduras in hopes that they could depose the Sandinistas in Nicaragua .

[ 165 ] The CIA was involved in the Iran–Contra affair arms smuggling scandal. Repercussions from the scandal included the creation of the Intelligence Authorization Act in 1991. It defined covert operations as secret missions in geopolitical areas where the U.S. is neither openly nor apparently engaged. This also required an authorizing chain of command, including an official, presidential finding report and the informing of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, which, in emergencies, requires only "timely notification."  Critics have alleged that the CIA was also involved in Contra cocaine trafficking .

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Lebanon The CIA's prime source in Lebanon was Bashir Gemayel , a member of the Christian Maronite sect. The uprising against the Maronite minority blindsided the CIA.

Israel invaded Lebanon , and, along with the CIA, propped up Gemayel. This secured Gemayel's assurance that Americans would be protected in Lebanon. Thirteen days later he was assassinated.

Imad Mughniyah , a Hezbollah assassin, targeted Americans in retaliation for the Israeli invasion, the Sabra and Shatila massacre , and the US Marines of the Multi-National Force for their role in opposing the PLO in Lebanon. On April 18, 1983, a 2,000 lb car bomb exploded in the lobby of the American embassy in Beirut , killing 63 people, including 17 Americans and 7 CIA officers, including Robert Ames , one of the CIA's Middle East experts. America's fortunes in Lebanon suffered more as America's poorly directed retaliation for the bombing was interpreted by many as support for the Maronite minority. On October 23, 1983, two bombs ( 1983 Beirut Bombing ) were set off in Beirut, including a 10-ton bomb at a US military barracks that killed 242 people.

The embassy bombing killed Ken Haas, the CIA's Station Chief in Beirut .

Bill Buckley was sent in to replace him. Eighteen days after the US Marines left Lebanon, Buckley was kidnapped. On March 7, 1984, Jeremy Levin, CNN 's Bureau Chief in Beirut, was kidnapped. Twelve more Americans were captured in Beirut during the Reagan Administration .

Manucher Ghorbanifar , a former Savak agent, was an information seller, and was discredited over his record of misinformation. He reached out to the agency offering a back channel to Iran, suggesting a trade of missiles that would be lucrative to the intermediaries.

[ 168 ] Pakistan Main article: CIA activities in Pakistan It has been alleged by such authors as Ahmed Rashid that the CIA and ISI have been waging a clandestine war.

India–Pakistan geopolitical tensions On May 11, 1998, CIA Director George Tenet and his agency were taken aback by India's second nuclear test . The test prompted concerns from its nuclear-capable adversary, Pakistan , and, "remade the balance of power in the world." The nuclear test was New Delhi 's calculated response to Pakistan previously testing new missiles in its expanding arsenal. This series of events subsequently revealed the CIA's "failure of espionage, a failure to read photographs, a failure to comprehend reports, a failure to think, and a failure to see." [ 169 ] Poland, 1980–1989 See also: Poland–United States relations Unlike the Carter administration , the Reagan administration supported the Solidarity movement in Poland , and – based on CIA intelligence – waged a public relations campaign to deter what the Carter administration felt was "an imminent move by large Soviet military forces into Poland." Colonel Ryszard Kukliński, a senior officer on the Polish General Staff, was secretly sending reports to the CIA.

[ 170 ] The CIA transferred around $2 million yearly in cash to Solidarity, which suggests that $10 million total is a reasonable estimate for the five-year total. There were no direct links between the CIA and Solidarność , and all money was channeled through third parties.

[ 171 ] CIA officers were barred from meeting Solidarity leaders, and the CIA's contacts with Solidarność activists were weaker than those of the AFL–CIO , which raised 300 thousand dollars from its members, which were used to provide material and cash directly to Solidarity, with no control of Solidarity's use of it. The U.S. Congress authorized the National Endowment for Democracy to promote democracy, and the NED allocated $10 million to Solidarity.

[ 172 ] When the Polish government launched a crackdown in December 1981, Solidarity was not alerted. Explanations for this vary; some believe the CIA was caught off guard, while others suggest that American policymakers viewed an internal crackdown as preferable to an "inevitable Soviet intervention." [ 173 ] CIA support for Solidarity included money, equipment and training, which was coordinated by Special Operations CIA division.

[ 174 ] Henry Hyde , U.S. House intelligence committee member, said that the U.S. provided "supplies and technical assistance in terms of clandestine newspapers, broadcasting, propaganda, money, organizational help and advice".

[ 175 ] Michael Reisman of Yale Law School named operations in Poland as one of the CIA's Cold War covert operations.

[ 176 ] Initial funds for covert actions by the CIA were $2 million, but authorization was soon increased and by 1985 the CIA had successfully infiltrated Poland.

[ 177 ] Rainer Thiel, in Nested Games of External Democracy Promotion: The United States and the Polish Liberalization 1980–1989 , mentions how covert operations by the CIA, and spy games, among others, allowed the U.S. to proceed with successful regime change.

[ 178 ] Operation Gladio Main article: Operation Gladio During the Cold War , the CIA and NATO were involved in Operation Gladio .

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] As part of Operation Gladio, the CIA supported the Italian government, and allegedly supported neo-fascist organizations [ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] such as National Vanguard, New Order and the Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari during the Years of Lead in Italy .

In Turkey , Gladio was called Counter-Guerrilla . CIA efforts strengthened the Pan-Turkist movement through the founding member of the Counter-Guerrilla; Alparslan Türkeş .

[ 184 ] Other far-right individuals employed by the CIA as part of Counter-Guerilla included Ruzi Nazar , a former SS officer and Pan-Turkist.

[ 185 ] Operation Desert Storm Main article: Gulf War During the Iran–Iraq War , the CIA had backed both sides. The CIA had maintained a network of spies in Iran, but in 1989 a CIA mistake compromised every agent they had in there, and the CIA had no agents in Iraq. In the weeks before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait , the CIA downplayed the military buildup. During the war, CIA estimates of Iraqi abilities and intentions flip-flopped and were rarely accurate. In one particular case, the DOD had asked the CIA to identify military targets to bomb. One target the CIA identified was an underground shelter. The CIA did not know that it was a civilian bomb shelter. In a rare instance, the CIA correctly determined that the coalition forces efforts were coming up short in their efforts to destroy SCUD missiles. Congress took away the CIA's role in interpreting spy-satellite photos, putting the CIA's satellite intelligence operations under the auspices of the military. The CIA created its office of military affairs, which operated as "second-echelon support for the Pentagon. .. answering ... questions from military men [like] 'how wide is this road?

' " [ 186 ] Fall of the Soviet Union See also: History of the Central Intelligence Agency § Fall of the USSR Mikhail Gorbachev 's announcement of the unilateral reduction of 500,000 Soviet troops took the CIA by surprise. Moreover, Doug MacEachin, the CIA's Chief of Soviet analysis, said that even if the CIA had told the President, the NSC, and Congress about the cuts beforehand, it would have been ignored. "We never would have been able to publish it." [ 187 ] All the CIA numbers on the Soviet Union's economy were wrong. Too often the CIA relied on inexperienced people supposedly deemed experts. Bob Gates had preceded Doug MacEachin as Chief of Soviet analysis, and he had never visited the Soviet Union. Few officers, even those stationed in the country, spoke the language of the people on whom they spied. And the CIA could not send agents to respond to developing situations. The CIA analysis of Russia during the Cold War was either driven by ideology, or by politics.

William J. Crowe , the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, noted that the CIA "talked about the Soviet Union as if they weren't reading the newspapers, much less developed clandestine intelligence." [ 188 ] On January 25, 1993, Mir Qazi opened fire at the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, killing two officers and wounding three others.

[ 189 ] On February 26, Al-Qaeda terrorists led by Ramzi Yousef bombed the parking garage below the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City , killing six people and injuring 1,402 others.

During the Bosnian War , the CIA ignored signs within and without [ clarification needed ] of the Srebrenica massacre . On July 13, 1995, when the press report about the massacre came out, the CIA received pictures from a spy satellite of prisoners guarded by men with guns in Srebrenica.

[ 190 ] The CIA had no agents on the ground to verify the report. Two weeks after news reports of the slaughter, the CIA sent a U-2 to photograph it. A week later the CIA completed its report on the matter. The final report came to the Oval Office on August 4, 1995. In short, it took three weeks for the agency to confirm that one of the largest mass murders in Europe since the Second World War had occurred.

[ 190 ] Another CIA mistake which occurred in the Balkans during the Clinton presidency was the NATO bombing of Serbia. To force Slobodan Milošević to withdraw his troops from Kosovo, the CIA had been invited to provide military targets for bombings, wherein the agency's analysts used tourist maps to determine the location.

[ 191 ] However, the agency incorrectly provided the coordinates of the Chinese Embassy as a target resulting in its bombing. The CIA had misread the target as Slobodan Milosevic's military depot.

[ 192 ] In Guatemala , the CIA produced the Murphy Memo, based on audio recordings made by covert listening devices planted by Guatemalan intelligence in the bedroom of Ambassador Marilyn McAfee . In the recording, Ambassador McAfee verbally entreated "Murphy." The CIA circulated a memo in the highest Washington circles accusing Ambassador McAfee of having an extramarital lesbian affair with her secretary, Carol Murphy. There was no affair. Ambassador McAfee was calling to Murphy, her poodle .

[ 193 ] Harold James Nicholson would burn [ clarification needed ] several serving officers and three years of trainees before he was caught spying for Russia. In 1997 the House would pen another report, which said that CIA officers know little about the language or politics of the people they spy on; the conclusion was that the CIA lacked the "depth, breadth, and expertise to monitor political, military, and economic developments worldwide." [ 194 ] Russ Travers said in the CIA in-house journal that in five years "intelligence failure is inevitable".

[ 195 ] In 1997 the CIA's new director George Tenet would promise a new working agency by 2002. The CIA's surprise at India's detonation of an atom bomb was a failure at almost every level. After the 1998 embassy bombings by Al Qaeda , the CIA offered two targets to be hit in retaliation . One of them was the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory , where traces of chemical weapon precursors had been detected. In the aftermath, it was concluded that "the decision to target al Shifa continues a tradition of operating on inadequate intelligence about Sudan." It triggered the CIA to make "substantial and sweeping changes" to prevent "a catastrophic systemic intelligence failure." [ 196 ] Aldrich Ames See also: Aldrich Ames Between 1985 and 1986, the CIA lost every spy it had in Eastern Europe. The details of the investigation into the cause were obscured from the new Director, and the investigation had little success and has been widely criticized. On February 21, 1994, FBI agents pulled Aldrich Ames out of his Jaguar.

[ 197 ] In the investigation that ensued, the CIA discovered that many of the sources for its most important analyses of the USSR were based on Soviet disinformation fed to the CIA by controlled agents. On top of that, it was discovered that, in some cases, the CIA suspected at the time that the sources were compromised, but the information was sent up the chain as genuine.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] Osama bin Laden Agency files show that it is believed Osama bin Laden was funding the Afghan rebels against the USSR in the 1980s.

[ 200 ] In 1991, bin Laden returned to his native Saudi Arabia protesting the presence of troops, and Operation Desert Storm . He was expelled from the country. In 1996, the CIA created a team to hunt bin Laden. They were trading information with the Sudanese until, on the word of a source that would later be found to be a fabricator, the CIA closed its Sudan station later that year. In 1998, bin Laden would declare war on America, and, on August 7, strike in Tanzania and Nairobi . On October 12, 2000, Al Qaeda bombed the USS Cole . In the first days of George W. Bush's presidency, Al Qaeda threats were ubiquitous in daily presidential CIA briefings, but it may have become a case of false alarm. The agency's predictions were dire but carried little weight, and the focus of the president and his defense staff were elsewhere. The CIA arranged the arrests of suspected Al Qaeda members through cooperation with foreign agencies, but the CIA could not definitively say what effect these arrests have had, and it could not gain hard intelligence from those captured. The President had asked the CIA if Al Qaeda could plan attacks in the US. On August 6, Bush received a daily briefing with the headline, not based on current, solid intelligence, "Al Qaeda determined to strike inside the US." The US had been hunting bin Laden since 1996 and had had several opportunities, but neither Clinton, nor Bush had wanted to risk taking an active role in a murky assassination plot, and the perfect opportunity had never materialized for a DCI that would have given him the reassurances he needed to take the plunge. That day, Richard A. Clarke sent National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice warning of the risks, and decrying the inaction of the CIA.

[ 201 ] Al-Qaeda and the Global War on Terrorism Further information: CIA transnational anti-terrorism activities , Human rights violations by the CIA , and Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture The CIA prepared a series of leaflets announcing bounties for those who turned in or denounced individuals suspected of association with the Taliban or Al-Qaeda .

In January 1996, the CIA created an experimental "virtual station," the Bin Laden Issue Station , under the Counterterrorist Center, to track bin Laden's developing activities. Al-Fadl, who defected to the CIA in spring 1996, began to provide the Station with a new image of the Al Qaeda leader: he was not only a terrorist financier but a terrorist organizer as well. FBI Special Agent Dan Coleman (who together with his partner Jack Cloonan had been "seconded" to the bin Laden Station) called him Qaeda's " Rosetta Stone ".

[ 202 ] In 1999, CIA chief George Tenet launched a plan to deal with al-Qaeda. The Counterterrorist Center, its new chief, Cofer Black , and the center's bin Laden unit were the plan's developers and executors. Once it was prepared, Tenet assigned CIA intelligence chief Charles E. Allen to set up a "Qaeda cell" to oversee its tactical execution.

[ 203 ] In 2000, the CIA and USAF jointly ran a series of flights over Afghanistan with a small remote-controlled reconnaissance drone, the Predator ; they obtained probable photos of bin Laden. Cofer Black and others became advocates of arming the Predator with missiles to try to assassinate bin Laden and other al-Qaeda leaders.

September 11 attacks and its aftermath US special forces helping Northern Alliance troops away from a CIA-operated MI-17 Hip helicopter at Bagram Airbase , 2002 On September 11, 2001 , 19 Al-Qaeda members hijacked four passenger jets within the Northeastern United States in a series of coordinated terrorist attacks. Two planes crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City , the third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia , and the fourth inadvertently into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania . The attacks cost the lives of 2,996 people (including the 19 hijackers) , caused the destruction of the Twin Towers , and damaged the western side of the Pentagon. Soon after 9/11, The New York Times released a story stating that the CIA's New York field office was destroyed in the wake of the attacks. According to unnamed CIA sources, while first responders , military personnel and volunteers were conducting rescue efforts at the World Trade Center site , a special CIA team was searching the rubble for both digital and paper copies of classified documents. This was done according to well-rehearsed document recovery procedures put in place after the Iranian takeover of the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979.

While the CIA insists that those who conducted the attacks on 9/11 were not aware that the agency was operating at 7 World Trade Center under the guise of another (unidentified) federal agency, this center was the headquarters for many notable criminal terrorism investigations. Though the New York field offices' main responsibilities were to monitor and recruit foreign officials stationed at the United Nations, the field office also handled the investigations of the August 1998 bombings of United States Embassies in East Africa and the October 2000 bombing of the USS Cole .

[ 204 ] Despite the fact that the 9/11 attacks may have damaged the CIA's New York branch, and they had to loan office space from the US Mission to the United Nations and other federal agencies, there was an upside for the CIA.

[ 204 ] In the months immediately following 9/11, there was a huge increase in the number of applications for CIA positions. According to CIA representatives that spoke with The New York Times , pre-9/11 the agency received approximately 500 to 600 applications a week, in the months following 9/11 the agency received that number daily.

[ 205 ] The intelligence community as a whole, and especially the CIA, were involved in presidential planning immediately after the 9/11 attacks. In his address to the nation at 8:30pm on September 11, 2001, George W. Bush mentioned the intelligence community: "The search is underway for those who are behind these evil acts, I've directed the full resource of our intelligence and law enforcement communities to find those responsible and bring them to justice." [ 206 ] The involvement of the CIA in the newly coined "War on Terror" was further increased on September 15, 2001. During a meeting at Camp David George W. Bush agreed to adopt a plan proposed by CIA director George Tenet. This plan consisted of conducting a covert war in which CIA paramilitary officers would cooperate with anti-Taliban guerrillas inside Afghanistan. They would later be joined by small special operations forces teams which would call in precision airstrikes on Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters. This plan was codified on September 16, 2001, with Bush's signature of an official Memorandum of Notification that allowed the plan to proceed.

[ 207 ] US Secretary of Defense and former Director of Central Intelligence Robert Gates meeting with Russian Minister of Defense and ex-KGB officer Sergei Ivanov , 2007 On November 25–27, 2001, Taliban prisoners revolted at the Qala Jangi prison west of Mazar-e-Sharif. Though several days of struggle occurred between the Taliban prisoners and the Northern Alliance members present, the prisoners gained the upper hand and obtained North Alliance weapons. At some point during this period Johnny "Mike" Spann, a CIA officer sent to question the prisoners, was beaten to death. He became the first American to die in combat in the war in Afghanistan.

[ 207 ] After 9/11, the CIA came under criticism for not having done enough to prevent the attacks. Tenet rejected the criticism, citing the agency's planning efforts especially over the preceding two years. He also considered that the CIA's efforts had put the agency in a position to respond rapidly and effectively to the attacks, both in the "Afghan sanctuary" and in "ninety-two countries around the world".

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] The new strategy was called the "Worldwide Attack Matrix".

[ 210 ] Anwar al-Awlaki , a Yemeni American U.S. citizen and al-Qaeda member, was killed on September 30, 2011, by a CIA drone strike in Yemen.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] Al-Awlaki's 16-year-old son, a noncombatant and U.S. citizen, was also killed in a separate strike.

[ 212 ] Although approved by the Department of Justice , the strikes sparked discussion on the legality of killing American citizens without trial.

[ 211 ] Failures in intelligence analysis A major criticism is a failure to forestall the September 11 attacks . The 9/11 Commission Report identified failures in the IC as a whole. One problem, for example, was the FBI failing to "connect the dots" by sharing information among its decentralized field offices.

The report concluded that former DCI George Tenet failed to adequately prepare the agency to deal with the danger posed by al-Qaeda prior to the attacks of September 11, 2001.

[ 213 ] The report was finished in June 2005 and was partially released to the public in an agreement with Congress, over the objections of current DCI General Michael Hayden . Hayden said its publication would "consume time and attention revisiting ground that is already well plowed." [ 214 ] Tenet disagreed with the report's conclusions, citing his planning efforts vis-à-vis al-Qaeda, particularly from 1999.

[ 215 ] Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence, Carl W. Ford Jr.

remarked, "As long as we rate intelligence more for its volume than its quality, we will continue to turn out the $40 billion pile of crap we have become famous for." He further stated, "[The CIA is] broken. It's so broken that nobody wants to believe it." [ 216 ] Yugoslav wars See also: Breakup of Yugoslavia In 1989; Yugoslavia officially dissolved into six republics, with borders drawn along ethnic and historical lines: Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , Macedonia , Montenegro , Serbia , and Slovenia . This quickly dissolved into ethnic tensions between Serbs and other Balkan ethnicities. In 1991, the CIA predicted that tension in the region would evolve into a full blown Civil war.

[ 217 ] In 1992, the U.S. embargoed the trafficking of weapons into both Bosnia and Serbia in order to not prolong the war and the destruction of impacted communities. In May 1994, the CIA reported that the embargo had been ignored by countries such as Malaysia and Iran who moved weapons into Bosnia.

[ 218 ] Iraq War Main article: CIA activities in Iraq Further information: Plame affair Seventy-two days after the 9/11 attacks, President Bush told Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to update the US plan for an invasion of Iraq , but not to tell anyone. Rumsfeld asked Bush if he could bring DCI Tenet into the loop, to which Bush agreed.

[ 219 ] The CIA had put eight of their best officers in Kurdish territory in Northern Iraq. By December 2002, the CIA had close to a dozen functional networks in Iraq [ 219 ] : 242 and would penetrate Iraq's SSO , tap the encrypted communications of the Deputy Prime Minister, and recruit the bodyguard of Hussein's son [ which?

] as an agent. As time passed, the CIA would become more frantic about the possibility of their networks being compromised. To the CIA, the invasion had to occur before the end of February 2003 if their sources inside Hussein's government were to survive. The rollup would happen as predicted; 37 CIA sources recognized by their Thuraya satellite telephones provided for them by the CIA.

[ 219 ] : 337 Former CIA deputy director Michael Morell apologized to Colin Powell for the CIA's erroneous assessments of Iraq's WMD programs .

[ 220 ] The case Colin Powell presented before the United Nations (purportedly proving an Iraqi WMD program) was inaccurate. DDCI John E. McLaughlin was part of a long discussion in the CIA about equivocation. McLaughlin, who would make, among others, the "slam dunk" presentation to the President, "felt that they had to dare to be wrong to be clearer in their judgments".

[ 219 ] : 197 The Al Qaeda connection, for instance, was from a single source, extracted through torture, and was later denied. The sole source for the allegations of Iraqi mobile weapons laboratories , code-named Curveball , was a known liar.

[ 221 ] A postmortem of the intelligence failures in the lead up to Iraq led by former DDCI Richard Kerr would conclude that the CIA had been a casualty of the Cold War, wiped out in a way "analogous to the effect of the meteor strikes on the dinosaurs." [ 222 ] The Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture that details the use of torture during CIA detention and interrogation The opening days of the invasion of Iraq would see successes and defeats for the CIA. With its Iraq networks compromised, and its strategic and tactical information shallow, and often wrong, the intelligence side of the invasion itself would be a black eye for the agency. The CIA would see some success with its "Scorpion" paramilitary teams composed of CIA Special Activities Division paramilitary officers, along with friendly Iraqi partisans . CIA SAD officers would also help the US 10th Special Forces .

[ 219 ] [ 223 ] [ 224 ] The occupation of Iraq would be a low point in the history of the CIA. At the largest CIA station in the world, officers would rotate through 1–3-month tours. In Iraq, almost 500 transient officers would be trapped inside the Green Zone while Iraq station chiefs would rotate with only a little less frequency.

[ 225 ] 2004, DNI takes over CIA top-level functions The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 created the office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who took over some of the government and intelligence community (IC)-wide functions that had previously been the CIA's.

[ 226 ] The DNI manages the United States Intelligence Community and in so doing it manages the intelligence cycle . Among the functions that moved to the DNI were the preparation of estimates reflecting the consolidated opinion of the 16 IC agencies, and preparation of briefings for the president. On July 30, 2008, President Bush issued Executive Order 13470 [ 227 ] amending Executive Order 12333 to strengthen the role of the DNI.

[ 228 ] Previously, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) oversaw the Intelligence Community, serving as the president's principal intelligence advisor, additionally serving as head of the CIA. The DCI's title now is "Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" (D/CIA), serving as head of the CIA.

Currently, the CIA reports to the Director of National Intelligence. Before the establishment of the DNI, the CIA reported to the President, with informational briefings to congressional committees. The National Security Advisor is a permanent member of the National Security Council, responsible for briefing the President with pertinent information collected by all U.S. intelligence agencies, including the National Security Agency, the Drug Enforcement Administration, etc. All 16 Intelligence Community agencies are under the authority of the Director of National Intelligence.

Operation Neptune Spear See also: Death of Osama bin Laden On May 1, 2011, President Barack Obama announced that Osama bin Laden was killed earlier that day by "a small team of Americans" operating in Abbottabad , Pakistan, during a CIA operation.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] The raid was executed from a CIA forward base in Afghanistan by elements of the U.S. Navy's Naval Special Warfare Development Group and CIA paramilitary operatives.

[ 231 ] The operation was a result of years of intelligence work that included the CIA's capture and interrogation of Khalid Sheik Mohammad , which led to the identity of a courier of bin Laden's, [ 232 ] [ 233 ] [ 234 ] the tracking of the courier to the compound by Special Activities Division paramilitary operatives and the establishing of a CIA safe house to provide critical tactical intelligence for the operation.

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] [ 237 ] The CIA ran a fake vaccination clinic in an attempt to locate Osama bin Laden . This may have negatively affected the campaign against polio in Pakistan and Afghanistan. In some rural areas, vaccination workers were banned by the Taliban or chased away by locals.

[ 238 ] [ 239 ] There have been many deadly attacks by militants against vaccination workers in Pakistan.

[ 240 ] Efforts to eradicate polio have furthermore been disrupted by American drone strikes .

[ 238 ] Syrian Civil War Main article: CIA activities in Syria President Barack Obama and CIA Director John Brennan at the GCC -U.S. Summit in Riyadh in April 2016.

Saudi Arabia was involved in the CIA-led Timber Sycamore covert operation.

Under the aegis of operation Timber Sycamore and other clandestine activities, CIA operatives and U.S. special operations troops have trained and armed nearly 10,000 rebel fighters at a cost of $1 billion a year.

[ 241 ] The CIA has been sending weapons to anti-government rebels in Syria since at least 2012.

[ 242 ] These weapons have been reportedly falling into hands of extremists, such as al-Nusra Front and ISIL .

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] [ 245 ] Around February 2017, the CIA was instructed to halt military aid to Syrian rebels (Free Syrian Army or FSA), which also included training, ammunition, guided missiles, and salaries. Sources believe that the aid freeze was related to concerns that weapons and funds will fall into the hands of ISIL. On April 6, 2017, Al-Jazeera reported that funding to the FSA was partially restored. Based on the information provided by two FSA sources, the new military operation room will receive its funds from the coalition "Friends of Syria." The coalition consists of members from the U.S., Turkey, Western Europe, and Gulf states, which previously supported the military operation known as MOM.

[ 246 ] It was reported in July 2017 that President Donald Trump had ordered a "phasing out" of the CIA's support for anti- Assad rebels.

[ 247 ] Reorganization On 6 March 2015, the office of the D/CIA issued an unclassified edition of a statement by the director, titled 'Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future', as a press release for public consumption. The press release announced sweeping plans for the reorganization and reform of the CIA, which the director believes will bring the CIA more in line with the Agency doctrine called the 'Strategic Direction'. Among the principal changes disclosed include the establishment of a new directorate, the Directorate of Digital Innovation.  Other changes which were announced include the formation of a Talent Development Center of Excellence, the enhancement and expansion of the CIA University and the creation of the office of the Chancellor to head the CIA University in order to consolidate and unify recruitment and training efforts. The National Clandestine Service (NCS) will be reverting to its original Directorate name, the Directorate of Operations. The Directorate of Intelligence is also being renamed; it will now be the Directorate of Analysis.

[ 248 ] Drones A new policy introduced by President Barack Obama removed the authority of the CIA to launch drone attacks and allowed these attacks only under Department of Defense command. This change was reversed by President Donald Trump, who authorized CIA drone strikes on suspected terrorists.

[ 249 ] Encryption devices sold through front company For decades until 2018, the CIA secretly owned Crypto AG , a small Swiss company that made encryption devices, in association with West German intelligence. The company sold compromised encryption devices to over 120 countries, allowing Western intelligence to eavesdrop on communications that the users believed to be secure.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] Open-source intelligence Further information: Foreign Broadcast Information Service and Open Source Center Until the 2004 reorganization of the intelligence community, one of the "services of common concern" that the CIA provided was open-source intelligence from the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS).

[ 252 ] FBIS, which had absorbed the Joint Publication Research Service, a military organization that translated documents, [ 253 ] moved into the National Open Source Enterprise under the Director of National Intelligence.

During the Reagan administration , Michael Sekora (assigned to the DIA ), worked with agencies across the intelligence community, including the CIA, to develop and deploy a technology-based competitive strategy system called Project Socrates . Project Socrates was designed to utilize open-source intelligence gathering almost exclusively. The technology-focused Socrates system supported such programs as the Strategic Defense Initiative in addition to private sector projects.

[ 254 ] [ 255 ] Increasingly, the CIA is a major consumer of social media intelligence.

[ 256 ] CIA launched a Twitter account in June 2014.

[ 257 ] CIA also launched its own .onion website to collect anonymous feedback.

[ 258 ] Outsourcing and privatization See also: Intelligence outsourcing Many of the duties and functions of Intelligence Community activities, not the CIA alone, are being outsourced and privatized.

Mike McConnell , former Director of National Intelligence, was about to publicize an investigation report of outsourcing by U.S. intelligence agencies, as required by Congress.

[ 259 ] However, this report was then classified.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] Hillhouse speculates that this report includes requirements for the CIA to report: [ 260 ] [ 262 ] different standards for government employees and contractors; contractors providing similar services to government workers; analysis of costs of contractors vs. employees; an assessment of the appropriateness of outsourced activities; an estimate of the number of contracts and contractors; comparison of compensation for contractors and government employees; attrition analysis of government employees; descriptions of positions to be converted back to the employee model; an evaluation of accountability mechanisms; an evaluation of procedures for "conducting oversight of contractors to ensure identification and prosecution of criminal violations, financial waste, fraud, or other abuses committed by contractors or contract personnel"; and an "identification of best practices of accountability mechanisms within service contracts." According to investigative journalist Tim Shorrock : ...what we have today with the intelligence business is something far more systemic: senior officials leaving their national security and counterterrorism jobs for positions where they essentially perform the same jobs they once held at the CIA, the NSA, and other agencies – but for double or triple the salary and profit. It's a privatization of the highest order, in which our collective memory and experience in intelligence – our crown jewels of spying, so to speak – are owned by corporate America. There is essentially no government oversight of this private sector at the heart of our intelligence empire. And the lines between public and private have become so blurred as to be nonexistent.

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] Congress had required an outsourcing report by March 30, 2008: [ 262 ] The Director of National Intelligence has been granted the authority to increase the number of positions (FTEs) on elements in the Intelligence Community by up to 10% should there be a determination that activities performed by a contractor should be done by a U.S. government employee." [ 262 ] Part of the problem, according to author Tim Weiner, is that political appointees designated by recent presidential administrations have sometimes been under-qualified or over-zealous politically. Large purges have taken place in the upper echelons of the CIA, and when those talented individuals are pushed out the door, they have frequently gone on to found new independent intelligence companies which can suck up CIA talent.

[ 117 ] Another part of the contracting problem comes from Congressional restrictions on the number of employees within the IC. According to Hillhouse, this resulted in 70% of the de facto workforce of the CIA's National Clandestine Service being made up of contractors. "After years of contributing to the increasing reliance upon contractors, Congress is now providing a framework for the conversion of contractors into federal government employees – more or less." [ 262 ] The number of independent contractors hired by the Federal government across the intelligence community has skyrocketed. So, not only does the CIA have trouble hiring, but those hires will frequently leave their permanent employ for shorter term contract gigs which have much higher pay and allow for more career mobility.

[ 117 ] As with most government agencies, building equipment often is contracted. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), responsible for the development and operation of airborne and spaceborne sensors, long was a joint operation of the CIA and the United States Department of Defense. The NRO, then under DCI authority, contracted more of the design that had been their tradition, and to a contractor without extensive reconnaissance experience, Boeing . The next-generation satellite Future Imagery Architecture project "how does heaven look," which missed objectives after $4 billion in cost overruns, was the result of this contract.

[ 265 ] [ 266 ] Some of the cost problems associated with intelligence come from one agency, or even a group within an agency, not accepting the compartmented security practices for individual projects, requiring expensive duplication.

[ 267 ] Controversies Main article: List of CIA controversies See also: Human rights violations by the CIA , Allegations of CIA drug trafficking , CIA influence on public opinion , Project Mockingbird , Extraordinary rendition , Assassination of Orlando Letelier , Cubana de Aviación Flight 455 , and Operation Condor The CIA has been the subject of numerous controversies. The agency ran an operation code-named "Chaos" that ran from 1967 to 1974 where they routinely performed surveillance on Americans who were a part of various peace groups protesting the Vietnam War . The operation was authorized by order of President Lyndon B. Johnson in October 1967 as the CIA gathered the information of 300,000 American people and organizations and extensive files on 7,200 citizens. The program was exposed by the Church Committee in 1975 as a part of the investigation into the Watergate scandal .

[ 216 ] [ 268 ] The CIA also conducted a secret program called MKUltra , which ran from the early 1950s to the 1970s and involved illegal human experimentation to develop mind-control techniques. Subjects were often unaware they were part of the experiments, which included the administration of psychoactive drugs like LSD and other methods of psychological manipulation .

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] The program, exposed in the 1970s, led to widespread public outrage and calls for greater oversight of intelligence agencies.

[ 271 ] The CIA was also linked to the Iran-Contra Affair wherein missiles were sold to the Iranian government as an exchange for the release of hostages and the profits the agency made from selling the weapons at a marked-up price went towards assisting the contras in Nicaragua.

Another source of controversy has been the CIA's role in Operation Condor , which was a United States-backed campaign of repression and state terrorism involving intelligence operations, CIA-backed coup d'états and assassinations against leaders in South America from 1968 to 1989. By the Operation's end in 1989, up to 80,000 people had been killed.

[ 272 ] Similarly, the CIA was complicit in the actions of death squads in El Salvador and Honduras .

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] An additional controversy surrounds the Bush Administration's claim that Iraq had "weapons of mass destruction" in 2002, and again in 2003 as justification for invading the Middle Eastern country. The CIA went along with the claim despite contradicting the president in testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee in 2002. They produced a national intelligence estimate claiming that if the Iraqi government was able to acquire "sufficient fissile material from abroad, it could make nuclear weapons within a year".

[ 275 ] See also Abu Omar case Blue sky memo Church Committee CIA's relationship with the United States Military Classified information in the United States Enhanced interrogation techniques Freedom of Information Act (United States) Intellipedia Kryptos List of intelligence agencies National Intelligence Board Operation Peter Pan Reagan Doctrine Title 32 of the Code of Federal Regulations U.S. Army and CIA interrogation manuals United States Department of Homeland Security United States Intelligence Community Vault 7 The World Factbook , published by the CIA Portals : United States Politics Notes ^ "History of the CIA" . Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on June 12, 2007 . Retrieved March 28, 2014 .

^ "CIA Observes 50th Anniversary of Original Headquarters Building Cornerstone Laying" .

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on March 24, 2010 . Retrieved September 18, 2012 .

^ a b c d e f Gellman, Barton; Miller, Greg (August 29, 2013).

"U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives detailed in 'black budget' summary" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2013 . Retrieved August 29, 2013 .

^ Kopel, Dave (July 28, 1997).

"CIA Budget: An Unnecessary Secret" .

Cato Institute .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 15, 2007 .

^ "Cloak Over the CIA Budget" .

The Washington Post . November 29, 1999.

Archived from the original on September 16, 2018 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 – via Federation of American Scientists .

^ "How does the FBI differ from the Central Intelligence Agency?" .

Federal Bureau of Investigation .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2023 . Retrieved February 22, 2023 .

^ Rudgers, David F. (2000).

Creating the secret state : the origins of the Central Intelligence Agency, 1943-1947 . University Press of Kansas. pp.

114– 115.

ISBN 978-0-7006-1024-2 .

^ a b "Leadership" .

Central Intelligence Agency . December 30, 2011. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012 . Retrieved January 6, 2018 .

^ a b Windrem, Robert (November 14, 2013).

"Sisterhood of Spies: Women crack the code at the CIA" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 7, 2018 .

^ a b Holmes, Oliver (February 3, 2017).

"CIA deputy director linked to torture at Thailand black site" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2017 . Retrieved January 7, 2018 .

^ "Meroe Park Joins Butterfield Board" .

Butterfield Bank . October 6, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 16, 2020 . Retrieved January 6, 2018 .

^ "CIA Support to the US Military During the Persian Gulf War" .

Central Intelligence Agency . June 16, 1997. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007.

^ a b c "Offices of CIA – Intelligence & Analysis – History" . CIA. Archived from the original on April 30, 2013.

^ "Intelligence & Analysis" .

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on June 12, 2007 . Retrieved July 1, 2011 .

^ Miller, Greg (December 1, 2012).

"DIA to send hundreds more spies overseas" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2017 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 .

^ Eric Schmitt (April 23, 2012).

"Defense Department Plans New Intelligence Gathering Service" Archived January 17, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times .

^ Blanton, Thomas S.; Evans, Michael L.; Martin, Kate (July 17, 2000).

"Defense HUMINT Service Organizational Chart" .

The "Death Squad Protection" Act: Senate Measure Would Restrict Public Access to Crucial Human Rights Information Under the Freedom of Information Act . George Washington University National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 34.

Archived from the original on January 9, 2008 . Retrieved January 16, 2008 .

^ Pocock, Chris (2005).

50 Years of the U-2: The Complete Illustrated History of the 'Dragon Lady' . Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing Ltd. p. 404.

ISBN 0-7643-2346-6 .

LCCN 89012535 .

^ a b "New CIA director inherits an agency that is quickly developing cyber capabilities" . January 27, 2017.

Archived from the original on July 25, 2019 . Retrieved July 25, 2019 .

^ "Digital Innovation – Central Intelligence Agency" . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016.

^ "Digital Targeter – Central Intelligence Agency" . Archived from the original on March 7, 2017.

^ Schwartz, Mattathias (March 8, 2017).

"CIA's New 'Digital Innovation' Division Can't Seem to Keep its Own Secrets" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2019 . Retrieved July 25, 2019 .

^ Lyngaas, Sean (October 1, 2015).

"Inside the CIA's new Digital Directorate" .

FCW .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2019 . Retrieved July 25, 2019 .

^ Gellman, Barton; Miller, Greg (August 29, 2013).

" 'Black budget' summary details U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives" .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2013 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 – via The Washington Post .

^ "CIA Creates Digital Innovation Directorate" .

www.bankinfosecurity.com .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2019 . Retrieved July 25, 2019 .

^ "Congressional Affairs" .

cia.gov . March 26, 2013. Archived from the original on August 6, 2013 . Retrieved June 10, 2016 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Who We Are" .

cia.gov . January 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011 . Retrieved June 10, 2016 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c Wendt, Jeff.

"A feature interview with Frans Bax, President, CIA University" .

Today's Campus .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2013 . Retrieved June 5, 2013 .

^ a b Host: Mary Louise Kelly (May 28, 2004).

"Inside CIA University: Higher Ed for Operatives" .

Morning Edition .

NPR .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2017 . Retrieved April 3, 2018 .

^ "Life in HR: Learning Resources" .

Central Intelligence Agency . February 12, 2013. Archived from the original on April 29, 2013.

^ "Training Resources" .

Central Intelligence Agency . January 23, 2013. Archived from the original on June 12, 2007 . Retrieved April 3, 2013 .

^ The OSS Assessment Staff (1969) [1948].

Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services . Johnson Reprint Corporation (original printing by Rinehart and Company, Inc.).

^ Weiner, Tim (March 20, 1998).

"Is the Explosion-Noisy Base a C.I.A. Spy School? What Base?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2014 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ Pike, John (2001).

"Warrenton Station B" .

Federation of American Scientists . Archived from the original on June 5, 2009 . Retrieved March 18, 2013 .

^ "Office of the General Counsel" (PDF) .

Central Intelligence Agency . October 31, 1954.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 26, 2013 . Retrieved March 27, 2013 .

^ Pedlow, Gregory W.; Welzenbach, Donald E. (1992).

The Central Intelligence Agency and Overhead Reconnaissance: The U-2 and OXCART Programs, 1954–1974 . Washington, D.C.: History Staff, Central Intelligence Agency. pp.

43– 44.

Archived from the original on August 18, 2013 . Retrieved November 21, 2013 .

^ "Statement of the Director of Central Intelligence Regarding the Disclosure of the Aggregate Intelligence Budget for Fiscal Year 1997" .

Central Intelligence Agency . October 15, 1997. Archived from the original on June 12, 2007.

^ "Declaration of Steven Aftergood" .

Federation of American Scientists . May 5, 2003. Case No. 02-1146 (RMU).

Archived from the original on June 29, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ Central Intelligence Agency (September 1, 1965).

"CIA Cost Reduction Program" (PDF) .

Federation of American Scientists .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ "CIA Discloses FY 1998 Intelligence Budget Total" .

Federation of American Scientists . March 20, 1998.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ Shane, Scott (November 8, 2005).

"Official Reveals Budget for U.S. Intelligence" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2013 . Retrieved April 29, 2013 .

^ Legacy of Ashes, p. 28.

^ Blum, William.

Killing Hope: US military and CIA interventions since World War II , 2nd edition, Zed Books, 2004 p.37 ^ US Defense Information Services Agency (March 19, 1999).

"Zdarm (Defense Messaging Service) Genser (General Service) Message Security Classifications, Categories, and Marking Phrase Requirements Version 1.2" (PDF) .

Federation of American Scientists .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ " 'Verbindungsstelle 61': Ermittlungen gegen Chef von geheimer BND-Gruppe" .

Spiegel Online (in German). February 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2014 . Retrieved March 28, 2014 .

^ Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , pp. 18–19.

^ Anderson 2020 , p. 23.

^ Anderson 2020 , p. 108.

^ "Army & Navy – Merger: Navy Compromise" .

Time . December 10, 1945. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008.

^ Mashbir, Colonel Sidney (1953).

I Was an American Spy . Vantage Press, Inc. New York. pp.

347– 348.

^ Mashbir, Colonel Sidney (2018).

I Was an American Spy, 65th Anniversary Edition . Horizon Productions. pp.

347– 348.

^ Zacharias, Captain Ellis M. (1946).

Secret Missions . G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York. pp.

289– 293.

^ Factbook on Intelligence . Central Intelligence Agency. December 1992. pp.

4– 5.

^ "The Role of Intelligence".

Congress and the Nation 1945–1964: A review of government and politics in the postwar years . Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Service. 1965. p. 306.

^ a b "CIA – History" .

Federation of American Scientists .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ Warner, Michael (1995).

"The Creation of the Central Intelligence Group" (PDF) .

Studies in Intelligence .

39 (5).

Center for the Study of Intelligence : 111– 120. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 17, 2020 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ Wilford 2024 , p. 46.

^ "National Security Act of 1947" .

www.dni.gov .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2020 . Retrieved July 31, 2020 .

^ "Office of the General Counsel: History of the Office" .

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on August 27, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ Breneman, Gary M.

"Lawrence R. Houston: A Biography" (PDF) .

National Archives and Records Administration . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 29, 2015.

^ Zegart, Amy B. (September 23, 2007).

"The CIA's license to fail" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2011 .

^ "George Tenet v. John Doe" (PDF) .

Federation of American Scientists . July 16, 2006.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ Thorne, C. Thomas Jr.; Patterson, David S., eds. (1996).

Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment . Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Archived from the original on July 19, 2019 . Retrieved March 20, 2015 .

^ a b Laurie, Clayton.

"The Korean War and the Central Intelligence Agency" (PDF) .

Center for the Study of Intelligence . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ a b Weiner 2007 , p. 14.

^ a b c "Fifteen DCIs' First 100 Days" (PDF) .

Studies in Intelligence .

38 (1).

Center for the Study of Intelligence . January 1993. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 26, 2010 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ "A Look Back: The First Director of Central Intelligence" .

Central Intelligence Agency . July 24, 2014. Archived from the original on March 21, 2015.

^ a b 1634–1699: McCusker, J. J.

(1997).

How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF) .

American Antiquarian Society .

1700–1799: McCusker, J. J.

(1992).

How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF) .

American Antiquarian Society .

1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

"Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–" . Retrieved February 29, 2024 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 17.

^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment" .

U.S. Department of State . Document 292, Section 5.

Archived from the original on October 10, 2017 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 29.

^ Anderson 2020 , pp. 154–155.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 33.

^ Rose, P. K. (2001).

"Two Strategic Intelligence Mistakes in Korea, 1950" .

Studies in Intelligence .

45 (5).

Center for the Study of Intelligence : 57– 65. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ "The Role of Intelligence" (1965) Congress and the Nation 1945–1964. p.306.

^ Anderson 2020 , p. 210.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 51.

^ Gouda, Frances (2002).

American Visions of the Netherlands East Indies/Indonesia: US Foreign Policy and Indonesian Nationalism, 1920–1949 . Amsterdam University Press. p. 365.

ISBN 978-90-5356-479-0 .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 27.

^ a b c Weiner 2007 , p. 56.

^ a b c Weiner 2007 , p. 57.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 58.

^ a b Weiner 2007 , pp. 58–61.

^ Gasiorowski, Mark; Byrne, Malcolm (2004).

Mohammad Mosaddeq and the 1953 Coup in Iran . Syracuse University Press. p. 360.

ISBN 978-0-81563-018-0 .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Risen, James (2000).

"Secrets of History: The C.I.A. in Iran" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2013 . Retrieved March 30, 2007 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 90.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 87.

^ Capuchin (September 21, 2008), U.S. and Them: Operation Ajax – Iran and the CIA coup (2/2) , archived from the original on December 14, 2021 , retrieved January 20, 2017 ^ Weiner 2007 , p. 91.

^ Anderson 2020 , p. 367–368.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 95.

^ a b Schlesinger, Stephen (June 3, 2011).

"Ghosts of Guatemala's Past" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2017 . Retrieved July 5, 2014 .

^ Cooper, Allan D. (2009).

The Geography of Genocide .

University Press of America . p. 171.

ISBN 978-0-7618-4097-8 .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Dosal, Paul J. (1995).

Doing Business with the Dictators: A Political History of United Fruit in Guatemala, 1899–1944 .

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-84202-590-4 .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Jones, Maggie (June 30, 2016).

"The Secrets in Guatemala's Bones" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2016 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ a b Immerman 1982 , pp. 161–170.

^ a b c Immerman 1982 , pp. 173–178.

^ Cullather, Nick (October 9, 2006).

Secret History: The CIA's Classified Account of Its Operations in Guatemala, 1952–1954 (Second ed.).

Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-5468-2 .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2016 . Retrieved April 17, 2016 .

^ Gleijeses, Piero (1992).

Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United States, 1944–1954 .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 0-691-02556-8 .

Archived from the original on August 31, 2023 . Retrieved August 31, 2023 .

^ Streeter, Stephen M. (2000).

Managing the Counterrevolution: The United States and Guatemala, 1954–1961 . Ohio University Press.

ISBN 978-0-89680-215-5 .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2016 . Retrieved April 17, 2016 .

^ Navarro, Mireya (February 26, 1999).

"Guatemalan Army Waged 'Genocide,' New Report Finds" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2017 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ [ 92 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] ^ a b Weiner 2007 , p. 139.

^ Wilford 2024 , p. 91.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 143.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 145.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 146.

^ Weiner 2007 , p.

170 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p.

148 .

^ Roadnight, Andrew (2002).

United States Policy towards Indonesia in the Truman and Eisenhower Years . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 162.

ISBN 978-0-333-79315-2 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 153.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 154.

^ Reid 2023 , p. 4.

^ Reid 2023 , pp. 261, 303.

^ Reid 2023 , pp. 385, 397–398.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 163.

^ a b c Weiner, Tim (2007).

Legacy of ashes: The history of the CIA (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3 .

^ Snow, Anita (June 27, 2007).

"CIA Plot to Kill Castro Detailed" .

The Washington Post . Washington, DC. AP.

Archived from the original on March 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 17, 2018 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 161.

^ Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , p. 68.

^ Bolender, Keith (2012).

Cuba Under Siege: American Policy, the Revolution, and its People . New York: Palgrave Macmillan . pp. x, 14, 18– 20, 53– 57, 63– 64, et passim .

doi : 10.1057/9781137275554 .

ISBN 978-1-137-27554-7 .

^ Domínguez, Jorge I. (April 2000).

"The @#$%& Missile Crisis" (PDF) .

Diplomatic History .

24 (2). Oxford/Malden: Blackwell Publishers / Oxford University Press : 305– 316.

doi : 10.1111/0145-2096.00214 .

ISSN 0145-2096 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 7, 2020 . Retrieved September 6, 2019 .

On the afternoon of 16 October... Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy convened in his office a meeting on Operation Mongoose, the code name for a U.S. policy of sabotage and related covert operation aimed at Cuba... The Kennedy administration returned to its policy of sponsoring terrorism against Cuba as the confrontation with the Soviet Union lessened... Only once in these nearly thousand pages of documentation did a U.S. official raise something that resembled a faint moral objection to U.S.-government sponsored terrorism.

^ a b Schoultz, Lars (2009). "State Sponsored Terrorism".

That infernal little Cuban republic: the United States and the Cuban Revolution . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press . pp.

170– 211.

ISBN 9780807888605 .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

What more could be done? How about a program of sabotage focused on blowing up 'such targets as refineries, power plants, micro wave stations, radio and TV installations, strategic highway bridges and railroad facilities, military and naval installations and equipment, certain industrial plants and sugar refineries.' The CIA proposed just that approach a month after the Bay of Pigs, and the State Department endorsed the proposal... In early November, six months after the Bay of Pigs, JFK authorized the CIA's 'Program of Covert Action', now dubbed Operation Mongoose, and named Lansdale its chief of operations. A few days later, President Kennedy told a Seattle audience, 'We cannot, as a free nation, compete with our adversaries in tactics of terror, assassination, false promises, counterfeit mobs and crises.' Perhaps – but the Mongoose decision indicated that he was willing to try.

^ Prados, John; Jimenez-Bacardi, Arturo, eds. (October 3, 2019).

Kennedy and Cuba: Operation Mongoose .

National Security Archive (Report).

Washington, D.C.

: The George Washington University .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2019 . Retrieved April 3, 2020 .

The Kennedy administration had been quick to set up a Cuba Task Force—with strong representation from CIA's Directorate of Plans—and on August 31 that unit decided to adopt a public posture of ignoring Castro while attacking civilian targets inside Cuba: 'our covert activities would now be directed toward the destruction of targets important to the [Cuban] economy' (Document 4)...While acting through Cuban revolutionary groups with potential for real resistance to Castro, the task force 'will do all we can to identify and suggest targets whose destruction will have the maximum economic impact.' The memorandum showed no concern for international law or the unspoken nature of these operations as terrorist attacks.

^ Lansdale, Edward (January 18, 1962). Smith, Louis J. (ed.).

Program Review by the Chief of Operations, Operation Mongoose .

Foreign Relations of the United States (Report). 1961–1963. Vol. X, Cuba.

Washington, D.C.

: United States Government Printing Office .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2017 . Retrieved February 19, 2020 .

^ a b Franklin, Jane (2016).

Cuba and the U.S. empire: a chronological history . New York: New York University Press . pp.

45– 63, 388– 392, et passim .

ISBN 9781583676059 .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

^ a b Erlich, Reese (2008).

Dateline Havana: the real story of U.S. policy and the future of Cuba . Abingdon/New York: Routledge . pp.

26– 29.

ISBN 9781317261605 .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

Officially, the United States favored only peaceful means to pressure Cuba. In reality, U.S. leaders also used violent, terrorist tactics... Operation Mongoose began in November 1961... U.S. operatives attacked civilian targets, including sugar refineries, saw mills, and molasses storage tanks. Some 400 CIA officers worked on the project in Washington and Miami... Operation Mongoose and various other terrorist operations caused property damage and injured and killed Cubans. But they failed to achieve their goal of regime change.

^ Brenner, Philip (2002).

"Turning History on its Head" .

National Security Archive .

Washington, D.C.

: The George Washington University .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2017 . Retrieved January 2, 2020 .

..in October 1962 the United States was waging a war against Cuba that involved several assassination attempts against the Cuban leader, terrorist acts against Cuban civilians, and sabotage of Cuban factories.

^ Stepick, Alex; Stepick, Carol Dutton (2002). "Power and Identity". In Suárez-Orozco, Marcelo M.; Páez, Mariela M. (eds.).

Latinos: Remaking America . Berkeley/London: University of California Press , Harvard University Center for Latin American Studies . pp.

75– 81.

ISBN 978-0520258273 .

Archived from the original on June 9, 2020 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

Through the 1960s, the private University of Miami had the largest Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) station in the world, outside of the organization's headquarters in Virginia. With perhaps as many as twelve thousand Cubans in Miami on its payroll at one point in the early 1960s, the CIA was one of the largest employers in the state of Florida. It supported what was described as the third largest navy in the world and over fifty front businesses: CIA boat shops, gun shops, travel agencies, detective agencies, and real estate agencies ^ Bohning, Don (2005).

The Castro obsession: U.S. covert operations against Cuba, 1959-1965 (1st ed.).

Washington, D.C.

: University of Nebraska Press/Potomac Books . pp. 1, 84.

ISBN 9781574886757 .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2020 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

By the end of 1962 the CIA station at an abandoned Navy air facility south of Miami had become the largest in the world outside its Langley, Virginia headquarters... Eventually some four hundred clandestine service officers toiled there... Additional CIA officers worked the Cuba account at Langley and elsewhere.

^ Miller, Nicola (2002). "The Real Gap in the Cuban Missile Crisis: The Post-Cold-War Historiography and Continued Omission of Cuba". In Carter, Dale; Clifton, Robin (eds.).

War and Cold War in American foreign policy, 1942–62 . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

211– 237.

doi : 10.1057/9781403913852 .

ISBN 9781403913852 .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2022 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

^ a b Brenner, Philip (March 1990).

"Cuba and the Missile Crisis" .

Journal of Latin American Studies .

22 ( 1– 2).

Cambridge University Press : 115– 142.

doi : 10.1017/S0022216X00015133 .

S2CID 145075193 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 7, 2020 . Retrieved September 2, 2019 .

While Operation Mongoose was discontinued early in 1963, terrorist actions were reauthorised by the president. In October 1963, 13 major CIA actions against Cuba were approved for the next two months alone, including the sabotage of an electric power plant, a sugar mill and an oil refinery. Authorised CIA raids continued at least until 1965.

^ Garthoff, Raymond (2011).

Reflections on the Cuban Missile Crisis .

Washington, D.C.

: The Brookings Institution . p. 144.

ISBN 9780815717393 .

Archived from the original on August 8, 2020 . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

One of Nixon 's first acts in office in 1969 was to direct the CIA to intensify covert operations against Cuba ^ a b c "Cuba 'plane bomber' was CIA agent" .

BBC News . London: BBC. May 11, 2005.

Archived from the original on February 22, 2006 . Retrieved September 7, 2020 .

The documents, released by George Washington University's National Security Archive, show that Mr Posada, now in his 70s, was on the CIA payroll from the 1960s until mid-1976.

^ a b Weiner, Tim (May 9, 2005).

"Cuban Exile Could Test U.S. Definition of Terrorist" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2015 . Retrieved September 8, 2019 .

^ a b c Kornbluh, Peter; White, Yvette, eds. (October 5, 2006).

Bombing of Cuban Jetliner 30 Years Later .

National Security Archive (Report).

Washington, D.C.

: The George Washington University .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2017 . Retrieved April 3, 2020 .

Among the documents posted is an annotated list of four volumes of still-secret records on Posada's career with the CIA, his acts of violence, and his suspected involvement in the bombing of Cubana flight 455 on October 6, 1976, which took the lives of all 73 people on board, many of them teenagers.

^ Gordon, Lincoln (March 27, 1964).

"Top Secret Cable from Rio de Janeiro" (PDF) .

NSA Archives .

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 22, 2019 . Retrieved May 4, 2019 .

^ "Status Report on Tibetan Operations" .

Office of the Historian . January 26, 1968.

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved June 14, 2017 .

^ Patti, Archimedes L. A. (1980).

Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's albatross . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-04156-9 .

^ Adams, Sam (1994).

War of Numbers: An Intelligence Memoir . Steerforth Press.

ISBN 1-883642-23-X .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 213.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 237.

^ Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , p. 82.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 285.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 248.

^ Brysk, Meade & Shafir 2016 ; Gordon 2014 ; Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , p. 85; Kuzmarov 2009 ; McCoy 2007 ; Schwab 2014 ; Simpson 2003 ; Valcourt 1989 .

^ a b c Frum, David (2000).

How We Got Here: The '70s . New York: Basic Books. pp.

49–51 .

ISBN 0-465-04195-7 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 319.

^ "Transcript of a recording of a meeting between President Richard Nixon and H. R. Haldeman in the oval office" .

Wyzant . June 23, 1972.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ "Nixon Explains His Taped Cryptic Remark About Helms" .

The New York Times . March 12, 1976.

Archived from the original on August 9, 2019 . Retrieved June 13, 2019 .

^ Gray III, L. Patrick ; Gray, Ed (2008).

In Nixon's Web: A Year in the Crosshairs of Watergate . Times Books/Henry Holt.

ISBN 978-0-8050-8256-2 .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2008 . Retrieved June 19, 2010 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 322.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 323.

^ Weiner Tim 2007 A Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA New York Doubleday p. 339 ^ Carl Colby (director) (September 2011).

The Man Nobody Knew: In Search of My Father, CIA Spymaster William Colby (Motion picture). New York City: Act 4 Entertainment.

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019 . Retrieved September 18, 2011 .

^ Perlstein, Rick (2014).

The invisible bridge : the fall of Nixon and the rise of Reagan . Internet Archive. New York : Simon & Schuster. p. 330.

ISBN 978-1-4767-8241-6 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 347.

^ Bronner, Michael (December 11, 2014).

"Our Man in Africa" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2017 . Retrieved March 6, 2017 .

^ Coll, Steve (2004).

Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 10, 2001 .

Penguin Group . p. 238.

ISBN 9781594200076 .

^ Walsh, Declan (July 25, 2010).

"Afghanistan war logs: US covered up fatal Taliban missile strike on Chinook" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2016 . Retrieved December 14, 2016 .

^ Coll, Steve (2004).

Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 10, 2001 .

Penguin Group . pp.

144– 145.

ISBN 9781594200076 .

^ "Story of US, CIA and Taliban" .

The Brunei Times . 2009. Archived from the original on December 5, 2013 . Retrieved December 16, 2013 .

^ West, Julian (September 23, 2001).

"Pakistan's 'godfathers of the Taliban' hold the key to hunt for bin Laden" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on January 10, 2022 . Retrieved April 9, 2011 .

^ Coll, Steve (2004).

Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 10, 2001 .

Penguin Group . pp. 233, 337– 338.

ISBN 9781594200076 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 380.

^ "US Concedes Contras Linked to Drugs, But Denies Leadership Involved" .

Associated Press . April 17, 1986. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved May 22, 2017 .

^ Delaval, Craig (2000).

"Cocaine, Conspiracy Theories & the C.I.A. in Central America" .

Frontline .

PBS . Archived from the original on April 27, 2017 . Retrieved May 22, 2017 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 397.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 468.

^ Davies, Richard T. (2004). "The CIA and the Polish Crisis of 1980–1981".

Journal of Cold War Studies .

6 (3): 120– 123.

doi : 10.1162/1520397041447346 .

S2CID 57563775 .

^ Domber, Gregory F. (2008).

Supporting the Revolution: America, Democracy, and the End of the Cold War in Poland, 1981–1989 . p. 199.

ISBN 9780549385165 .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2016 . Retrieved April 17, 2016 .

, revised as Domber 2014, p. 110 Archived July 27, 2020, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Domber, Gregory F. (August 28, 2014).

"What Putin Misunderstands about American Power" .

University of California Press Blog . University of North Carolina Press.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2014 . Retrieved April 17, 2016 .

^ MacEachin, Douglas J. (June 28, 2008).

"US Intelligence and the Polish Crisis 1980–1981" . Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007.

^ Bernstein, Carl (June 24, 2001).

"The Holy Alliance" .

Time .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 – via CarlBernstein.com.

^ Sussman, Gerald (2010).

Branding Democracy: U.S. Regime Change in Post-Soviet Eastern Europe . New York: Peter Lang. p. 128.

ISBN 978-1-43310-530-2 .

^ Arsanjani, Mahnoush H.; Cogan, Jacob Katz; Sloane, Robert D.; Wiessner, Siegfried, eds. (2011).

Looking to the Future: Essays on International Law in Honor of W. Michael Reisman . Leiden & Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers .

ISBN 978-9-00417-361-3 .

^ Daugherty, William J. (2004).

Executive Secrets: Covert Action and the Presidency . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. pp.

201–203 .

ISBN 978-0-81312-334-9 .

^ Thiel, Rainer (2010).

Nested Games of External Democracy Promotion: The United States and the Polish Liberalization 1980–1989 . Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften . p.

273 .

ISBN 978-3-53117-769-4 .

^ Pedrick, Clare (November 14, 1990).

"CIA Organized Secret Army in Western Europe" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2023 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ Agee, Philip; Wolf, Louis (1978).

Dirty Work: The CIA in Western Europe .

^ "Terrorists 'helped by CIA' to stop rise of left in Italy" .

TheGuardian.com . March 26, 2001.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2015 . Retrieved July 30, 2023 .

^ "Strage di Piazza Fontana spunta un agente Usa" . February 11, 1998.

Archived from the original on March 18, 2023 . Retrieved July 30, 2023 .

^ "Il Terrorismo, le stragi ed il contesto storico-politico" (PDF) . August 19, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 19, 2006.

^ Mehtap Söyler (2015).

The Turkish Deep State State Consolidation, Civil Military Relations And Democracy .

^ Fernandes, Desmond; Ozden, Iskender (Spring 2001).

"United States and NATO Inspired 'Psychological Warfare Operations' Against The 'Kurdish Communist Threat' in Turkey" (PDF) .

Variant .

12 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 17, 2023 . Retrieved July 30, 2023 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 428.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 429.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 430.

^ Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , pp. 142–143.

^ a b Weiner, Tim (2008).

Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA . New York: Anchor Books. p. 527.

^ Weiner, Tim (2008).

The Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA . New York: Anchor Books. p. 546.

^ Weiner, Tim (2008).

The Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA . New York: Anchor Books. p. 547.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 459.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 465.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 466.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 470.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 448.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 450.

^ "FBI History: Famous Cases – Aldrich Hazen Ames" .

Federal Bureau of Investigation . Archived from the original on June 11, 2008 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 460.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 480.

^ Mayer, Jane (September 11, 2006).

"Junior: The clandestine life of America's top Al Qaeda source" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2014 . Retrieved February 28, 2014 .

^ Tenet, George ; Harlow, Bill (2007).

At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA . New York: HarperCollins. pp.

119– 120.

ISBN 978-0-06-114778-4 .

OCLC 71163669 .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ a b Risen, James (November 4, 2001).

"A Nation Challenged: The Intelligence Agency; Secret C.I.A. Site in New York Was Destroyed on Sept. 11" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2013 . Retrieved December 3, 2013 .

^ Schmitt, Eric (October 22, 2001).

"A Nation Challenged: The Intelligence Agencies; Job Seekers Flood Spy Agencies" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2013 . Retrieved December 3, 2013 .

^ Bush, George W.

"President George W. Bush's Address To The Nation on September 11, 2001" .

YouTube . Archived from the original on September 13, 2013 . Retrieved December 3, 2013 .

^ a b "Fighting on Two Fronts: A Chronology" .

PBS Frontline .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2018 . Retrieved December 3, 2013 .

^ Tenet, George; Harlow, Bill (2007).

At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA . New York: HarperCollins. pp.

121– 122.

ISBN 978-0-06-114778-4 .

OCLC 71163669 .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2020 .

^ Tenet, George; Harlow, Bill (April 30, 2007).

At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA . Harper Collins.

ISBN 9780061147784 .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 – via Google Books.

^ "Foreign network at front of CIA's terror fight" .

NBC News . n.d . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ a b Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , pp. 189–190.

^ a b Wilford 2024 , p. 296.

^ Jones, Milo L. & Silberzahn, Philippe (2013).

Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001 . Stanford University Press. pp.

198– 202.

ISBN 978-0-80479-336-0 .

^ Stout, David; Mazzetti, Mark (August 21, 2007).

"Tenet's C.I.A. Unprepared for Qaeda Threat, Report Says" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2009 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ "CIA criticises ex-chief over 9/11" .

BBC News online . August 22, 2007.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2009 . Retrieved December 31, 2009 .

^ a b Tim Winer. Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. New York: Doubleday, 2007.

^ "Yugoslavia: Military Dynamics of a Potential Civil War" (PDF) .

cia.gov . March 1991.

^ "Lifting the Arms Embargo: Impact on the War in Bosnia" (PDF) .

cia.gov .

^ a b c d e Woodward, Bob (2004).

Plan of Attack . New York: Simon & Schuster. p.

467 .

ISBN 074325547X .

^ "Morell 'wanted to apologize' to Powell about WMD evidence" .

CBS News . May 11, 2015.

Archived from the original on November 30, 2016 . Retrieved December 18, 2016 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 491.

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 496.

^ Tucker, Mike; Faddis, Charles (2008).

Operation Hotel California: The Clandestine War inside Iraq . The Lyons Press.

ISBN 978-1-59921-366-8 .

^ "An interview on public radio with the author" . Archived from the original on September 30, 2011 . Retrieved March 16, 2010 .

^ Weiner 2007 , p. 493.

^ Jeffreys-Jones 2022 , pp. 160–161.

^ "Executive Order 13470" .

Federation of American Scientists .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2010 .

^ Strohm, Chris (August 1, 2008).

"Bush Orders Intelligence Overhaul" .

Congress Daily .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 – via Nuclear Threat Initiative .

^ "Osama Bin Laden killed in CIA operation" .

The Washington Post . May 8, 2011.

Archived from the original on July 15, 2017 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 .

^ Dilanian, Ken (May 2, 2011).

"CIA led U.S. special forces mission against Osama bin Laden" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2011 . Retrieved May 14, 2011 .

^ Gaffney, Frank J. Jr. (May 2, 2011).

"Gaffney: Bin Laden's welcome demise" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2011 . Retrieved August 19, 2011 .

^ "Counterterrorism chief declares al-Qaida 'in the past' " .

NBC News . May 2, 2011.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved August 19, 2011 .

^ Ross, Tim (May 4, 2011).

"Osama bin Laden dead: trusted courier led US special forces to hideout" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on January 10, 2022.

^ "Debate rages about role of torture" .

CNN . May 20, 2011.

Archived from the original on May 13, 2011 . Retrieved May 14, 2011 .

^ Miller, Greg (May 5, 2011).

"CIA spied on bin Laden from safe house" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2011 . Retrieved August 19, 2011 .

^ Mazzetti, Mark; Cooper, Helene; Baker, Peter (May 2, 2011).

"Clues Gradually Led to the Location of Osama bin Laden" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2011 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ "Pakistan rattled by news of CIA safe house in Abbottabad" .

CBS News . May 6, 2011.

Archived from the original on May 9, 2011.

^ a b Kennedy, Jonathan (October 2017).

"How Drone Strikes and a Fake Vaccination Program Have Inhibited Polio Eradication in Pakistan: An Analysis of National Level Data" .

International Journal of Health Services: Planning, Administration, Evaluation .

47 (4): 807– 25.

doi : 10.1177/0020731417722888 .

ISSN 1541-4469 .

PMID 28764582 .

S2CID 25844860 .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2021 . Retrieved October 17, 2021 .

^ McNeil, Donald G. Jr. (July 9, 2012).

"C.I.A. Vaccine Ruse May Have Harmed the War on Polio" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2012 . Retrieved July 3, 2020 .

^ Aizenman, Nurith (January 23, 2018).

"Pakistan Raises Its Guard After 2 Polio Vaccinators Are Gunned Down" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2019 . Retrieved October 17, 2021 .

^ Miller, Greg; DeYoung, Karen (June 12, 2015).

"Secret CIA effort in Syria faces large funding cut" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2015 .

^ Cloud, David S.; Abdulrahim, Raja (June 21, 2013).

"U.S. has secretly provided arms training to Syria rebels since 2012" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2018 . Retrieved December 5, 2015 .

^ Mekhennet, Souad (August 18, 2014).

"The terrorists fighting us now? We just finished training them" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2015 .

^ Mahmood, Mona (November 23, 2014).

"US air strikes in Syria driving anti-Assad groups to support Isis" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2016 . Retrieved December 14, 2016 .

^ Hersh, Seymour (January 7, 2016).

"Military to Military" .

London Review of Books .

38 (1).

Archived from the original on November 29, 2019 . Retrieved November 29, 2016 .

^ Petkova, Mariya (April 6, 2017).

"Syria's 'moderate rebels' to form a new alliance" .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2017 . Retrieved May 6, 2017 .

^ Jaffe, Greg; Entous, Adam (July 19, 2017).

"Trump ends covert CIA program to arm anti-Assad rebels in Syria, a move sought by Moscow" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2017 . Retrieved July 21, 2017 .

^ "Unclassified Version of March 6, 2015 Message to the Workforce from CIA Director John Brennan: Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future" . March 6, 2015. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015.

^ Welna, David (March 14, 2017).

"Trump Restores CIA Power To Launch Drone Strikes" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2018 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ "The CIA secretly bought a company that sold encryption devices across the world. Then its spies sat back and listened" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved February 11, 2020 .

^ "The CIA's 'Minerva' Secret | National Security Archive" .

nsarchive.gwu.edu . February 11, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved February 12, 2020 .

^ Mercado, Stephen (April 15, 2007).

"Reexamining the Distinction Between Open Information and Secrets" .

Center for the Study of Intelligence . Archived from the original on June 13, 2007 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ "Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS)" .

Harvard College Library . Archived from the original on July 9, 2010 . Retrieved July 1, 2011 .

^ Smith, Esther (May 5, 1988). "DoD Unveils Competitive Tool: Project Socrates Offers Valuable Analysis".

Washington Technology .

^ Wrubel, Robert (July 10, 1990). "The Frontal Assault: A Conversation with Michael Sekora".

Financial World .

^ Claburn, Thomas (February 6, 2008).

"CIA Monitors YouTube For Intelligence" .

InformationWeek . Archived from the original on February 10, 2008 . Retrieved February 11, 2008 .

^ Pfeiffer, Eric (June 6, 2014).

"CIA outwits impersonators by embracing Twitter, Facebook" .

Yahoo! News .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved January 14, 2017 .

^ Makuch, Ben (May 7, 2019).

"The CIA Will Use its New Dark Web Site to Collect Anonymous Tips" . Vice.

Archived from the original on March 3, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ "Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, Conference Committee Report" (PDF) .

Federation of American Scientists . December 6, 2007.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ a b Hillhouse, R. J. (July 8, 2007).

"Who Runs the CIA? Outsiders for Hire" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2010 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ Keefe, Patrick Radden (June 25, 2007).

"Don't Privatize Our Spies" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2007 . Retrieved July 4, 2008 .

^ a b c d Hillhouse, R. J.

(December 18, 2007).

"CIA Contractors: Double or Nothin' " .

thespywhobilledme.com .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ Shorrock, Tim (May 29, 2008).

"Former high-ranking Bush officials enjoy war profits" .

Salon.com . Archived from the original on June 2, 2008 . Retrieved June 16, 2008 .

^ Hurt III, Harry (June 15, 2008).

"The Business of Intelligence Gathering" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2015 . Retrieved June 18, 2008 .

^ Butler, Amy (March 20, 2005).

"SBIRS High in the Red Again" .

Aviation Week .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2011 . Retrieved January 14, 2008 .

^ Taubman, Philip (November 11, 2007).

"In Death of Spy Satellite Program, Lofty Plans and Unrealistic Bids" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved April 29, 2013 .

^ Rich, Ben R. (1996).

Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years of Lockheed . Back Bay Books.

ISBN 0-316-74330-5 .

^ " 'Operation Chaos': Files on 7,200" (PDF) .

'Operation Chaos': Files on 7,200 . Washington Post. June 11, 1975 . Retrieved May 1, 2024 .

^ "DIALOGUE SOUGHT WITH PROFESSOR IN CIA PROBE | CIA FOIA (foia.cia.gov)" .

www.cia.gov . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ " 'Poisoner In Chief' Details The CIA's Secret Quest For Mind Control : NPR" .

NPR . January 5, 2025. Archived from the original on January 5, 2025 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Magazine, Smithsonian; Boissoneault, Lorraine.

"The True Story of Brainwashing and How It Shaped America" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved January 12, 2025 .

^ Bevins, Vincent (2020).

The Jakarta Method : Washington's Anticommunist Crusade and the Mass Murder Program that Shaped Our World .

PublicAffairs . pp.

266– 267.

ISBN 978-1-5417-4240-6 .

^ Cohn, Gary; Thompson, Ginger (June 11, 1995).

"When a wave of torture and murder staggered a small U.S. ally, truth was a casualty" .

The Baltimore Sun . Archived from the original on February 16, 2017 . Retrieved May 22, 2017 .

^ Lakhani, Nina (October 23, 2015).

"Confidential files on El Salvador human rights stolen after legal action against CIA" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017 . Retrieved May 22, 2017 .

^ "(Est Pub Date) Iraq's Weapons of Mass Destruction Programs" (PDF) .

CIA Reading Room: Iraq's Weapons of Mass Destruction Programs . November 19, 2009 . Retrieved May 1, 2024 .

References Anderson, Scott (2020).

The Quiet Americans: Four CIA Spies at the Dawn of the Cold War . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-385-54046-9 .

Brysk, Alison; Meade, Everard; Shafir, Gershon (2016). "Constructing National and Global Insecurity". In Aceves, William; Meade, Everard; Shafir, Gershon (eds.).

Lessons and Legacies of the War on Terror . London/New York: Routledge. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0-415-63841-8 .

Gordon, Rebecca (2014).

Mainstreaming Torture: Ethical Approaches in the Post-9/11 United States . Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780199336432 .

Immerman, Richard H. (1982).

The CIA in Guatemala: The Foreign Policy of Intervention . University of Texas Press.

ISBN 978-0-292-71083-2 .

Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri (2022).

A Question of Standing: The History of the CIA .

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780192847966.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-284796-6 .

Kuzmarov, Jeremy (April 2009). "Modernizing Repression: Police Training, Political Violence, and Nation-Building in the 'American Century' ".

Diplomatic History .

33 (2). Oxford University Press: 191– 221.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.2008.00760.x .

McCoy, Alfred W. (2007).

A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror . London: Macmillan Publishers . pp.

63– 71.

ISBN 9780805082487 .

Reid, Stuart A. (2023).

The Lumumba Plot: The Secret History of the CIA and a Cold War Assassination . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-1-5247-4881-4 .

Schwab, Stephen Irving Max (June 2014). "Once a Jedburgh Always a Jedburgh".

International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence .

27 (2). Taylor & Francis: 405– 412.

doi : 10.1080/08850607.2014.872540 .

Simpson, Christopher (2003). "U.S. Mass Communication Research, Counterinsurgency, and Scientific 'Reality' ". In Braman, Sandra (ed.).

Communication Researchers and Policy-making . Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press . pp.

253– 292.

ISBN 9780262523400 .

Valcourt, Richard R. (January 1989). "Tossing Wins Away: Lost Victory: A Firsthand Account of America's Sixteen-Year Involvement in Vietnam".

International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence .

3 (4). Taylor & Francis: 567– 605.

doi : 10.1080/08850608908435122 .

Weiner, Tim (2007).

Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3 .

OCLC 82367780 .

Wilford, Hugh (2024).

The CIA: An Imperial History . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-1-541-64591-2 .

External links Central Intelligence Agency at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Library resources about Central Intelligence Agency Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official website Central Intelligence Collection at the Internet Archive v t e Central Intelligence Agency United States Intelligence Community (CIA Headquarters: George Bush Center for Intelligence , Langley, Virginia ) Organization History Directorate of Analysis Directorate of Science & Technology Directorate of Operations ( Special Activities Center , National Resources Division ) Directorate of Support Operations Support Branch CIA Library Geographic activities Americas Russia and Europe Africa Asia Transnational activities Alleged drug trafficking ( Involvement in Contra cocaine trafficking ) Arms control, WMD, and proliferation Black sites Controversies Counterterrorism Crime and illicit drug trade Health and economy Human rights violations Influence on public opinion Directors of Central Intelligence and Directors of the Central Intelligence Agency William J. Donovan ( OSS ) Sidney Souers Hoyt Vandenberg Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter Walter Bedell Smith Allen Dulles John A. McCone William Raborn Richard Helms James R. Schlesinger William Colby George H. W. Bush Stansfield Turner William J. Casey William H. Webster Robert Gates R. James Woolsey Jr.

John M. Deutch George Tenet Porter Goss Michael Hayden Leon Panetta David Petraeus John Brennan Mike Pompeo Gina Haspel William J. Burns John Ratcliffe Major international operations Operation Ajax Operation PBSuccess Secret War 1960 U-2 incident Congo Crisis Bay of Pigs Invasion Operation Mongoose Phoenix Program Operation Rubicon United States intervention in Chile Operation Cyclone Iran–Contra affair Drone strikes in Pakistan Operation Neptune Spear Timber Sycamore Notable works The Invisible Government (1964) All the Shah's Men (2003) Ghost Wars (2004) Overthrow (2006) Legacy of Ashes (2007) The Unexpected Spy (2019) CIA activities by country Afghanistan Angola Australia Brazil Cambodia Canada Chad Chile China Colombia Cuba DRC France Germany Guatemala Honduras Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Italy Japan Laos Libya Myanmar Nicaragua North Korea Pakistan Peru Philippines Somalia Soviet Union Sudan Syria Turkey United Kingdom USA Vietnam Yemen Official reports by the U.S. Government on the CIA Project MKUltra v t e United States Intelligence Community Intelligence Community Defense Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Clandestine Service Defense Debriefing Service Defense Attaché System National Intelligence University Missile and Space Intelligence Center National Center for Medical Intelligence Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office ( Sentient (intelligence analysis system) ) National Security Agency Central Security Service Special Collection Service Armed Forces Army Intelligence and Security Command Marine Corps Intelligence Office of Naval Intelligence Air Force Intelligence Space Force Intelligence ( Space Delta 7 / Space Delta 18 ) Coast Guard Intelligence ( Homeland Security ) Civilian Bureau of Intelligence and Research ( State ) Central Intelligence Agency Directorate of Operations Special Activities Center Open Source Center Directorate of Science and Technology CIA University DEA Office of National Security Intelligence ( Justice ) FBI Intelligence Branch ( Justice ) Office of Intelligence and Analysis ( Homeland Security ) Office of Intelligence and Analysis ( Treasury ) Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence ( Energy ) Director of National Intelligence Director of National Intelligence National Counterterrorism Center National Counterproliferation Center National Counterintelligence and Security Center Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration Center National Intelligence Council Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity Joint Intelligence Community Council Chief Information Officer Executive Office of the President National Security Advisor National Security Council President's Intelligence Advisory Board Homeland Security Council Homeland Security Advisor President's Daily Brief Other Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency National Security Division (Justice) Army Intelligence Support Activity Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System Intellipedia Iranian Directorate National Museum of Intelligence and Special Operations Oversight Senate Intelligence Committee House Intelligence Committee Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board Office of Management and Budget Information Security Oversight Office Intelligence Oversight Board Defunct Contingency Fund for Foreign Intercourse Counterintelligence Field Activity Military Information Division Military Intelligence Division Military Intelligence Service Office of Strategic Services Office of Special Plans Ritchie Boys Strategic Support Branch v t e National intelligence agencies Foreign intelligence Afghanistan: GDI Albania: SHISH Algeria: DRS Angola: SIE Argentina: SIDE Armenia: NSS Austria: HNaA Australia: ASIS Azerbaijan: XKX Bahrain: NSA Bangladesh: NSI Belarus: KGB RB Belgium: ADIV/SGRS Bosnia and Herzegovina: OSA-OBA Botswana: DIS Brazil: ABIN Brunei: BRD Bulgaria: DAR Cameroon: BMM Canada: CSIS Chad: ANS Chile: ANI China: MSS Congo (Democratic Republic of): ANR Croatia: SOA Cuba: DI Czech Republic: ÚZSI Denmark: FE Djibouti: BSRG Ecuador: SENAIN Egypt: Mukhabarat Estonia: EFIS Ethiopia: NISS Finland: Supo France: DGSE Gambia: SIS Georgia: GIS Germany: BND Ghana: BNI , BGU , RDU Greece: EYP Hungary: IH India: RAW Indonesia: BIN Iran: VAJA Iraq: INIS Ireland: G2 Israel: Mossad Italy: AISE Ivory Coast: NSC Japan: CIRO Jordan: GID Kazakhstan: Syrbar Kenya: NIS Kyrgyzstan: UKMK Kuwait: KSS Latvia: SAB Liberia: NSA Lithuania: VSD Lebanon: GDGS Libya: MJ Malaysia: MEIO Mexico: CISEN Moldova: SIS Mongolia: GIA Montenegro: ANB Morocco: DGED Mozambique: SISE Netherlands: AIVD New Zealand: NZSIS Nigeria: NIA North Korea: RGB North Macedonia: ANB Norway: E-tjenesten Oman: Palace Office Pakistan: ISI Palestine: GIS Papua New Guinea: NIO Philippines: NICA Poland: AW Portugal: SIED Qatar: QSS Romania: SIE Russia: SVR Saudi Arabia: GIP Serbia: BIA Sierra Leone: CISU Singapore: SID Slovakia: SIS Slovenia: SOVA Somalia: NISA South Africa: SSA South Korea: NIS Spain: CNI Sri Lanka: SIS Sudan: GIS Sweden: KSI Switzerland: NDB Syria: GIS Taiwan: NSB Tajikistan: GKNB Tanzania: TISS Thailand: NIA Togo: NIA Tunisia: TIA Turkey: MİT Turkmenistan: MNS Uganda: ESO Ukraine: SZRU United Arab Emirates: SIA United Kingdom: SIS ( MI6 ) United States: CIA Uzbekistan: SSS Vietnam: TC2 Domestic intelligence Afghanistan: GDI Algeria: CSS Angola: SINSE Argentina: SIDE Armenia: NSS Australia: ASIO Austria: DSN Azerbaijan: DTX Bangladesh: SB Belarus: KGB RB Belgium: VS/SE Bosnia and Herzegovina: SIPA Botswana: DIS Brazil: PF Brunei: IRD Bulgaria: DANS Burundi: SNR Canada: CSIS Chad: DGSSIE Chile: ANI China: MSS Colombia: DNI Congo (Democratic Republic of): ANR Croatia: SOA Czech Republic: BIS Denmark: PET Egypt: NSA Estonia: KAPO Finland: SUPO France: DGSI Georgia: SSSG Germany: BfV , LfV Ghana: GPS , CID Greece: EYP Hong Kong: NSD , CPGNSO Hungary: AH India: IB Indonesia: Baintelkam Polri ( id ), BIN Iran: VAJA , IRGC , PAVA Ireland: CSB , SDU , NSU Israel: Shin Bet Italy: AISI Japan: NPA , TMPD PSB , PSIA Kazakhstan: NSC Kenya: NIS Kosovo: AKI Latvia: VDD Lithuania: STT Lebanon: ISF IB , LSS Luxembourg: SREL Macau: DS Malaysia: SB Moldova: SIS Morocco: DGST Netherlands: NCTV New Zealand: NZSIS Nigeria: SSS North Korea: SSD North Macedonia: IA Norway: PST Oman: ISS Pakistan: IB , FIA Palestine: PPS Paraguay: SNI Peru: DINI Philippines: NBI , NICA Poland: ABW , SOP , SM Portugal: SIS Romania: SRI Russia: FSB Saudi Arabia: Mabahith Serbia: BIA Singapore: ISD Somalia: NISA South Africa: SSA South Korea: Intelligence Bureau, KNPA Spain: CITCO Sri Lanka: SIS Sweden: SÄPO Switzerland: NDB Syria: GIS Taiwan: MJIB Thailand: ISOC , SB Togo: ANR Turkey: MİT , İB Uganda: ISO Ukraine: SBU United Kingdom: Security Service ( MI5 ) , NDEDIU , NCA , NBIS United States: I&A (DHS) , ID (HSI) , IB (FBI) , ONSI (DEA) , OSII (ATF) Uzbekistan: SNB Venezuela: SEBIN Vietnam: TC5 ( vi ) Zimbabwe: CIO Military intelligence Algeria: DCSA Angola: SIM Australia: DIO Austria: HNaA Bangladesh: DGFI Belarus: GRU MO RB Belgium: ADIV/SGRS Brazil: DIE Canada: CFINTCOM Chad: DGSSIE China: CMC JSD Intelligence Bureau Congo (Democratic Republic of): DEMIAP Croatia: VSOA Cuba: DCIM Czech Republic: VZ Denmark: FE Egypt: DMISR Finland: PE TIEDOS France: DRM , DGSE Germany: MAD Ghana: MIU Hungary: KNBSZ Iran: General Staff , SAHEFAJA , SAHEFASA , SAHEFAVEDJA India: DMI , DIA Indonesia: BAIS TNI , Pusintelad Ireland: G2 Israel: Aman Italy: CII Japan: DIH Kazakhstan: NSC Lithuania: AOTD Malaysia: DIO Maldives: MNDF Morocco: DB Myanmar: Sa Ya Pa Netherlands: MIVD New Zealand: DDIS Nigeria: DIA North Korea: RGB North Macedonia: MSSI Norway: E-tjenesten Pakistan: MI , NI , AI Palestine: MIS Philippines: ISAFP Poland: SKW , SWW Portugal: CISMIL Romania: DGIA Russia: GRU Saudi Arabia: AFISC Serbia: VBA , VOA Singapore: MIO Slovakia: VS Slovenia: OVS South Africa: SANDF-ID South Korea: DIA , DCC Spain: CIFAS Sri Lanka: DMI Sweden: MUST Switzerland: MND , LWND Syria: MI , AFID Taiwan: MIB Thailand: AFSC Turkey: GENKUR İ.D.B.

Ukraine: HUR MO United Kingdom: DI United States: DIA ONI MIC USAFI MCI CGI NSIC Venezuela: DGCIM Vietnam: TC2 Signals intelligence Australia: ASD Bangladesh: NTMC Brazil: 2ª Sch/EMD Canada: CSE China: SIGINT Croatia: OTC Ethiopia: INSA Finland: PVTIEDL France: DGSE , DRSD Germany: BND Ghana: RDU India: JCB , NTRO Indonesia: BSSN ( id ) Ireland: CIS Israel: 8200 Japan: DIH Kazakhstan: NSC Netherlands: NSO , JSCU New Zealand: GCSB North Korea: RGB Norway: NSM Pakistan: JSIB Poland: AW , ABW , SKW , SWW , NCBC , gOR 3.FO , CRiWWRE , 2.ORel , 6.ORel , JW NIL Romania: STS Russia: Spetssvyaz Saudi Arabia: PSS South Africa: SSA Spain: CCN Sweden: FRA Switzerland: NDB Syria: MI Turkey: MİT-SİB UAE: SIA Ukraine: Derzhspetszviazok United Kingdom: GCHQ United States: NSA Imagery intelligence Australia: AGO Finland: PVTIEDL India: DAI Indonesia: BIG Israel: Air Intelligence Group Malaysia: MaCGDI New Zealand: GEOINT NZ Poland: AW , SWW , ORO , 12.BBSP , JW NIL Pakistan: Air Intelligence Philippines: NMARSC Portugal: CIGeoE Russia: TsVTI GRU United Kingdom: DGIFC United States: NGA Financial intelligence Argentina: UIF Australia: AUSTRAC Azerbaijan: MMX Bangladesh: FIU Brazil: COAF Canada: FINTRAC China: MPSECIB [ zh ] Fiji: FIU France: Tracfin , DNRED Iceland: SR India: CEIB Indonesia: PPATK Ireland: GNECB Italy: UIF Lithuania ( FNTT ) Malta: FIAU Mexico: UIF Netherlands: FIOD Poland: GIIF , SCS , CBA Qatar: FIU Russia: Rosfinmonitoring Saudi Arabia: GDOFI Spain: SVA , SEPBLAC Turkey: MASAK United Kingdom: NCA United States: IRS-CI , TFI FinCEN OIA Vatican: ASIF Criminal intelligence Argentina: DNIC Australia: ACIC Bangladesh: CID Canada: CISC Finland: NBI India: CBI Indonesia: Baintelkam Polri ( id ) Italy: DIA , DIGOS Philippines: NBI , PNP-IG Poland: BWiIK KGP , CBŚP , ZOŚ KGSG , ZK KGŻW Romania: DGPI South Africa: Crime Intelligence Division Spain: CGI , SIGC , CGPJ , UCO United Kingdom: NCA United States: IB (FBI) , ONSI (DEA) , OSII (ATF) , ID (HSI) Intelligence community Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bangladesh Croatia France India Israel Italy New Zealand Pakistan Russia United Kingdom United States Intelligence alliances Club de Berne Five Eyes Maximator Egmont Group Defunct agencies Fascist Italy : OVRA Gaddafi Libya : Mukhabarat el-Jamahiriya Imperial Japan : Tokko Ming Dynasty : Embroidered Uniform Guard , Eastern Depot , Western Depot [ zh ] , Internal Depot [ zh ] Prussia : Prussian Secret Police Republic of China : NBIS Nazi Germany : Gestapo , Sicherheitsdienst Soviet Union : NKVD , KGB United Kingdom : DMI United States : Office of Strategic Services Wang Jingwei regime : Jessfield 76 [ zh ; de ; ja ] Yugoslavia : KOS Related topics Espionage ( List of intelligence agencies ) Leaks Diplomatic cable leaks NSA leaks CIA leaks Great Firewall of China Mass surveillance in China Law enforcement Interpol Security agency Surveillance Big Brother Call detail record Carnivore Dishfire ECHELON PRISM Stone Ghost Turbulence (NSA programme) National security Surveillance issues in smart cities Border guard Coast guard Customs Law enforcement agency Types Intelligence agency v t e Five Eyes Intelligence agencies Australia Domestic: ASIO Foreign: ASIS Geospatial : AGO Military : DIO Signals : ASD Canada Domestic: CSIS Foreign: CSIS Geospatial : CFINTCOM Military : CFINTCOM Signals : CSE New Zealand Domestic: NZSIS Foreign: NZSIS Geospatial : GEOINT Military : DDIS Signals : GCSB United Kingdom Domestic: MI5 Foreign: MI6 Geospatial : DGIFC Military : DI Signals : GCHQ United States Domestic: FBI Foreign: CIA Geospatial : NGA Military : DIA Signals : NSA v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Harry S. Truman 33rd President of the United States (1945–1953) 34th Vice President of the United States (1945) U.S. Senator from Missouri (1935–1945) Presidency Timeline Inaugurations first second Assassination attempt 1952 Puerto Rican constitutional referendum State of the Union Address 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 Judicial appointments Supreme Court Sherman Minton Supreme Court nomination Cabinet Truman Balcony "The buck stops here" Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Eisenhower transition Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Potsdam Conference 1945; Agreement on Europe Declaration to Japan Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (1945) War Brides Act (1945) Alien Fiancées and Fiancés Act (1946) Luce–Celler Act (1946) Executive Order 9835 (1947) General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (1947) Hoover Commission (1947) National Security Act of 1947 U.S. Department of Defense Joint Chiefs of Staff National Security Council National Security Resources Board Air Force / Department Central Intelligence Agency Displaced Persons Act (1948) Key West Agreement (1948) Marshall Plan (1948) Joint Long Range Proving Grounds (1949) North Atlantic Treaty 1949; NATO Revolt of the Admirals (1949) Korean War 1950–1953; U.N. Security Council Resolutions 82, 83 Defense Production Act of 1950 Relief of Douglas MacArthur Office of Defense Mobilization 1950; Science Advisory Committee , 1951 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 National Security Agency (1952) Fair Deal Medal of Freedom (1945) Revenue Act of 1945 National Mental Health Act 1946; National Institute of Mental Health Atomic Energy Act of 1946 U.S. Atomic Energy Commission Employment Act of 1946 Council of Economic Advisers Flood Control Acts 1946 1948 1950 Fulbright Program (1946) Hill–Burton Act (1946) Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act of 1946 Federal Tort Claims Act Legislative Reference Service National School Lunch Act (1946) President's Committee on Civil Rights (1946) Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (1947) Housing and Home Finance Agency (1947) Presidential Succession Act of 1947 Taft–Hartley Act (1947) Agricultural Act of 1948 Executive Order 9981 (1948) Revenue Act of 1948 Agricultural Act of 1949 Housing Act of 1949 Dingell–Johnson Act (1950) Revenue Act of 1950 Excess profits tax Unrelated Business Income Tax Revenue Act of 1951 Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1952 1952 steel strike Life Early life and career Presidential Library, Museum, and gravesite Missouri Office and Courtroom Truman Committee 1944 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection The Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace Homes Birthplace Harry S. Truman Farm Home Harry S. Truman home and National Historic Site Historic District Blair House Truman Little White House Elections United States Senate election in Missouri, 1934 1940 Democratic National Convention 1944 1948 1944 United States presidential election 1948 campaign " Dewey Defeats Truman " campaign song Ferdinand Magellan railcar 1952 Democratic Party presidential primaries Legacy Bibliography Truman Day Harry S Truman Building Truman Dam and Reservoir Harry S. Truman Scholarship Truman Sports Complex U.S. Postage stamps Statue of Harry S. Truman Public image Give 'em Hell, Harry!

(1975 play and film) Harry Truman (1975 song by Chicago ) Collision Course: Truman vs. MacArthur (1976 film) MacArthur (1977 film) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) Truman (1995 film) Truman (1997 documentary film) The First Lady (2022 TV series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Family Bess Wallace Truman (wife) Margaret Truman (daughter) Martha Ellen Young Truman (mother) Clifton Truman Daniel (grandson) ← Franklin D. Roosevelt Dwight D. Eisenhower → ← Henry A. Wallace Alben W. Barkley → Category v t e War on terror September 11 attacks War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) ( Withdrawal ) Iraq War (2003–2011) ( Withdrawal ) Participants Operational ISAF Operation Enduring Freedom participants Afghanistan Northern Alliance Iraq ( Iraqi Armed Forces ) NATO Pakistan United Kingdom United States European Union Philippines Ethiopia Targets Individuals Osama bin Laden Hamza bin Laden Anwar al-Awlaki Sirajuddin Haqqani Jalaluddin Haqqani Anas Haqqani Khalil Haqqani Hafiz Saeed Mahmoud Mohamed Ahmed Bahaziq Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Factions al-Qaeda al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula Abu Sayyaf Al-Shabaab Boko Haram Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami Hizbul Mujahideen Islamic Courts Union Jaish-e-Mohammed Jemaah Islamiyah Lashkar-e-Taiba Taliban Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan Islamic State Conflicts Operation Enduring Freedom War in Afghanistan OEF – Philippines Georgian involvement in the Iraq War OEF – Horn of Africa OEF – Trans Sahara Drone strikes in Pakistan Other Operation Active Endeavour Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present) Insurgency in the North Caucasus Moro conflict in the Philippines Iraq War Iraqi insurgency Operation Linda Nchi Terrorism in Saudi Arabia Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa War in Somalia (2006–2009) 2007 Lebanon conflict al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen Policies Patriot Act (2001) Torture Memos (2002) Military Commissions Act of 2006 Military Commissions Act of 2009 President's Surveillance Program Protect America Act of 2007 Terrorist Surveillance Program Related Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse Axis of evil Bush Doctrine Clash of Civilizations Cold War Combatant Status Review Tribunal Criticism of the war on terror CIA black sites Killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri Killing of Osama bin Laden Enhanced interrogation techniques Extrajudicial prisoners Extraordinary rendition Guantanamo Bay detention camp Iranian Revolution Islamic terrorism Islamism North Korea and weapons of mass destruction Operation Noble Eagle Operation Eagle Assist Situation Room photograph State Sponsors of Terrorism Targeted killing Targeted Killing in International Law Targeted Killings: Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World Unitary executive theory Unlawful combatant CAGE Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI 2 3 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐ggw52
Cached time: 20250818105527
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.803 seconds
Real time usage: 3.426 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28935/1000000
Revision size: 207632/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 831523/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20877/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 77/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 922060/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.676/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19580189/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2796.602      1 -total
 41.96% 1173.387      1 Template:Reflist
 15.17%  424.116     68 Template:Cite_book
 12.59%  352.022     78 Template:Cite_web
  9.00%  251.779     80 Template:Sfn
  8.76%  245.059     46 Template:Cite_news
  8.09%  226.296      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
  7.93%  221.832      1 Template:Infobox
  4.25%  118.929      1 Template:IPAc-en
  3.91%  109.349      8 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5183633:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818105527 and revision id 1306417237. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Central_Intelligence_Agency&oldid=1306417237 " Categories : Central Intelligence Agency 1947 establishments in Virginia Anti-communist organizations in the United States Cold War in popular culture Government agencies established in 1947 Independent agencies of the United States government Intelligence analysis agencies McLean, Virginia Secret police United States intelligence agencies Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2024 Coordinates not on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2021 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2019 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 16:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Central Intelligence Agency 116 languages Add topic

