Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Actuation 1.2 Wind tolerance and construction 1.3 Aluminium awnings 1.4 Retractable awnings 1.4.1 Retractable patio cover systems 1.4.2 Retractable lateral arm awnings or folding arm awnings 1.4.3 Retractable side or drop arm awnings 1.4.4 Portable, pop-up canopies 1.4.5 Retractable solar shade screens 1.4.6 Retractable solar window awnings 1.5 Shade sails 2 Classification numbers 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Awning 9 languages Català Español Euskara Ido Nederlands Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fabric building structure providing shade For the 1976 painted aluminum sculpture by Douglas Senft, see Awning (sculpture) .

Spherical awning of a bandshell An awning or overhang is a secondary covering attached to the exterior wall of a building. It is typically composed of canvas woven of acrylic , cotton or polyester yarn, or vinyl laminated to polyester fabric that is stretched tightly over a light structure of aluminium , iron or steel , possibly wood or transparent material (used to cover solar thermal panels in the summer, but that must allow as much light as possible in the winter). The configuration of this structure is something of a truss , space frame or planar frame . Awnings are also often constructed of aluminium understructure with aluminium sheeting . These aluminium awnings are often used when a fabric awning is not a practical application where snow load as well as wind loads may be a factor.

Types [ edit ] Actuation [ edit ] An example of a modern garden awning Today's awnings come in two basic types: manually operated models which are opened by hand and motorized models which operate by electricity.  Each offers its own advantages. Benefits include low-cost affordability, easy adaptability to almost any deck or patio, and support arms that can be angled back against the house or set vertically on the deck or patio floor.  These arms provide extra support and stability which some owners prefer in windy areas, and increase the awning's versatility by making the attachment of certain accessories available.

Motorized awnings have no vertical supports. Instead, they have retracting lateral arms, creating an unobstructed shaded area.  These awnings are operated by an electric motor , generally hidden inside the roller bar of the awning.  The arms open and close the awning at the touch of a wireless remote control or a wall-mounted switch.

Modern awnings may be constructed with covers of various types of fabrics, aluminium, corrugated fibreglass, corrugated polycarbonate or other materials. High winds can cause damage to an extended awning, and newer designs incorporate a wind sensor for automatic retraction in certain conditions.

Wind tolerance and construction [ edit ] Wind tolerance Design schematics for awning type used at the White House Modern awnings are rated for wind tolerance based on width, length, number of supporting arms, and material. Modern awning design incorporates urethane compression joints, steel support structures, and wind sensors. Such designs are currently in use at the White House, Grand Central Station, and the Kremlin.

Aluminium awnings [ edit ] Aluminium awnings have long been popular in residential applications throughout the world. They are available in many colors and are usually painted with a baked-on enamel paint. Among the many benefits of these awnings are cooler temperatures inside the home, shade for your patio, extending the life of furniture and window treatments. Possibly the most beneficial feature of the awnings are the fact that they have a usable life of well over 40 years.

Some aluminum awnings are designed to be folded down and fastened to protect windows in case of storms such as hurricanes.

Retractable awnings [ edit ] Retractable awning in Maryland, USA.

Retractable awnings are now becoming very popular with homeowners in the United States . They have been popular in Europe for many years, due to higher energy costs and lack of air conditioning.

Some retractable awnings can include photovoltaic cells or rollable solar panels to generate electricity.

Retractable awnings can include the following types: Retractable patio cover systems [ edit ] Retractable patio cover systems are the latest "entry" in to the retractable market. Most of these systems are water-proof as compared to water-resistant (lateral arm awnings) and therefore allow no water penetration through the  fabric "roof" section. These systems meet Beaufort scale wind loads up to Beaufort 10 (89–101 km/h or 48–55 kn or 55–63 mph) depending on model and size. Another advantage of retractable patio cover systems is that they can be enclosed on the front and sides using solar shade screens. This allows for an "outdoor room" that can be heated in the winter and air conditioned in the summer .

Retractable lateral arm awnings or folding arm awnings [ edit ] These are a modern version of the old storefront crank-up awnings of the last century. The two, three or four tension arms (width dependent) and a top tube are supported by a torsion bar . With a Traditional 'Open Style' folding arm awning the torsion bar (also known as square bar) fits into wall or soffit or fascia or roof mounted brackets that spread the load to the wall or roof truss. The newer 'Full Cassette' style of folding arm awning does away with the torsion bar and uses an aluminium extrusion that interlocks with brackets that in-turn spreads the cantilevered force imposed by the awning into the structure it is fitted to.

[ 1 ] Hand-cranked awnings are still available, but motorized awnings are now most common due to advances in technology, manufacturing & reliability over the last few decades. The motor is inside the roller tube that the fabric rolls around and therefore is not visible. Many motors now have a built-in receiver and are operated by remote control, smartphone, tablet or home automation .

Lateral arm awnings are also known as folding arm, deck or patio awnings, as they can extend / project as far as 5 m (16 ft) and when several awnings are coupled together, can be as wide as 16 m (52 ft) or more – thus covering a large outdoor space. Normally a single folding arm awning can only span 7 m (23 ft) in a single system due to difficulties transporting, storing and powder coating extrusion greater than this size.

The most common fabric choice for folding arm awning is solution dyed acrylic fabric that comes in a variety of styles, colours, patterns as well as performance grades for water repellence and fire retardancy. Solution dyed acrylic fabric is the most suitable fabric for use in these awnings due to dimensional properties, ease of manufacturing, weight (versus woven mesh) & high levels of filtering of and resistance against UV.

Retractable side or drop arm awnings [ edit ] Rigid shop awnings.

Commonly used to shade a window, with a roller tube at the top, spring-loaded side arms, and a motor, crank or tape-pull operator. Awnings with sides are commonly known as traditional style awnings as they have been used for many years dating back to the early 19th century using cotton canvas fabric. Canvas was replaced in the 1960s by more acrylic materials and polyester in more recent times driven by a focus on the environment. Traditional style awnings are appropriate for historical buildings and are still popular today using a more weather resistant fabric and a rope and pulley system for retracting the awnings.

[ 2 ] Awnings without sides do not provide as much sun protection as those with sides. Awnings without sides come in many different styles. Drop Arm Awnings without sides come with roller tubes at the top and are available with motors and wind sensors for automatic retraction.  Spear Awnings are made without sides and are made with Wrought Iron Frames and they can be retracted with a rope and pulley system but are not available with motors.

Awnings with sides provide the best sun protection for east and west facing windows. North and South facing windows can be protected from the sun with awnings without sides. Awnings provide shade keeping your house cooler, awnings are also great shade creators around porches, decks and patios.

Portable, pop-up canopies [ edit ] Main article: Pop up canopy A portable pop-up canopy or tent provides a cost-effective temporary solution to people who want to enjoy shade.  The portable designs offer versatility to take the unit to social events. The frame usually incorporates an accordion-style truss which folds up compactly.

Retractable solar shade screens [ edit ] Shade screens utilize acrylic canvas or a mesh fabric , which allows some view-through while blocking the sun's rays. The roller at the top may be hand-cranked or motorized.

[ 3 ] The fabric is gravity-fed, with a weighted bottom rail pulling the fabric down between guide rails or guy wires . Exterior shades are much more effective at blocking heat than interior shades , since they block the heat before it enters the glass.

[ 4 ] This style of framed screen is typically done by professional installers, because of the specialized frames and tools required. A recent advancement is frame-less shade screens, which allows a " DIY -er" to install their own exterior shades. Solar shade screens can also be installed at the end of awnings to provide horizontal shade during early morning or late afternoon sun positions.

Retractable solar window awnings [ edit ] Retractable solar window awnings are made from fabric. They are resistant to hail and harsh winter weather. Many solar window awnings can be programmed to open and close automatically in response to the sun.

Shade sails [ edit ] Shade sails provide semi-horizontal shading. They can be demounted with some difficulty and are usually left in place year round. Retractable versions also exist, with greater cost but also greater utility, as they can be retracted to admit winter sun if required.

Classification numbers [ edit ] Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) Division 10 MasterFormat 2004 Edition: 10 73 13 – Awnings 10 73 16 – Canopies 10 71 13 – Exterior Sun Control Devices 10 71 13.43 – Fixed Sun Screen 10 73 00 – Protective Covers (Generic) CSI MasterFormat 1995 Edition: 10530 – Protective Covers, Awnings & Canopies See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Awnings .

Brise soleil Canopy (architecture) Curtain Marquee (overhang) Overhang (architecture) Rope Solar panel Tent Umbrella Verandah Window blind References [ edit ] ^ "Construct folding arm style awnings" . Department of Education, Skills and Employment Austria.

^ "The Use of Awnings on Historic Buildings, Repair, Replacement and New Design" . U.S. Department of the Interior. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013.

^ "Wintergartenbeschattung" (in German). Metallbau Görres. 4 February 2021.

^ "Energy Efficient Window Coverings" . Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tw2sg
Cached time: 20250812001243
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.206 seconds
Real time usage: 0.261 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 767/1000000
Revision size: 11879/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 10154/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 880/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 16869/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.127/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6484679/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  227.698      1 -total
 33.48%   76.222      1 Template:Reflist
 29.35%   66.831      4 Template:Cite_web
 19.70%   44.851      1 Template:Short_description
 18.16%   41.358      1 Template:Commons_category
 17.66%   40.208      1 Template:Sister_project
 17.21%   39.193      1 Template:Side_box
 11.41%   25.974      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.23%   21.005      4 Template:Cvt
  8.17%   18.605      1 Template:About Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2657367:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001243 and revision id 1296859265. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Awning&oldid=1296859265 " Categories : Architectural elements Low-energy building Windows Shading (architecture) Passive cooling Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 19:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Awning 9 languages Add topic

