Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 National sovereignty 2 Land rights 3 Limits of national jurisdiction and sovereignty 4 Land rights and women Toggle Land rights and women subsection 4.1 India 4.2 Uganda 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Land law 14 languages العربية Беларуская Чӑвашла Español فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of law that deals with the rights to use, alienate, or exclude others from land Land law is the form of law that deals with the rights to use , alienate , or exclude others from land . In many jurisdictions, these kinds  of property are referred to as real estate or real property , as distinct from personal property .

Land use agreements, including renting , are an important intersection of property and contract law .

Encumbrance on the land rights of one, such as an easement , may constitute the land rights of another.

Mineral rights and water rights are closely linked, and often interrelated concepts.

Land rights are such a basic form of law that they develop even where there is no state to enforce them; for example, the claim clubs of the American West were institutions that arose organically to enforce the system of rules appurtenant to mining.

Squatting , the occupation of land without ownership, is a globally ubiquitous phenomenon.

Indigenous land rights is also a perennial related issue.

National sovereignty [ edit ] Sovereignty , in common law jurisdictions, is often referred to as absolute title , radical title , or allodial title .  Nearly all of these jurisdictions have a system of land registration , to record fee simple interests, and a land claim process to resolve disputes.

Land rights [ edit ] Indigenous land rights are recognized by international law , as well as the national legal systems of common law and civil law countries. In common law jurisdictions, the land rights of indigenous peoples are referred to as aboriginal title . In customary law jurisdictions, customary land is the predominant form of land ownership.

Land reform refers to government policies that take and/or redistribute land, such as a land grant .

Land rights refer to the inalienable ability of individuals to freely obtain, use, and possess land at their discretion, as long as their activities on the land do not impede on other individuals' rights.

[ 1 ] This is not to be confused with access to land, which allows individuals the use of land in an economic sense (i.e. farming). Instead, land rights address the ownership of land which provides security and increases human capabilities . When a person only has access to land, they are in constant threat of expulsion depending on the choices of the land owner, which limits financial stability.

[ 1 ] Land rights are an integral part of Land Laws, as they socially enforce groups of individuals' rights to own land in concurrence with the land laws of a nation. Land Law addresses the legal mandates set forth by a country in regards to land ownership, while land rights refer to the social acceptance of land ownership.

Landesa takes the stance that although the law may advocate for equal access to land, land rights in certain countries and cultures may hinder a group's right to actually own land.

[ 2 ] Laws are important, but they must be backed up by cultural tradition and social acceptance. Therefore, laws concerning land ownership and land rights of a country must be in agreement.

Globally, there has been an increased focus on land rights, as they are so pertinent to various aspects of development. According to Wickeri and Kalhan, land ownership can be a critical source of capital, financial security, food, water, shelter, and resources.

[ 3 ] The UN Global Land Tool organisation has found that rural landlessness is a strong predictor of poverty and hunger, [ 4 ] and negatively impacts Empowerment and the realisation of Human rights .

[ 5 ] In order to home in on this critical problem of inadequate land rights, The Millennium Development Goal 7D strives to improve the lives of 100 million slum dwellers.

[ 6 ] This includes increased land rights for impoverished people, which will ultimately lead to a higher quality of life.

[ 3 ] Although land rights are fundamental in achieving higher standards of living, certain groups of individuals are consistently left out of land ownership provisions. The law may provide access to land, however, cultural barriers and poverty traps limit minority groups' ability to own land.

[ 7 ] In order to reach equality, these groups must obtain adequate land rights that are both socially and legally recognised.

Limits of national jurisdiction and sovereignty [ edit ] Limits of national jurisdiction and sovereignty Outer space (including Earth orbits ; the Moon and other celestial bodies , and their orbits) national airspace territorial waters airspace contiguous zone airspace [ citation needed ] international airspace land territory surface internal waters surface territorial waters surface contiguous zone surface Exclusive Economic Zone surface international waters surface internal waters territorial waters Exclusive Economic Zone international waters land territory underground Continental Shelf surface extended continental shelf surface international seabed surface Continental Shelf underground extended continental shelf underground international seabed underground full national jurisdiction and sovereignty restrictions on national jurisdiction and sovereignty international jurisdiction per common heritage of mankind Land rights and women [ edit ] Several scholars argue that women's lack of sufficient land rights negatively affects their immediate families and the larger community, as well.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] With land ownership, women can develop an income and allocate this income more fairly within the household.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Tim Hanstad claims that providing sufficient land rights for women is beneficial because, once women can exercise those rights the following will be promoted: [ 12 ] Women will be less likely to contract and spread HIV/AIDS as they do not have to resort to prostitution Women will be less likely to be victims of Domestic violence Their children will be more likely to get an education and stay in school longer Women will be better positioned to get access to Microcredit In many parts of the world, women have access to land in order to farm and cultivate the land; however, there are traditions and cultural norms which bar women from inheriting or purchasing land.

[ 7 ] [ 11 ] This puts women in a place of dependence on their husbands, brothers, or fathers for their livelihood and shelter.

[ 9 ] Should there be an illness, domestic violence, or death in the family, women would be left landless and unable to either grow crops for food, or rent land for profit. Land ownership for women is a crucial form of security and income, increasing Empowerment and decreasing Poverty .

India [ edit ] Kanakalatha Mukund makes the important point that although women in India have the legal right to own land, very few actually do as a result of the patriarchal practices which dominate the nation.

[ 13 ] Up until recently, Indian women have been left out of laws regarding the distribution of public land and were forced to rely on the small possibility of obtaining private land from their families.

[ 9 ] Inheritance laws which cater towards men are one of the key issues behind inequality in land rights. According to Bina Agarwal , land ownership defines social status and political power in the household and in the village, shaping relationships and creating family dynamics.

[ 9 ] Therefore, inheritance of land automatically puts men above women both in the household, and in the community. Without political pull in the village, and with limited bargaining powers within the household, women lack the voice to advocate for their own rights.

[ 9 ] Another issue with land rights in India is that they leave women completely dependent on the lives of their husbands. A study by Bina Agarwal found that in West Bengal , prosperous families turn destitute when the male head of the household dies, as women are not permitted to take over their husband's land.

[ 9 ] Also, due to cultural tradition, the higher the status of the woman, the less likely she is to have any developed skills that would be useful in finding work.

[ 9 ] These women are forced to beg for food and shelter once their husbands die because they have not been allowed to gain work experience.

[ 9 ] Bina Agarwal argues that land ownership significantly decreases the chance of domestic violence against Indian women.

[ 10 ] Owning property elevates women to a higher status within the household, allowing more equality and bargaining power. In addition, owning property separately from their husbands allowed women an opportunity of escape from abusive relationships .

[ 10 ] Agarwal concluded that the prospect of a safe shelter outside of the main household decreases the longevity of domestic violence.

[ 10 ] Land rights are critical for women in India due to the heavily patriarchal society in which they live. Cultural perspectives play a key role in the acceptance of equality within land ownership. Women owning land ultimately benefits the household and society as a whole.

[ 8 ] The most recent advance towards equality in land rights in India was the Hindu Succession Act of 2005 . This act aimed to remove the gender discrimination which was present in the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 . In the new amendment, daughters and sons have equal rights to obtain land from their parents.

[ 14 ] This act was both a legally and socially important move for women's rights to land. Not only did it legally mandate equality in land succession, it also validated women's roles as equals in society.

Uganda [ edit ] Uganda's 1995 Constitution enforces equality between men and women, including the acquisition and ownership of land.

[ 15 ] However, research from Women's Land Link Africa reveals that women remain excluded from land ownership due to customs and deeply ingrained cultural habits.

[ 16 ] Even when women save up enough money to purchase land, the land is signed in their husband's name, while women sign as the witness.

[ 16 ] Inheritance practices are a particular obstacle which reduces women empowerment , as well. Land is passed down through male lineage which reinforces women's exclusion from land ownership.

[ 17 ] Another detriment to equality, pointed out by Women's Land Link Africa, is that women lack sufficient knowledge about the rights they have under the law to own land.

[ 16 ] Rural, illiterate women do not even have access to the new constitution which guarantees them land rights.

Although the 1995 Constitution provides for equality between men and women, there are still gaps in the law which affect women's rights to land. The law protects the rights to land of wives in marriage; however, it does not address the needs of widows or divorcees.

[ 17 ] Consequentially, these women are left landless and without the protection land offers. Also, women have a difficult time taking cases to court due to corruption and expensive trials.

[ 16 ] The trials concerning land take so long to process that many women do not even attempt to seek legal assistance.

Women's Land Link Africa provides suggestions to alleviate inequality in land ownership. Rural women can be educated about their rights through radio campaigns, community discussions, educational outreach programs, and public forums.

[ 16 ] The cultural nuances must be addressed in policies and community leaders can be educated about inclusion of minority groups.

[ 16 ] Also, the law itself can address the rights of widows and divorcees in addition to the rights of married women.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] English land law Land grabbing Split estate The Land is Ours International Land Coalition Struggle for the Land References [ edit ] ^ a b Adi, D.N. (2009). Critical Mass Representation in Uganda. 1-38.

^ Hanstad, T. (2010). Secure Land Rights. Landesa.

^ a b Wickeri, Elisabeth; Kalhan, Anil (2010). "Land Rights Issues in International Human Rights Law".

Malaysian Journal on Human Rights .

4 (1): 16– 25.

SSRN 1921447 .

^ Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (2009), Housing and Property Restitution for Refugees and Displaced Persons, 3-5.

^ UN Global Land Tool Network (2010) "UN-HABITAT.:. Land & Tenure | Secure Land and Tenure" . Archived from the original on 2012-01-11 . Retrieved 2010-12-06 .

^ Millennium Development Goal Monitor: Tracking the Mellennium Development Goals. (2010) http://www.mdgmonitor.org/goal7.cfm ^ a b c Hanstad, T. (2010). Secure Land Rights. Rural Development Institute.

^ a b Agarwal, B. (1988). “Who Sows? Who Reaps? Women and Land Rights in India” Journal of Peasant Studies. 531-581.

^ a b c d e f g h Agarwal, B. (1994). “A Field of One’s Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia”. Cambridge University Press.

^ a b c d Agarwal, B. (2005). “Marital Violence, Human Development, and Women’s Property Status in India” World Development. 823-850.

^ a b Deere, C.D., & Doss, C. R. (2006). “Gender and the Distribution of Wealth in Developing Countries. World Institute for Development Economics Research, 1-27.

^ Hanstad, T. (2010). Secure Land Rights. Rural Development Institute ^ Mukund, K. (1999). “Women's Property Rights in South India: A Review”. Economic and Political Weekly.

^ Hindu Succession Act 2005. September 5, 2005.

http://www.hrln.org/admin/issue/subpdf/HSA_Amendment_2005.pdf Archived 2015-03-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ Constitution of Uganda. (1995).

http://www.ugandaonlinelawlibrary.com/files/constitution/constitution_1995.pdf ^ a b c d e f g Women’s Land Link Africa. (2010). “The Impact of National Land Policy and Land Reform On Women in Uganda”. WLLA. 1-8.

^ a b Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions. (2010). “Uganda-Women’s Land Rights: The Gap Between Policy and Practice”.

"Uganda: Women's land rights – the gap between policy and practice | COHRE - Center on Housing Rights and Evictions" . Archived from the original on 2011-01-24 . Retrieved 2010-12-06 .

v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics Authority control databases National Latvia Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐gcblx
Cached time: 20250814234500
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.355 seconds
Real time usage: 0.474 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1642/1000000
Revision size: 18239/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 97752/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2015/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55368/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.175/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6031399/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  342.206      1 -total
 32.56%  111.422      7 Template:Navbox
 29.12%   99.642      1 Template:Reflist
 25.42%   86.991      1 Template:Natural_resources
 18.98%   64.943      1 Template:Cite_journal
 16.55%   56.633      1 Template:Short_description
  9.78%   33.462      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.98%   30.737      1 Template:Citation_needed
  7.74%   26.478      1 Template:Fix
  6.10%   20.889      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1082450:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234500 and revision id 1290397110. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_law&oldid=1290397110 " Categories : Land law Human rights Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009 This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 15:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land law 14 languages Add topic

