Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Courtroom division 2 License and certification Toggle License and certification subsection 2.1 U.S. procedure 2.1.1 U.S. patent procedure 2.2 British procedure 3 The legal profession 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bar (law) 4 languages العربية Español Italiano Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal profession as an institution This article is about the legal term. For professional organizations of lawyers, see bar association . For other uses, see bar (disambiguation) .

In this courtroom in Worcester, Massachusetts (United States), the bar is represented by a physical barrier (with swinging gate doors), separating the benches reserved for spectators from the judge 's bench and lawyers ' tables.

In law , the bar is the legal profession as an institution . The term is a metonym for the line (or "bar") that separates the parts of a courtroom reserved for spectators and those reserved for participants in a trial such as lawyers .

In the United Kingdom, the term "the bar" refers only to the professional organization for barristers (referred to in Scotland as advocates); the other type of UK lawyer, solicitors , have their own body, the Law Society . Correspondingly, being "called to the bar" refers to admission to the profession of barristers, not solicitors.

Courtroom division [ edit ] The wooden bar in front of the magistrate's bench in an 18th-century outdoor courtroom in Belgium The origin of the term bar is from the barring furniture dividing a medieval European courtroom, which defined the areas restricted to lawyers and court personnel from which the general public was excluded.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Within most modern courts of the U.S., Europe and many other countries, the bar continues to be represented by a physical partition, such as a railing or barrier .

[ 3 ] The area behind the bar is open to the public.

[ 4 ] This restriction is enforced in nearly all courts.

License and certification [ edit ] The bar may also refer to the qualifying procedure by which a lawyer is licensed to practice law in a given jurisdiction.

U.S. procedure [ edit ] Main article: Admission to the bar in the United States In the United States, this procedure is administered by the individual U.S. states and their respective bar associations. In general, a candidate must graduate from a qualified law school and pass a written test: the bar examination . Almost all states use the Multistate Bar Examination (MBE), a multiple-choice exam administered on one day of a two- or three-day test. An increasing number use the Uniform Bar Examination , which includes the MBE. In either case, on days during which the MBE is not administered, the bar exam may include questions related to that state's laws. If the candidate reaches the score required by a particular state, the candidate is then admitted to the bar .  A lawyer whose license to practice law is revoked is said to be disbarred .

State bar associations may set additional requirements to bar admission such as trial and court observations, character and background screenings, or an additional examination on professional ethics.

U.S. patent procedure [ edit ] Main article: USPTO registration examination Admission to practice before the patent section of the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) requires that the individual pass a separate, single-day examination administered by that agency. This test is typically referred to as the "patent bar", although the word "bar" does not appear in the test's official name.

Unlike the general bar examination, for which graduation from a recognized law school is a prerequisite, the USPTO exam does not require that the candidate have taken any law school courses. Instead, the main prerequisite is a science or engineering background, most often met with a bachelor's degree in a relevant field. Individuals who pass the examination are referred to as "patent attorneys" if they have an active law license from any U.S. jurisdiction, and "patent agents" otherwise. Attorneys and agents have the same license to represent clients before the patent section of the USPTO, and both may issue patentability opinions. However, any other patent-related practice (such as licensing or infringement litigation) can only be performed by licensed attorneys—who do not necessarily have to be USPTO-licensed.

British procedure [ edit ] Main article: Call to the bar In the United Kingdom, the practice of law is divided between barristers ( advocates in Scotland ) and solicitors ; advocacy before a court is almost always carried out by barristers (or advocates). A person who becomes an advocate or barrister is referred to as being called to the bar .  In the UK, there is a distinction between the inner bar (for senior King's counsel ) and the outer bar (for Junior barristers ).

The legal profession [ edit ] The bar commonly refers to the legal profession as a whole. With a modifier, it may refer to a branch or division of the profession: as, for instance, the tort bar —lawyers who specialize in filing civil suits for damages.

In conjunction with bench , bar may differentiate lawyers who represent clients ( the bar ) from judges or members of a judiciary ( the bench ). In this sense, the bar advocates and the bench adjudicates. Yet, in some countries, judges who previously worked as lawyers representing clients commonly remain members of the bar and lawyers are commonly referenced as Officers of the Court .

The phrase bench and bar denotes all judges and lawyers collectively.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Admission to practice law Admission to the bar in the United States Bar association Bench (law) Call to the bar Courtroom References [ edit ] ^ "History – The Florida Bar" . Retrieved 2023-05-23 .

^ Rivlin, Geoffrey (2012).

Understanding the law (6th ed.). Oxford, U.K: Oxford University Press. p. 147.

ISBN 9780199608805 .

^ a b Walker, David Maxwell (1980).

The Oxford companion to law . Oxford: Clarendon press. p. 112,123.

ISBN 0-19-866110-X .

^ Garner, Bryan, ed. (2004).

Black's Law Dictionary (8th ed.). St. Paul, MN: West Publishing. pp.

157– 8.

ISBN 0-314-15199-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Bar, The ".

Importance of Bar & Bench relationship , available at learningthelaw.in v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐vq4lm
Cached time: 20250811235537
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.324 seconds
Real time usage: 0.409 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 751/1000000
Revision size: 6990/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38028/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 765/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25802/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.207/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4601014/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  334.811      1 -total
 33.34%  111.614      1 Template:Reflist
 29.77%   99.689      1 Template:Law
 29.24%   97.904      1 Template:Navbox
 21.85%   73.162      1 Template:Cite_web
 19.00%   63.623      1 Template:Short_description
 10.07%   33.717      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.54%   25.247      1 Template:About
  7.38%   24.693      3 Template:Cite_book
  6.96%   23.292      1 Template:EB1911_poster Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:268188:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235537 and revision id 1271567276. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bar_(law)&oldid=1271567276 " Categories : Courts Judiciaries Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 January 2025, at 17:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bar (law) 4 languages Add topic

