Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the term 2 Organizational support 3 Other uses of the term 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Third camp 4 languages Français Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of socialism This article is about the Trotskyst idea of a socialist Third camp. For the 'Third Camp' in Austrian politics, see German nationalism in Austria .

Not to be confused with Third Position or Third Way .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Third camp" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a Politics series Third camp Concepts Bureaucratic collectivism State capitalism Prominent figures Carter Draper Harrington Howe Jacobson Matgamna Namazie Shachtman Groups Alliance for Workers' Liberty International Socialists Left Worker-communist Party of Iraq New Politics Worker-communist Party of Iran Workers' Party Related topics Leninism Marxism Trotskyism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e The third camp , also known as third camp socialism or third camp Trotskyism , is a branch of socialism that aims to oppose both capitalism and Stalinism by supporting the organised working class as a "third camp".

The term arose early during World War II and refers to the idea of two "imperialist camps" competing to dominate the world: one led by the United Kingdom and France and supported by the United States , and the other led by Nazi Germany and Japan and supported by Fascist Italy . It did have a predecessor in the Trotskyist opposition to the Stalin-led Soviet Union, however.

Origins of the term [ edit ] From the 1930s and beyond, Leon Trotsky and his American supporter James P. Cannon described the Soviet Union as a " degenerated workers' state ", the revolutionary gains of which should be defended against imperialist aggression despite the emergence of a gangster-like ruling stratum, the party bureaucracy. While defending the Russian revolution from outside aggression, Trotsky, Cannon and their followers at the same time urged an anti-bureaucratic political revolution against Stalinism to be conducted by the Soviet working class themselves.

Dissidents in the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party , witnessing the collaboration of Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler in the invasion and the partition of Poland and the Soviet invasion of the Baltic states , argued that the Soviet Union had actually emerged as a new social formation, which was neither capitalist nor socialist. Adherents of that view, espoused most explicitly by Max Shachtman and closely following the writings of James Burnham and Bruno Rizzi , argued that the Soviet bureaucratic collectivist regime had in fact entered one of two great imperialist "camps" aiming to wage war to divide the world. The first of the imperialist camps, which Stalin and the Soviet Union were said to have joined as a directly participating ally, was headed by Nazi Germany and included most notably Fascist Italy. In that original analysis, the "second imperialist camp" was headed by England and France, actively supported by the United States.

[ 1 ] Shachtman and his cothinkers argued for the establishment of a broad "third camp" to unite the workers and colonial peoples of the world in revolutionary struggle against the imperialism of the German-Soviet-Italian and the Anglo-American-French blocs. Shachtman concluded that the Soviet policy was one of imperialism and that the best result for the international working class would be the defeat of the Soviet Union in the course of its military incursions. Conversely, Trotsky argued that a defeat for the Soviet Union would strengthen capitalism and reduce the possibilities for political revolution.

[ 2 ] With the demise of fascism in World War II and the emergence of Soviet-controlled governments in Central and Eastern Europe, the "three camps" conception was modified. The leading imperialist camp was held to be that of the chief capitalist powers (the United States, the United Kingdom and France), with the Soviet Union consigned to a second imperialist camp.

Over time, Shachtman's aggressive calls for the defeat of official communist nations' expansionism (the second camp) drifted rightward into support for the capitalist nations (the first camp). That position has led orthodox Trotskyist groups to declare it reactionary. However, some supporters of the three camps analysis split with Shachtman and continued to develop their analyses of the changing world situation.

Organizational support [ edit ] The Congress Socialist Party of India also adopted a third camp position, with the slogan "We want neither the rule of London or Berlin; nor the rule of Paris or Rome; nor that of Tokyo or Moscow" (September 1939).

[ 3 ] A third camp position is held today by the Workers Liberty groups, [ 4 ] New Politics [ 5 ] and by some in the multi-tendency Marxist organization Solidarity in the United States as well as some in the Democratic Socialists of America and the Socialist Party USA .

Other uses of the term [ edit ] More recently, a movement by the Worker-Communist Party of Iran and its leaders such as Hamid Taqvaee and Maryam Namazie , together with groups including Left Worker-communist Party of Iraq , has emerged calling for a third camp opposing American militarism and Islamic terrorism .

[ 6 ] However, this is unrelated to the Trotskyist third camp theory [ citation needed ] as neither organisation comes from a Trotskyist background.

See also [ edit ] Anti-Stalinist left Centrism Council communism Left communism Neoconservatism Non-Aligned Movement Shachtmanism Three Worlds Theory References [ edit ] ^ Shachtman, Max (1 May 1940).

"Against Both War Camps — For the Camp of World Labor!" .

Labor Action . p. 1 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

, and the May Day 1940 manifesto of the Workers Party , the political offshoot of the SWP established by Burnham, Shachtman and Martin Abern in April 1940.

^ A series of sharply critical articles and letters from Trotsky's debates with Shachtman was published posthumously under the title In Defense of Marxism . Cannon's polemics against Burnham and Shachtman are contained in the book The Struggle for a Proletarian Party .

^ Stanley, Sherman (April 1940).

India and the Third Camp – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ "Workers' Liberty and the "Third Camp" " .

Workers Liberty . Archived from the original on April 16, 2013.

^ Johnson, Alan (Summer 1999).

"The Third Camp as History And a Living Legacy" .

New Politics .

7 (3).

^ "Third camp" .

Further reading [ edit ] Johnson, Alan (1999).

" "Neither Washington Nor Moscow": The Third Camp as History And a Living Legacy" .

New Politics .

7 (3): 135– 165.

ISSN 0028-6494 .

Kelly, John (2018).

Contemporary Trotskyism: Parties, Sects and Social Movements in Britain .

Routledge . pp. 26, 41, 85– 90, 101, 226, 230, 236.

ISBN 978-1-138-94379-7 .

LCCN 2017052868 .

External links [ edit ] Max Shachtman.

"The Soviet Union and the World War" .

Leon Trotsky.

"Balance Sheet of the Finnish Events" .

Pierre Frank .

"Under Pressure of the Coming War, Imperialism Beckons "Third Camp" .

Tony Cliff.

"Marxism and the theory of bureaucratic collectivism" .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Third_camp&oldid=1270799413 " Categories : Trotskyism Marxist theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 07:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Third camp 4 languages Add topic

