Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works (selection) 3 See also 4 References 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abraham Calovius 12 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lutheran theologian (1612–1686) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Abraham Calovius" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Abraham Calovius Abraham Calovius (also Abraham Calov or Abraham Kalau ; 16 April 1612 – 25 February 1686) was a Lutheran theologian, and was one of the champions of Lutheran orthodoxy in the 17th century.

Biography [ edit ] Title page of the Calov Bible, with Bach's signature in the bottom right hand corner.

He was born in Mohrungen (Morąg), Ducal Prussia , a fief of Crown of Poland . After studying at Königsberg , in 1650 he was appointed professor of theology at Wittenberg , where he afterwards became general superintendent and primarius .

[ 1 ] Calovius opposed the Catholics , Calvinists and Socinians , and in particular attacked the syncretism of his bitter enemy, George Calixtus .

[ 1 ] While Calixtus affirmed that the Apostles' Creed was an adequate definition of faith, Calovius rather held that one must believe every part of revealed truth in order to gain salvation. This led Calovius to deny as a heresy the idea that Roman Catholics or Calvinists could be partakers of salvation.

As a writer of polemics Calovius had few equals. His chief dogmatic work, Systema locorum theologicorum, (12 volumes, 1655–1677) represents the climax of Lutheran scholasticism . He produced a popular commentary on Martin Luther 's translation of the Bible, "die deutsche Bibel," today known as the Calov Bible .

[ 2 ] He also wrote a much larger professional exegetical work on the entire Bible called "Biblia Illustrata." It is written from the point of view of a very strict belief in inspiration, his object being to refute the statements made by Hugo Grotius in his Commentaries.

[ 1 ] Calovius died in Wittenberg .

Works (selection) [ edit ] Tractatus Novus De Methodo Docendi & Disputandi , 1632.

Metaphysica divina.

Rostock, Hallervord, 1640.

Scripta philosophica.

Lübeck, Wilden, 1651.

Systematis locorum theologicorum.

:"Système de prémisses théologiques issues des écrits les plus sacrés de l'Antiquité :" Wittenberg 1655–1677 (12 volumes).

Biblia illustrata.

Frankfurt am Main 1672–1676 and 1719 (4 volumes).

Theologia positiva.

Wittenberg 1682.

See also [ edit ] Syncretistic Controversy References [ edit ] ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Calovius, Abraham ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 68.

^ Lutheran Orthodoxy Under Fire [ permanent dead link ] by Timothy Schmeling References [ edit ] Marco Sgarbi, Abraham Calov and Immanuel Kant. Aristotelian and Scholastic Traces in the Kantian Philosophy , Historia Philosophica, 8, 2010, pp. 55–62 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Abraham Calov .

Abraham Calov, Scripta philosophica Abraham Calov (1612-1686) Post-Reformation Digital Library The Birth of Ontology. A selection of Ontologists from 1560 to 1770 Abraham Calov's Doctrine of Vocatio in Its Systematic Context by Kenneth Appold Dogmatic excerpts from Syncretismus and Digressio by Abraham Calov Lutheran Orthodoxy under Fire Archived 2011-07-25 at the Wayback Machine by Timothy Schmeling v t e Lutheran Orthodoxy Early Orthodoxy Acceptance of the Book of Concord Martin Chemnitz Jakob Andreae Nikolaus Selnecker David Chytraeus Matthias Hafenreffer Leonhard Hutter Aegidius Hunnius Stephan Praetorius High Orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Johann Gerhard Confessio Catholica Johannes Andreas Quenstedt Syncretistic Controversy Abraham Calovius Calov Bible Georgius Calixtus Nicolaus Hunnius Jesper Brochmand Salomo Glassius Johann Hülsemann Johann Conrad Dannhauer Johann Friedrich König Johannes Musaeus Johann Wilhelm Baier Thirty Years' War Adversaries Jesuits Socinians Calvinists Late Orthodoxy David Hollatz Martin Moller Johann Arndt Christian Scriver Valentin Ernst Löscher Johann Melchior Goeze Salzburg Protestants Landlers Adversaries Pietists Wolffians Neologists German idealists Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Finland Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abraham_Calovius&oldid=1304316599 " Categories : 1612 births 1686 deaths People from Morąg 17th-century Prussian people 17th-century German Lutheran clergy German Lutheran theologians German male non-fiction writers 17th-century German Protestant theologians 17th-century writers in Latin 17th-century German male writers University of Königsberg alumni Academic staff of the University of Wittenberg 17th-century Lutheran theologians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Commons link is locally defined Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 08:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abraham Calovius 12 languages Add topic

