Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Era 3 Lifestyle 4 Significance of the find 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Tulerpeton 11 languages Deutsch Español Français Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Extinct genus of tetrapodomorphs Tulerpeton Temporal range: Famennian PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade : Elpistostegalia Clade : Stegocephali Family: † Tulerpetontidae Lebedev & Coates, 1995 Genus: † Tulerpeton Lebedev, 1984 Type species Tulerpeton curtum Lebedev, 1984 Tulerpeton is an extinct genus of Devonian four-limbed vertebrate, known from a fossil that was found in the Tula Region of Russia at a site named Andreyevka. This genus, Acanthostega , and Ichthyostega represent the earliest tetrapods .

Description [ edit ] Tulerpeton is considered one of the first " tetrapods " (in the broad sense of the word) to have evolved. It is known from a fragmented skull, the left side of the pectoral girdle , and the entire right forelimb and right hindlimb along with a few belly scales. This species is differentiated from the less derived "aquatic tetrapods" (such as Acanthostega and Ichthyostega ) by a strengthened limb structure. These limbs consist of 6 toes and fingers. Additionally, its limbs appear to have evolved for powerful paddling rather than walking.

The fossil fragments also indicate that its head was disconnected from the pectoral girdle. From the absence of the rough postbranchial lamina of the pectoral girdle, it has been determined that Tulerpeton had no gills and was therefore entirely dependent on breathing air.

Era [ edit ] Tulerpeton lived approximately 365 million years ago, [ 1 ] in the Late Devonian period when the climate was fairly warm and there were no glaciers. Land had already been colonized by plants. But it was only during the following Carboniferous period that the first truly terrestrial pentadactyl tetrapods – the ancestors of present-day lissamphibians, mammals, birds, and reptiles – first began to appear.

Lifestyle [ edit ] Even though Tulerpeton breathed air, it lived mainly in shallow marine water. The Andreyevka fossil bed where it was discovered was at least 200 km from the nearest landmass during this era. The fossils of plants in the area tell us that the salinity of the waters where it lived fluctuated wildly, indicating that the waters were quite shallow.
Because the bones of the neck and the pectoral girdle were disconnected, Tulerpeton could lift its head. Therefore, in shallow water, it had a considerable advantage over the other animals whose heads only moved side to side. The later land animals that descended from Tulerpeton ’s relatives needed this head flexion on land, but the condition probably evolved because of the advantage that this gave it in shallow marine waters, not for land. In the book “Vertebrate Life”, authors Pough, Janis, and Heiser say that,” The development of a distinct neck, with the loss of the opercular bones and the later gain of a specialized articulation between the skull and the vertebral column (not yet present in the earliest tetrapods), may be related to lifting the snout out of the water to breath [ sic ?

] air or to snap at prey items.”
The six fingered hands and toes were stronger than the fins from which they developed, therefore Tulerpeton had an advantage in propelling itself through shallow and brackish water, but the limbs do not yet seem strong enough for extensive use on land.

Significance of the find [ edit ] Tulerpeton is one of the early transition tetrapods – a marine animal capable of living on land. The separation of the pectoral-shoulder girdle from the head allowed the head to move up and down, and the strengthening of the legs and arms allowed the early tetrapods to propel themselves on land.

Tulerpeton is important in the study of dactyly . The polydactyl (more than five toes) condition of Tulerpeton caused considerable comment when the fossil was first discovered. Before the discovery, the pentadactyl five-fingered condition that is ancestral to all living tetrapods, was thought to have developed before the first terrestrial tetrapods appeared. But the discoveries of Acanthostega and Ichthyostega confirm that the pentadactyl ancestor came later in the development of tetrapods.

Phylogenetic studies conducted by Lebedev and Coates (1995) and Coates (1996) indicated that Tulerpeton was the earliest and basalmost member of the clade containing amniotes and all extinct tetrapods that were more closely related to amniotes than to lissamphibians (living amphibians).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] However, later phylogenetic studies recovered Tulerpeton outside the least inclusive clade containing amniotes and lissamphibians, finding it to be more distantly related to amniotes than such extinct tetrapods as lepospondyls , seymouriamorphs , Embolomeri , temnospondyls , baphetids , colosteids and whatcheeriids were.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Michael Benton (2005) noted that, due to the fact that Tulerpeton had more than five toes, establishing its exact phylogenetic position is important to our understanding of digital reduction in tetrapods. If it indeed was more closely related to amniotes than lissamphibians are, it would mean that "reduction to five digits had to happen twice, once on the line to amphibians and once on the reptiliomorph line"; on the other hand, if it lies outside the least inclusive clade containing amniotes and lissamphibians, then "digital reduction happened once, between Tulerpeton and later tetrapods".

[ 9 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Recent Transitionals ^ Oleg A. Lebedev, Michael I. Coates (1995). "The postcranial skeleton of the Devonian tetrapod Tulerpeton curtum Lebedev".

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

114 (3): 307– 348.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1995.tb00119.x .

^ Michael I. Coates (1996). "The Devonian tetrapod Acanthostega gunnari Jarvik: postcranial anatomy, basal tetrapod interrelationships and patterns of skeletal evolution".

Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh: Earth Sciences .

87 (3): 363– 421.

doi : 10.1017/S0263593300006787 .

S2CID 86801453 .

^ Laurin, M.; Reisz, R.R. (1999). "A new study of Solenodonsaurus janenschi , and a reconsideration of amniote origins and stegocephalian evolution".

Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences .

36 (8): 1239– 1255.

doi : 10.1139/e99-036 .

^ Ruta, M.; Coates, M.I.; Quicke, D.L.J. (2003). "Early tetrapod relationships revisited".

Biological Reviews .

78 (2): 251– 345.

doi : 10.1017/S1464793102006103 .

PMID 12803423 .

S2CID 31298396 .

^ Vallin, Grégoire; Laurin, Michel (2004). "Cranial morphology and affinities of Microbrachis , and a reappraisal of the phylogeny and lifestyle of the first amphibians".

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

24 (1): 56– 72.

doi : 10.1671/5.1 .

S2CID 26700362 .

^ Chapter 6: "Walking with early tetrapods: evolution of the postcranial skeleton and the phylogenetic affinities of the Temnospondyli (Vertebrata: Tetrapoda)." In : Kat Pawley (2006). " The postcranial skeleton of temnospondyls (Tetrapoda: temnospondyli) ." PhD Thesis. La Trobe University, Melbourne.

^ Ruta, M.; Coates, M.I. (2007). "Dates, nodes and character conflict: addressing the lissamphibian origin problem".

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

5 (1): 69– 122.

doi : 10.1017/S1477201906002008 .

S2CID 86479890 .

^ Michael J. Benton (2005), Vertebrate Paleontology , 3rd ed. Blackwell Science Ltd 2005, p. 80.

References [ edit ] The Devonian Times reports on Tulerpeton Gordon, M.S. and Long, J.A. (2004) The Greatest Step In Vertebrate History: A Paleobiological Review of the Fish-Tetrapod Transition. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology. 77(5):700-719.

Recent Transitionals Sarcopterygii: Elpistostegalia The postcranial skeleton of the Devonian tetrapod Tulerpeton curtum Lebedev Stegocephalians: Tetrapods and other digit-bearing vertebrates Famennian Tetrapods Worldwide Tulerpeton Paleontology portal v t e Tetrapodomorpha ( Pan-Tetrapoda ) Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade : Osteichthyes Clade : Sarcopterygii Clade : Rhipidistia Gnathostomata see Gnathostomata Tetrapodomorpha see below↓ Tetrapodomorpha Tetrapodomorpha † Bogdanovia † Chrysolepis † Geptolepis † Glyptopomus † Gogonasus † Greiserolepis † Gyroptychius † Harajicadectes † Kenichthys † Litoptychus † Lamprotolepis † Latvius † Medoevia † Megadonichthys † Muranjilepis † Osteolepis † Peregrina † Platyethmoidia † Shirolepis † Thaumatolepis † Thursius † Tungsenia † Viluichthys † Rhizodontida Archichthys Aztecia Barameda Gooloogongia Hongyu Letognathus Propycnoctenion Pycnoctenion Rhizodus Rossichthys Sauripterus Screbinodus Strepsodus Thysanolepis ?

Vorobjevaia ?

† Canowindridae Beelarongia Canowindra Koharalepis Marsdenichthys ?

Owensia ?

† Megalichthyidae Askerichthys Cladarosymblema Cryptolepis ?

Ectosteorhachis Lohsania ?

Mahalalepis Megalichthys Megapomus ?

Megistolepis ?

Palatinichthys Rhizodopsis Sengoerichthys Sterropterygion ?

Eotetrapodiformes † Palaeospondylus ?

† Tristichopteridae Bruehnopteron Cabonnichthys Callistipterus Canningius Devonosteus Edenopteron Eusthenodon Eusthenopteron Heddleichthys Hyneria Jarvikina Langlieria Litoptychus ?

Mandageria Marsdenichthys ?

Notorhizodon Platycephalichthys Spodichthys Tinirau Tristichopterus Elpistostegalia † Howittichthys ?

† Livoniana † Panderichthys † Parapanderichthys † Qikiqtania † Rubrognathus † Tiktaalik Stegocephali ( Tetrapoda sensu lato ) see below↓ Stegocephali ( Tetrapoda sensu lato ) Devonian taxa † Acanthostega † Brittagnathus † Densignathus † Elpistostege ?

† Hynerpeton † Ichthyostega † Jakubsonia † Metaxygnathus † Parmastega † Sinostega † Tiktaalik ?

† Tulerpeton † Tutusius † Umzantsia † Ventastega † Ymeria † Elginerpetontidae Elginerpeton Obruchevichthys Webererpeton Post- Devonian taxa † Antlerpeton † Aytonerpeton † Crassigyrinus † Diploradus † Doragnathus † Gaiasia † Ichthyerpeton † Koilops † Mesanerpeton † Occidens † Ossirarus † Perittodus † Sigournea † Tantallognathus † Aistopoda Andersonerpeton Lethiscus Ophiderpeton Oestocephalidae Coloraderpeton Oestocephalus Phlegethontioidea Pseudophlegethontia Phlegethontiidae Phlegethontia Sillerpeton † Whatcheeriidae Ossinodus ?

Pederpes Whatcheeria † Colosteidae Colosteus Deltaherpeton Greererpeton Pholidogaster † Adelospondyli Acherontiscus Adelogyrinidae Adelogyrinus Adelospondylus Dolichopareias Palaeomolgophis † " Nectridea " see Nectridea † Baphetoidea Eucritta ?

Spathicephalus Baphetidae Baphetes Kyrinion Loxomma Megalocephalus † Embolomeri Anthracosaurus Archeria Aversor Calligenethlon Carbonoherpeton " Cricotus " Diplovertebron Eobaphetes Eoherpeton ?

Leptophractus Neopteroplax Palaeoherpeton Papposaurus Pholiderpeton Proterogyrinus Pteroplax Seroherpeton Spondylerpeton † Gephyrostegidae Bruktererpeton Eusauropleura Gephyrostegus † Other " anthracosaurs " Caerorhachis Casineria ?

Eldeceeon Eoherpeton Silvanerpeton Termonerpeton Crown group Tetrapoda Temnospondyli ( Batrachomorpha see Temnospondyli includes Lissamphibia Reptiliomorpha ( Pan-Amniota ) see Reptiliomorpha includes Amniota Related topics Paraphyletic / Polyphyletic groups Stem tetrapoda Osteolepiformes Osteolepididae Megalichthyiformes ?

Tristichopteridae ?

Labyrinthodontia Rachitomi Ichthyostegalia Lepospondyli Holospondyli Phyllospondyli Anthracosauria Other topics Evolution of tetrapods Polydactyly in stem-tetrapods Romer's gap Timeline Zachelmie trackways Category Taxon identifiers Tulerpeton Wikidata : Q133989 GBIF : 4816194 IRMNG : 1304680 Open Tree of Life : 3621243 Paleobiology Database : 37184 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tulerpeton&oldid=1287895852 " Categories : Stegocephali Prehistoric lobe-finned fish genera Late Devonian sarcopterygians Devonian sarcopterygians of Europe Famennian genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars of monotypic genera missing species This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 03:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tulerpeton 11 languages Add topic

