Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 17th century 1.2 18th century 1.3 19th century 1.4 20th century 2 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 2.1 Gardens 2.2 Interiors 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Summerhill House 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 53°28′49″N 6°43′57″W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.4801618°N 6.7325901°W ﻿ / 53.4801618; -6.7325901 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Palladian house in County Meath, Ireland Summerhill House General information Status Private dwelling house Type House Architectural style Palladian Baroque Classification Demolished Town or city Summerhill, County Meath Country Ireland Coordinates 53°28′49″N 6°43′57″W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.4801618°N 6.7325901°W ﻿ / 53.4801618; -6.7325901 Elevation 50 m (160 ft) Estimated completion 1731 Demolished Arson (4 Feb 1921) Demolition (1959) Final clearance (1970) Height 30 m (98 ft) Dimensions Other dimensions 300 feet in length Technical details Material limestone Size 389,000 cubic feet Floor count 3 Design and construction Architect(s) Designed by Edward Lovett Pearce Completed by Richard Cassels Developer Hercules Langford Rowley Known for The largest house in Ireland Other information Number of rooms circa 100 Summerhill House was a 100-roomed Palladian house in County Meath , Ireland which was the ancestral seat of the Viscounts Langford and the Barons Langford . Built in 1731, it was likely designed by Sir Edward Lovett Pearce and completed by Richard Cassels in the Palladian style, although Sir John Vanbrugh , who was related to Pearce and with whom he trained, is thought to have also influenced the design of the house, which could be seen by the Baroque details, great arched chimney stacks and the palatial grandeur and scale.

[ 1 ] The house demonstrated the power and wealth the Langford Rowley family had at the time. They owned vast amounts of land in counties Meath , Westmeath , Cork , Londonderry , Antrim , and Dublin as well as in Devon and Cornwall in England . The house also welcomed royalty, and ranked architecturally amongst the finest and most modern mansions in Europe.

[ 2 ] Desmond FitzGerald, 29th Knight of Glin and president of the Irish Georgian Society described its loss as "probably the greatest tragedy in the history of Irish domestic architecture".

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] 17th century [ edit ] Lynch's Castle,  Summerhill In 1661, Sir Hercules Langford, 1st Baronet bought Lynch's Castle located on the Summerhill demesne in County Meath and many other townlands from The Rt Rev. Dr.

Henry Jones , the Lord Bishop of Meath who had been awarded it by Oliver Cromwell .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Fourteen years prior in 1647, the surrounding area had formed the battlefield for the Battle of Dungan's Hill .

Earlier, John Rowley came to Ireland during the reign of James I , as sole agent for the building of the towns of Derry and Coleraine for the London Society. Upon the incorporation of the city of Derry in 1613, he was, by charter, appointed first Mayor of Derry city . He was later knighted for his services at the time of the Restoration. He also married Mary, daughter of Sir Hercules Langford, 1st Baronet.

One of Rowley's daughters, Anne, married Sir Tristram Beresford, 1st Baronet , ancestor to the family of Tyrone. Another daughter, Mary, married James Clotworthy , and by him had an only daughter, who married Robert FitzGerald, 19th Earl of Kildare , and who was grandmother of Lieutenant-General The 1st Duke of Leinster .

He only left one son, Hercules Rowley and via his son's marriage to Frances Upton, his only son and heir, Hercules Langford Rowley , married in 1732, Elizabeth Ormsby, later created The 1st Viscountess Langford . It is likely the family still lived at Lynch's Castle until this time.

18th century [ edit ] In the 1730s Langford Rowley constructed the vast Palladian Baroque house at Summerhill .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Later in 1743, Langford also acquired what was to become Langford House on Mary Street in Dublin city as his town residence while sitting in parliament.

Robert Adam was engaged in 1765 to carry out an interior redecoration and interior remodelling of this house.

[ 8 ] At the same time he was also commissioned to complete an extension to the already sprawling Summerhill house however these designs composed of a quadrant link connecting two wings, were ultimately never executed.

Summerhill House was damaged by fire during the Irish Rebellion of 1798 .

19th century [ edit ] In 1845, the Parliamentary Gazeteer and other sources describe the house as being in a state of decline, with much of its extensive mature woodlands having been removed.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The house and estate had been inherited in 1854 by The 4th Baron Langford (1848–1919). He engaged the architect John McCurdy to restore parts of the house in 1869.

[ 11 ] Equestrian portrait of Elisabeth at Possenhofen Castle, 1853 The Empress of Austria visited Summerhill in February 1879 for a six week holiday for the purposes of hunting. When she was on one hunt in Dunshaughlin , as they came to Maynooth they came across two men repairing a demesne wall of the Catholic seminary. As the deer they were hunting jumped into the land of the college, the empress followed without knowing where she was going and nearly jumped on the President of the college, Professor William Walsh , who later became the Archbishop of Dublin and Primate of Ireland . Throughout her trip she was accompanied by George "Bay" Middleton who was widely rumoured to be her lover.

On 13 November 2010 one famous riding whip appeared in a country house auction in Slane Castle held by Adams. This whip was owned by the Empress and was given to Robert Fowler who was the Master of the Meath Hounds at the time of her stay in Summerhill. The whip had been lost and had been found not long before the auction in Rahinston House. The whip was found in a mahogany presentation case with a silver crest plate bearing the Imperial Arms of Habsburg. The whip was estimated at €3,000-€5,000 but reached a total of €37,000.

[ 12 ] 20th century [ edit ] It suffered problems when farm hands went on strike and damaged farming equipment in 1919. Republican workers and farm hands were evicted from their homes and after months of agrarian agitation eventually on 4 February 1921, the Irish Republican Army invaded and took the estate and distributed the lands and farms around the house equally amongst the workers and their families, before they set the house on fire where it was mostly destroyed.

He was succeeded by his son, the young 5th Baron (1894–1922), who died prematurely and was in turn succeeded by his elderly cousin, Colonel William Chambre Rowley, who became the 6th Baron.

In 1922, Colonel The 6th Baron Langford (1849–1931), who had only inherited the barony the previous year, sought compensation from the Government of the Irish Free State . After three years of negotiation with the Compensation Board, a sum of £43,500 was paid to Colonel Lord Langford, approximately one third of the value of the house and contents destroyed in the fire. The elderly Lord Langford invested the money in gilt-edged stocks and moved to Middlesex in England.

Even in a ruinous state, the house was still said to be one of the architectural wonders of Ireland and made the house even more romantic in some minds much like the ruined Seaton Delaval . The calcinating of the external limestone gave it a more patterned and less harsh look similar to rustication in a way that can be seen at Russborough House .

Summerhill House stood as a ruin until it was totally demolished in 1970.

Architecture [ edit ] Summerhill House, Garden Front c1903 (rear of the property).

One of the surviving ornamental side gates to Summerhill House with oculi and blind niches was taken down and re-erected in recent years at Dolly's Grove. The gates stood to the side of the wings as entrances to the rear gardens extending the already vast width of the house. The busts are not original and were added in modern times.

The house stood on the summit of a hill with the main entrance from the village of Summerhill with another entrance from a mile long avenue on the Dublin road. In all, there were four avenues leading out to the four points of the compass.

[ 13 ] It consisted of a centre block and two wings, the mansion was massively built of limestone and of great length. Four semi-columns with Corinthian capitals ornamented the front; the main order was carried up the full height of the house like Renaissance Palaces in Rome. There was a portico in front of two sunken gardens behind with a raised grassy platform for a sundial; a large rose garden as well as another very large garden. When the Langford mansion was built the path went up the hill and around the portico.

[ 14 ] A broad flight of stairs led to the entrance of the mansion.

Gardens [ edit ] The gardens to the front of the house contained a Ha-ha .

A gothic mausoleum was also constructed around 1781 not far from the house and elements still survive at a religious institution in County Meath.

Interiors [ edit ] The Lafranchini brothers are said to have designed some of the interior stucco work and ceilings of the house including the state dining room which was detached from the main block.

[ 11 ] There was a large and very lofty hall, which was similar to Leinster House in Dublin. The hall contained plaques, pastels and oil portraits by Francesco Guardi and Hugh Douglas Hamilton as well as statuary of Mary Pakenham, daughter of the first Lord Longford by the sculptor Thomas Banks .

[ 15 ] To the right on entering was the library. The drawing room had a southern aspect, and contained several portraits of the Rowley family including by famous artists such as Pompeo Batoni . Two symmetrical grand staircases led to the bedrooms.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Desart Court References [ edit ] ^ Maurice Craig , "The quest for Edward Lovett Pearce", Irish Arts Review Yearbook, Vol. 12 (1996), 27–34 ^ Tarquin Blake, Abandoned Ireland ^ Dooley, Terence (19 April 2022).

Burning the Big House: The Story of the Irish Country House in a Time of War and Revolution . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300265118 . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ Kimber, Edward (1768).

"The Peerage of Ireland: A Genealogical and Historical Account of All the Peers of that Kingdom Etc" . Almon . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ "Summerhill House, Co. Meath: unexecuted design for an extension to the house for the Rt Hon. Hercules Langford Rowley, 1765 (1)" .

collections.soane.org . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ "Meath « The Irish Aesthete" .

theirishaesthete.com . 20 May 2024.

^ "Summerhill « The Irish Aesthete" .

theirishaesthete.com . 6 March 2023.

^ "1765 – Interior Designs, Langford House, Mary St., Dublin | Architecture @ Archiseek.com" .

www.archiseek.com . 11 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 September 2024 .

^ Brocas, William (Irish artist (11 September 2008).

"Master Rowley and Summerhill" .

hdl : 2262/21876 . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ "Summerhill House" (PDF) .

www.annevanweerden.nl . Retrieved 10 September 2024 .

^ a b "Co. Meath, Summerhill" .

Dictionary of Irish Architects . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ "ATG 1965 101113" .

content.yudu.com .

^ The History and Folklore of Coole and Summerhill Parish, published in 1999, compiled and presented by Coole and Summerhill I.C.A.

^ The Irish Georgian Society, The Irish Architectural Archives, Merrion Square ^ Dooley, Terence (19 April 2022).

Burning the Big House: The Story of the Irish Country House in a Time of War and Revolution . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-26511-8 . Retrieved 10 September 2024 .

^ Summerhill, Co. Meath, Architect: Edward Lovett Pearce / Richard Cassels archiseek, 1731 ^ Casey, Christine; Hayes, Melanie (26 January 2023).

Enriching Architecture: Craft and its conservation in Anglo-Irish building production, 1660–1760 . UCL Press.

ISBN 9781800083547 . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ T.U. Sadlier, "Richard Castle, Architect", The Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, Sixth Series, Vol. 1, No. 3 (1911), 241-245 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Summerhill House .

Side view of the house showing ornamental gates and wings - Historical Picture Archive Side view of the house showing ornamental gates and wings - Courtauld Gallery CGIs of what the facade limestone stonework would have looked like - Craft Value 1908 letter from Lord Langford regarding cattle theft and lawlessness - EBay 1937 view of the beech drive to the ruined house from the National Library of Ireland O'Dea collection Unexecuted design for an extension to Summerhill House in 1765 by Robert Adam - John Soane Museum v t e Historic Irish houses and castles Connacht Ashford Castle Aughnanure Castle Ballymore Castle Ballymote Castle Ballynahinch Castle Castle Hackett Classiebawn Castle Clifden Castle Clonalis House Dunguaire Castle Dunsandle Castle Eyrecourt Castle Fiddaun Castle Hazelwood House Glanleam House Kilronan Castle Lissadell House Markree Castle Menlo Castle Parke's Castle Strokestown House Tyrone House Westport House Dublin Abbeville, Dublin Aldborough House Áras an Uachtaráin Ardgillan Castle Ashtown Castle Baggotrath Castle Carrickmines Castle Castleknock Castle Chichester House Clontarf Castle Deerfield Drimnagh Castle Dublin Castle Farmleigh Frescati House Hillcourt Howth Castle Iveagh House Leinster House Lucan Manor Luttrellstown Castle Malahide Castle Manderley Castle Manresa House Mansion House Merrion Castle Mornington House Old Connaught House Rathfarnham Castle Roebuck, Dublin Sutton Castle Swords Castle Rest of Leinster Allenstown House Altamont House Ardbraccan House Athlone Castle Athclare Castle Athlumney Castle Avondale House Ballinlough Castle Barberstown Castle Bargy Castle Beaulieu House Bellinter House Belvedere House Bellevue House Birr Castle Blessington House Butler House Carton House Castle Durrow Castlemartin House and Estate Castle Roche Castletown House Charleville Castle Dangan Castle Dardistown Castle Darver Castle Desart Court Dowth Hall Duckett's Grove Dunsany Castle Durhamstown Castle Emo Court Enniscorthy Castle Foulksrath Castle Gloster House Harristown House Humewood Castle Huntington Castle Kilkea Castle Killeen Castle, Dunsany Kilkenny Castle Killruddery House Kinnitty Castle Leap Castle Leixlip Castle Lisnavagh House Loftus Hall Luggala Lodge Lyons Demesne Maynooth Castle Marlfield House Middleton Park House Mount Loftus Portlick Castle Powerscourt House Rock of Dunamase Russborough House Slane Castle Stackallan House Stradbally Hall Straffan House Summerhill House Tallaght Castle Townley Hall Trim Castle Munster Abbeville, Tipperary Adare Manor Ardfinnan Castle Ballinalacken Castle Ballinskelligs Castle Ballycarbery Castle Ballyhannon Castle Bantry House Barryscourt Castle Black Castle Blarney Castle Bourchier's Castle Bunratty Castle Bowen's Court Cahir Castle Cappoquin House Castle Conway Castle Donovan Castle Gurteen de la Poer Castle Maine Castle Oliver Castle Otway Craggaunowen Castle Croom Castle Curraghmore Damer House Derreen House Derryquin Castle Desmond Castle, Kinsale Doonagore Castle Dough Castle Dromoland Castle Dromore Castle Dunasead Castle Dunboy Castle Dunkerron Castle Dunlough Castle Ennistymon House Fota House Gallarus Castle Kenmare House Kilcash Castle Killagha Abbey Killarney House Kiltinan Castle King John's Castle Knappogue Castle Leamaneh Castle Lismore Castle Listowel Castle Macroom Castle Moorstown Castle Mount Congreve Mount Trenchard House Muckross House Newhall House and Estate Newtown Castle O'Dea Castle Ormonde Castle Parkavonear Castle Red House Redwood Castle Rock of Cashel Roscrea Castle Ross Castle Shanmuckinish Castle Slevoir House Strancally Castle Tarbert House Vernon Mount Waterford Castle Woodhouse Woodstown House Ulster Altinaghree Castle Archbishop's Palace, Armagh Arthur Cottage Bailieborough Castle Ballymoyer House Bangor Castle Baronscourt Belfast Castle Bellamont House Blessingbourne House Burt Castle Carrickfergus Castle Castle Caulfield Castle Coole Castle Leslie Castle Saunderson Clandeboye House Cloughoughter Castle Crom Castle Dartrey Forest Derrymore House Doe Castle Donegal Castle Dundrum Castle Dungannon Castle Dunluce Castle Florence Court Glenarm Castle Glenveagh Castle Gosford Castle Grianan of Aileach Hillsborough Castle Hope Castle Inch Castle Lissan House Lough Eske Castle Monellan Castle Mongavlin Castle Mount Stewart Parkanaur House Richhill Castle Rossmore Castle Springhill House Tynan Abbey See also Historic houses in Northern Ireland Historic houses in the Republic of Ireland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Summerhill_House&oldid=1284777780 " Categories : Country houses in Ireland Manor houses Houses completed in 1731 Palladian architecture in Ireland Houses in County Meath Demolished buildings and structures in the Republic of Ireland Edward Lovett Pearce buildings Richard Cassels buildings Former palaces Baroque architecture in Ireland Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2013 Use dmy dates from January 2024 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 April 2025, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Summerhill House 1 language Add topic

