Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Functions 3 Members 4 Commentary 5 References Toggle the table of contents National Indigenous Council Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Advisory body appointed by the Australian Government (2004–2008) Not to be confused with Indigenous Advisory Council .

The National Indigenous Council ( NIC ) was an appointed advisory body to the Australian Government through the Minister's for Indigenous Affairs ' Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs (MTIA) established in November 2004 (not to be confused with the earlier Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs (MTF) chaired by Mal Brough ), and wound up in early 2008. It was chaired by Sue Gordon , a Western Australian magistrate.

History [ edit ] NIC was established as a government-appointed 14-member advisory body, subsequent to the abolition of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC), which was an elected body of Indigenous Australian representatives. The new body found little support among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, although the members of the Council were respected, because it was felt that the appointed members had no mandate to speak on behalf of Indigenous people.

[ 1 ] While the Howard government stressed that the NIC was not intended to replace ATSIC, and nor was it a representative body, a leaked document from the federal cabinet in April 2004 had used the word "replace" several times.

[ 2 ] NIC first met on 8–9 December 2004.

[ 3 ] It was supposed to run until 31 December 2007.

[ 2 ] A government inquiry into the demise of ATSIC recommended in March 2005 "that the NIC be a temporary body, to exist only until a proper national, elected representative body is in place".

[ 1 ] On 15 January 2008, the Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs , Jenny Macklin , announced that the NIC would be wound up. The news was largely welcomed by Indigenous Australians.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Functions [ edit ] The terms of reference of the council were to provide expert advice to government on improving outcomes for Indigenous Australians. It would report to the Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs (MTA), and would support the work of the MTA to develop "strategies which would improve the delivery of services to Indigenous Australians".

[ 5 ] It was not involved in specific funding proposals or in the planning of proposals being undertaken in individual communities. While it was regarded as the principal source of advice to the government, other bodies and individuals would also be consulted by the government.

[ 6 ] According to Minister Amanda Vanstone , the Council's goals would include such matters as facilitating early childhood development , improving safety for Indigenous women and children, and reducing welfare dependence . Gordon indicated that Aboriginal domestic violence would be a top priority.

[ 7 ] Members [ edit ] The first 14 members appointed were: [ 5 ] Sue Gordon (Chair) Wesley Aird Archie Barton Miriam Rose Baumann MaryAnn Bin-Sallik Joseph Elu Adam Goodes Sally Goold Robert Lee John Kundereri Moriarty Warren Mundine Joe Proctor Michael White Tammy Williams Commentary [ edit ] The appointment of the National Indigenous Council sparked controversy both among Indigenous leaders and politicians. Former Aboriginal football player Michael Long turned down a position on the board.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Parliament of Australia . Select Committee on the Administration of Indigenous Affairs (March 2005).

"Chapter 4: Representation" .

After ATSIC: Life in the mainstream?

.

Commonwealth of Australia .

ISBN 0-642-71501-7 .

^ a b c Tarczynski, Stephen de (16 March 2008).

"RIGHTS-AUSTRALIA: Concerns Over New Indigenous People's Body" .

Inter Press Service . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

^ Rowse, Tim (14 October 2020).

"How John Howard Positioned Himself as Indigenous Australia's Champion" .

ANU Historical Journal II .

2 (2): 169– 194.

doi : 10.22459/ANUHJII.2020.09 .

S2CID 241897048 .

^ Calma, Tom (4 June 2008).

"Sustainable options for Australia's new national Indigenous representative body" .

Australian Human Rights Commission . Speech from a Native Title conference.

^ a b Vanstone, Amanda .

"National Indigenous Council appointed" .

The Hon Mal Brough MP . Archived from the original on 9 October 2007.

^ "National Indigenous Council" .

The Hon Mal Brough MP . Archived from the original on 30 October 2007.

^ a b "Australian Government Announcement of new Indigenous Council Sparks Debate" .

Cultural Survival . 2004 . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Indigenous_Council&oldid=1176055503 " Categories : Indigenous Australian politics 2004 establishments in Australia Defunct organisations serving Indigenous Australians Public policy in Australia 2008 disestablishments in Australia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Use Australian English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English This page was last edited on 19 September 2023, at 05:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Indigenous Council Add languages Add topic

