Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Formal language 1.2 Formal grammar 1.3 Formal systems 1.4 Interpretations 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Formal proof 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Português Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Establishment of a theorem using inference from the axioms In logic and mathematics , a formal proof or derivation is a finite sequence of sentences (known as well-formed formulas when relating to formal language ), each of which is an axiom , an assumption, or follows from the preceding sentences in the sequence, according to the rule of inference . It differs from a natural language argument in that it is rigorous, unambiguous and mechanically verifiable.

[ 1 ] If the set of assumptions is empty, then the last sentence in a formal proof is called a theorem of the formal system . The notion of theorem is generally effective , but there may be no method by which we can reliably find proof of a given sentence or determine that none exists. The concepts of Fitch-style proof , sequent calculus and natural deduction are generalizations of the concept of proof.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The theorem is a syntactic consequence of all the well-formed formulas preceding it in the proof. For a well-formed formula to qualify as part of a proof, it must be the result of applying a rule of the deductive apparatus (of some formal system) to the previous well-formed formulas in the proof sequence.

Formal proofs often are constructed with the help of computers in interactive theorem proving (e.g., through the use of proof checker and automated theorem prover ).

[ 4 ] Significantly, these proofs can be checked automatically, also by computer. Checking formal proofs is usually simple, while the problem of finding proofs (automated theorem proving) is usually computationally intractable and/or only semi-decidable , depending upon the formal system in use.

Background [ edit ] Formal language [ edit ] Main article: Formal language A formal language is a set of finite sequences of symbols . Such a language can be defined without reference to any meanings of any of its expressions; it can exist before any interpretation is assigned to it – that is, before it has any meaning. Formal proofs are expressed in some formal languages.

Formal grammar [ edit ] Main articles: Formal grammar and Formation rule A formal grammar (also called formation rules ) is a precise description of the well-formed formulas of a formal language. It is synonymous with the set of strings over the alphabet of the formal language which constitute well formed formulas. However, it does not describe their semantics (i.e. what they mean).

Formal systems [ edit ] Main article: Formal system A formal system (also called a logical calculus , or a logical system ) consists of a formal language together with a deductive apparatus (also called a deductive system ). The deductive apparatus may consist of a set of transformation rules (also called inference rules ) or a set of axioms , or have both. A formal system is used to derive one expression from one or more other expressions.

Interpretations [ edit ] Main articles: Formal semantics (logic) and Interpretation (logic) An interpretation of a formal system is the assignment of meanings to the symbols, and truth values to the sentences of a formal system. The study of interpretations is called formal semantics .

Giving an interpretation is synonymous with constructing a model .

See also [ edit ] Axiomatic system Formal verification Mathematical proof Proof assistant Proof calculus Proof theory Proof (truth) De Bruijn factor References [ edit ] ^ Kassios, Yannis (February 20, 2009).

"Formal Proof" (PDF) .

cs.utoronto.ca . Retrieved 2019-12-12 .

^ The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, deduction ^ Barwise, Jon; Etchemendy, John Etchemendy (1999).

Language, Proof and Logic (1st ed.). Seven Bridges Press and CSLI.

^ Harrison, John (December 2008).

"Formal Proof—Theory and Practice" (PDF) .

ams.org . Retrieved 2019-12-12 .

External links [ edit ] "A Special Issue on Formal Proof" .

Notices of the American Mathematical Society . December 2008.

2πix.com: Logic Part of a series of articles covering mathematics and logic.

Archive of Formal Proofs Mizar Home Page Pr∞fWiki, Definition:Proof System/Formal Proof v t e ‌ Logical truth ⊤ Functional: Truth value Truth function ⊨ Tautology Formal: Theory Formal proof Theorem Negation ⊥ False Contradiction Inconsistency v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zj8pd
Cached time: 20250812021844
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.328 seconds
Real time usage: 0.450 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 895/1000000
Revision size: 5324/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77466/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1161/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 36010/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.204/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5233609/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  355.488      1 -total
 36.12%  128.405      5 Template:Navbox
 29.70%  105.593      1 Template:Reflist
 25.53%   90.740      3 Template:Cite_web
 22.47%   79.878      1 Template:Logical_truth
 18.91%   67.223      1 Template:Short_description
 10.25%   36.443      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
 10.24%   36.415      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.41%   33.445      4 Template:Main
  6.98%   24.802      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1197184:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021844 and revision id 1237317557. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formal_proof&oldid=1237317557 " Categories : Formal languages Proof theory Formal systems Syntax (logic) Logical truth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2024, at 05:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Formal proof 9 languages Add topic

