Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Awards and honors 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Arthur Lester Benton 5 languages العربية Français Italiano مصرى Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American neuropsychologist and professor This article does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Arthur Lester Benton" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Arthur Lester Benton Born ( 1909-10-16 ) October 16, 1909 New York City Died December 27, 2006 (2006-12-27) (aged 97) Glenview, Cook County, Illinois Relatives James Bernstein Arthur Lester Benton (October 16, 1909 – December 27, 2006) was a neuropsychologist and Emeritus Professor of Neurology and Psychology at the University of Iowa .

Biography [ edit ] He received his A.B. from Oberlin College in 1931, his A.M. from Oberlin College in 1933 and his Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1935. He acquired his training as a psychologist at the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic of New York Hospital.  Early in 1941, Benton volunteered for service in the U.S. Navy and was commissioned as a lieutenant in the medical department.  His active duty lasted until 1945, followed by many years of service in the U.S. Navy Reserve, retiring at the rank of captain.  In 1946 Benton accepted an appointment as associate professor of Psychology at the University of Louisville.  In 1948, he moved to the University of Iowa as professor and director of graduate training in clinical psychology.  In 1958 he became professor of psychology and neurology, retiring in 1978, at which time the Benton Laboratory of Neuropsychology in the Division of Behavioral Neurology was dedicated.  At Iowa he supervised 46 doctoral dissertations and 24 master's theses.  He was the author of numerous books and the creator of a number of neuropsychological testing instruments, including the Benton Visual Retention Test (BVRT).

He was the husband of the late Professor Rita Benton, Professor of Musicology at the University of Iowa, and father of Raymond Stetson Benton, Abigail Benton Sivan, and Daniel Joseph Benton.

Awards and honors [ edit ] Distinguished Professional Contribution Award from the American Psychological Association (1978) Outstanding Scientific Contribution of the International Neuropsychological Society (1981) Samuel Torrey Orton Award of the Orton Dyslexia Society (1982) Distinguished Service and Outstanding Contribution Award of the American Board of Professional Psychology (1985) First speaker in an annual series of lectures initiated by the New York Neuropsychology Group and the Psychology Section of the New York Academy of Sciences , featuring important figures in the development of neuropsychology, subsequently named The Arthur L. Benton Lecture in his honor.(1986) Distinguished Clinical Neuropsychological Award of the National Academy of Neuropsychology (1989) Gold Medal Award for Life Achievement in the Application of Psychology from the American Psychological Foundation, for which the citation reads: "For lifetime contributions that include pioneering clinical studies of brain-behavior relations. He introduced novel and objective psychological assessment techniques that expanded our understanding of the difficulties manifested by neurologically compromised patients. He broadened the applications of psychology and in the process opened up a new field of study and practice, clinical neuropsychology." (1992) See also [ edit ] Judgment of Line Orientation References [ edit ] v t e Neuropsychology Topics Brain–computer interface Brain regions Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Human brain Misconceptions Neuroanatomy Neurophysiology Phrenology Traumatic brain injury Brain functions Arousal Attention Consciousness Decision making Executive functions Learning Memory Motor coordination Natural language Perception Planning Problem solving Thought People Arthur Lester Benton David Bohm António Damásio Phineas Gage Norman Geschwind Elkhonon Goldberg Kurt Goldstein Donald O. Hebb Kenneth Heilman Edith Kaplan Muriel Lezak Benjamin Libet Rodolfo Llinás Alexander Luria Brenda Milner Karl H. Pribram Oliver Sacks Roger Wolcott Sperry H. M.

K. C.

Tests Bender-Gestalt Test Benton Visual Retention Test Clinical Dementia Rating Continuous Performance Task Glasgow Coma Scale Hayling and Brixton tests Johari window Lexical decision task Mini–mental state examination Stroop effect Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wisconsin card sorting Category Commons Philosophy portal Psychology portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Israel Finland Catalonia Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arthur_Lester_Benton&oldid=1305258815 " Categories : 1909 births 2006 deaths Deaths from emphysema Respiratory disease deaths in Illinois American neurologists 20th-century American psychologists Oberlin College alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking sources from August 2025 All articles lacking sources Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 00:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arthur Lester Benton 5 languages Add topic

