Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Current hypothetical scenario 2 Current research 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Galactic corona 11 languages العربية Català Français Latina 日本語 Română Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hot, ionised, gaseous component of a galactic halo This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The terms galactic corona and gaseous corona have been used in the first decade of the 21st century to describe a hot, ionised , gaseous component in the galactic halo of the Milky Way . A similar body of very hot and tenuous gas in the halo of any spiral galaxy may also be described by these terms.

Current hypothetical scenario [ edit ] The hypothetical source of the galactic halo of coronal gas may be the cumulative output of many “galactic fountains” in the galactic disc ejecting hot gas.

The hypothesis is that a single supernova and then its supernova remnant both produce hot ionized gas that supplies an individual “galactic fountain”. The expelled material forms a giant bubble of high-pressure, low density, hot gas in the denser, cooler gas and dust of the galactic disc . At least some of those bubbles extend high or low enough, vertically, to pierce through the denser disk, and form “chimneys” which exhaust the hot gas into the halo, analogous to a terrestrial geyser spewing out water and steam that is much hotter and much less dense than the surrounding earth, heated by a source hidden deep below.

As the expelled gas in the galactic corona cools, it falls back into the galactic disc , guided by the disc's own gravitational attraction, enriching the gas and dust in the disc with the heavy elements (loosely termed “metals” by astronomers) which were produced in supernova precursors, and during supernova explosions.

Current research [ edit ] Galactic coronas have been and are currently being studied extensively, in the hope of gaining a further understanding of galaxy formation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] However, considering how galaxies differ in shape and size, no particular theory has been able to adequately explain how all galactic coronas are formed and maintained.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Galaxy formation and evolution – Subfield of cosmology Galactic coordinate system – Celestial coordinate system in spherical coordinates, with the Sun as its center Galactic bulge – Tightly packed group of stars within a larger formation Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Disc galaxy – Type of galactic form Spiral arm – Spiral-shaped regions of enhanced brightness within the galactic disc in spiral galaxies Galactic halo – Spherical component of a galaxy Galactic spheroid – Class of galaxy that has spiral structures extending from their cores Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ Pedersen, K.; et al. (X-ray: NASA / CXC / U. Copenhagen; optical: Palomar DSS) (2006).

Detection of hot halo gets theory out of hot water . Chandra Space Telescope (composite optical & X-ray image with expository caption). NGC 5746. Harvard University . Retrieved 19 December 2020 .

^ Williams, Rik J.; Mathur, Smita & Nicastro, Fabrizio (2005). "Galactic corona or Local Group intergalactic medium?".

arXiv : astro-ph/0511621 .

^ Hille, Karl (22 September 2017).

"Hubble's cool galaxy with a hot corona" .

NASA.gov . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Bonnell, Jerry (1995).

"The galactic corona" .

Richter, Philipp (2003). "Absorption line studies in the halo".

How does the Galaxy Work?

. Astrophysics and Space Science Library. Vol. 315. pp.

129– 135.

arXiv : astro-ph/0309693 .

doi : 10.1007/1-4020-2620-X_22 .

ISBN 1-4020-2619-6 .

S2CID 14742733 .

Fox, Andrew J.; et al. (2005). "Multi-phase high-velocity clouds toward HE 0226-4110 and PG 0953+414".

Astrophys. J .

630 (1): 332– 354.

arXiv : astro-ph/0505299 .

Bibcode : 2005ApJ...630..332F .

doi : 10.1086/431915 .

S2CID 2545271 .

v t e Galaxies Morphology Disc Lenticular barred unbarred Spiral anemic barred flocculent grand design intermediate Magellanic unbarred Dwarf galaxy elliptical irregular spheroidal spiral Elliptical galaxy cD Irregular barred Peculiar Ring Polar Structure Active galactic nucleus Bar Bulge Central massive object Galactic Center Dark matter halo Disc Disc galaxy Halo corona Galactic plane Galactic ridge Interstellar medium Protogalaxy Galaxy filament Spiral arm Supermassive black hole Ultramassive Active nuclei Blazar BL Lacertae object LINER Little Red Dots Markarian Quasar Radio X-shaped DRAGN Relativistic jet Seyfert Energetic galaxies Lyman-alpha emitter Lyman-break Luminous infrared ULIRG HLIRG ELIRG Starburst blue compact dwarf blueberry pea faint blue Luminous infrared galaxy Hot dust-obscured Green bean galaxy Hanny's Voorwerp Wolf-Rayet galaxy Low activity Low surface brightness Ultra diffuse Dark galaxy Red nugget Blue Nugget Dead disk Interaction Binary galaxy Field Galactic tide Groups and clusters group cluster Brightest cluster galaxy fossil group Interacting merger collision cannibalism Jellyfish Satellite Stellar stream Superclusters Walls Voids and supervoids void galaxy Lists Galaxies Galaxies named after people Largest Nearest Polar-ring Ring Spiral Groups and clusters Large quasar groups Quasars List of the most distant astronomical objects Starburst galaxies Superclusters Voids Related Extragalactic astronomy Galactic astronomy Galactic coordinate system Galactic habitable zone Galactic magnetic fields Galactic orientation Galactic quadrant Galaxy color–magnitude diagram Galaxy formation and evolution Galaxy rotation curve Gravitational lens Gravitational microlensing Illustris project Intergalactic dust Intergalactic stars Intergalactic travel Population III stars Galaxy X (galaxy) Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Galactic_corona&oldid=1283535795 " Categories : Galactic astronomy Extragalactic astronomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2020 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 03:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Galactic corona 11 languages Add topic

