Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Birth, travels and literary output 2 al-Masʿudi's intellectual environment 3 Travels in lands beyond Islam 4 al-Masʿudi and the Abbasids 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Reception 6 Religious influences 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents al-Masudi 62 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu سنڌي Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 10th-century Arab historian and geographer "Masudi" redirects here. For other uses, see Masudi (disambiguation) .

al-Masʿūdī المسعودي Roof figure of al-Mas'udi, Naturhistorisches Museum , Vienna Born 282–283 AH (896 AD) Baghdad , Abbasid Caliphate Died Jumada al-Thani , 345 AH (September, 956 AD) Cairo , Egypt Academic background Influences al-Shafi'i [ 1 ] Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age ( Middle Abbasid era ) Main interests History , geography , jurisprudence [ 2 ] Notable works Murūj al-Dhahab wa-Ma'ādin al-Jawhar ("The Meadows of Gold and the Mines of Gems") At-Tanbih wa al-'Ashraf ("Admonition and Revision") al-Masʿūdī (full name Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī al-Masʿūdī , أبو الحسن علي بن الحسين بن علي المسعودي ), c.

896 –956, was a historian , geographer and traveler . He is sometimes referred to as the " Herodotus of the Arabs".

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] A polymath and prolific author of over twenty works on theology, history (Islamic and universal), geography , natural science and philosophy , his celebrated magnum opus The Meadows of Gold ( Murūj al-Dhahab ) combines  universal history with scientific geography , social commentary and biography.

[ 6 ] Birth, travels and literary output [ edit ] Further information: The Meadows of Gold Apart from what al-Mas'udi writes of himself little is known.  Born in Baghdad , he was descended from Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud , a companion of Islamic prophet Muhammad . It is believed that he was a member of Banu Hudhayl tribe of Arabs.

[ citation needed ] Al-Masudi mentions a number of scholar associates he encountered during his journeys: Al-Mas'udi's travels actually occupied most of his life from at least 903/915 CE to very near the end of his life. His journeys took him to most of the Persian provinces, Armenia , Georgia and other region of the Caspian Sea ; as well as to Arabia , Syria and Egypt. He also travelled to the Indus Valley , and other parts of India, especially the western coast; and he voyaged more than once to East Africa. He also sailed on the Indian Ocean, the Red Sea, the Mediterranean and the Caspian.

[ 7 ] Al-Masʿudi may have reached Sri Lanka and China although he is known to have met Abu Zayd al-Sirafi on the coast of the Persian Gulf and received information on China from him.

[ 8 ] He presumably gathered information on Byzantium from the Byzantine admiral, Leo of Tripoli , a convert-to-Islam whom he met in Syria where his last years were divided between there and Egypt . In Egypt he found a copy of a Frankish king list from Clovis to Louis IV that had been written by an Andalusian bishop.

Little is known of his means and funding of his extensive travels within and beyond the lands of Islam, and it has been speculated that like many travelers he was involved in trade.

[ 8 ] Towards the end of The Meadows of Gold, al-Masʿudi wrote: The information we have gathered here is the fruit of long years of research and painful efforts of our voyages and journeys across the East and the West, and of the various nations that lie beyond the regions of Islam . The author of this work compares himself to a man who, having found pearls of all kinds and colours, gathers them together into a necklace and makes them into an ornament that its possessor guards with great care. My aim has been to trace the lands and the histories of many peoples, and I have no other.

[ 9 ] We know that al-Masʿudi wrote a revised edition of Murūj al-dhahab in 956 CE; [ 10 ] however, only a draft version from 947 is extant.  Al-Masʿudi in his Tanbīh states that the revised edition of Murūj al-dhahab contained 365 chapters.

[ 8 ] al-Masʿudi's intellectual environment [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Al-Masʿudi lived at a time when books were available and cheap. Major cities like Baghdad had large public libraries and many individuals, such as as-Suli, a friend of Mas‘udi's, had private libraries, often containing thousands of volumes. Early in the Abbasid era the art of papermaking was brought to the Islamic world by Chinese prisoners after the battle of Talas and most large towns and cities had paper mills. Available cheap writing material contributed to the lively intellectual life.

[ 11 ] Al-Mas'udi often refers readers to his other books, assuming their availability. The high literacy and vigor of the Islamic world with its rich cultural heritage of Greek philosophy, Persian literature, Indian mathematics, contrasted with that of Europe, when the author of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle was writing. Islamic Abbasid society of al-Masʿudi's world manifested a knowledge seeking, perceptive analytical attitude and scholarly-minded people associated naturally in this highly civilized atmosphere.

[ 12 ] Al-Mas'udi was a pupil, or junior colleague, of prominent intellectuals, including the philologists al-Zajjaj, Ibn Duraid , Niftawayh and ibn Anbari. He was acquainted with famous poets, including Kashajim, whom he probably met in Aleppo . He was well read in philosophy, the works of al-Kindi and al-Razi , the Aristotelian thought of al-Farabi and the Platonic writings.  It is probable that al-Masʿudi met al-Razi and al-Farabi, but only a meeting with al-Farabi's pupil Yahya ibn Adi, of whom he spoke highly, is recorded.
He was familiar with the medical work of Galen , with Ptolemaic astronomy , with the geographical work of Marinus and with the studies of Islamic geographers and astronomers.

In The Meadows of Gold, al-Mas'udi wrote his famous condemnation of revelation over reason: The sciences were financially supported, honoured everywhere, universally pursued; they were like tall edifices supported by strong foundations. Then the Christian religion appeared in Byzantium and the centres of learning were eliminated, their vestiges effaced and the edifice of Greek learning was obliterated. Everything the ancient Greeks had brought to light vanished, and the discoveries of the ancients were altered beyond recognition.

He mentions meeting influential jurists and cites the work of others and indicates training in jurisprudence. According to al-Subki , al-Mas'udi was a student of Ibn Surayj, the leading scholar of the Shafi'ite school. Al-Subki claimed he found al-Mas'udi's notes of Ibn Surayj's lectures. Al-Mas'udi also met Shafi'ites during his stay in Egypt. He met Zahirites in Baghdad and Aleppo such as Ibn Jabir and Niftawayh; modern scholarship leans toward the view that al-Mas'udi was an adherent of the latter school.

[ 13 ] Al-Masʿudi knew leading Mu'tazilites , including al-Jubba, al-Nawbakhti, ibn Abdak al-Jurjani and Abu'l-Qasim al-Balkhi al-Ka'bi. He was also well acquainted with previous Mu'tazilite literature. His reasoning, his phraseology, and his expressed high esteem for Mu'tazilities could suggest that he was one of their number. However, Shboul points out that his extant works do not specifically state that he was.

Al-Mas'udi included the history of the ancient civilizations that had occupied the land upon which Islam later spread. He mentions the Assyrians , Babylonians , Egyptians and Persians among others. He is also the only Arab historian to refer (albeit indirectly) to the kingdom of Urartu , when he speaks about the wars between the Assyrians (led by the legendary Queen Semiramis ) and Armenians (led by Ara the Beautiful ).

[ 14 ] Al-Masʿudi was aware of the influence of ancient Babylon on Persia. He had access to a wealth of translations by scholars such as ibn al-Muqaffa from Middle Persian into Arabic. In his travels, he also personally consulted Persian scholars and Zoroastrian priests. He thus had access to much material, factual and mythical. Like other Arabic historians, he was unclear on the Achaemenid dynasty , though he knew of Kurush ( Cyrus the Great ). He was much clearer on the more recent dynasties and his estimation of the time between Alexander the Great and Ardashir is much more accurately depicted than it is in al-Tabari .

His wide-ranging interests included the Greeks and the Romans. Again, like other Arabic historians, he was unclear on Greece before the Macedonian dynasty that produced Alexander the Great . He is aware that there were kings before this, but is unclear on their names and reigns. He also seems unfamiliar with such additional aspects of Greek political life as Athenian democratic institutions. The same holds for Rome prior to Caesar . However, he is the earliest extant Arabic author to mention the Roman founding myth of Romulus and Remus .

In al-Masʿudi's view the greatest contribution of the Greeks was philosophy. He was aware of the progression of Greek philosophy from the pre-Socratics onward.

He also was keenly interested in the earlier events of the Arabian peninsula. He recognized that Arabia had a long and rich history. He also was well-aware of the mixture of interesting facts in pre-Islamic times, in myths and controversial details from competing tribes and even referred to the similarity between some of this material and the legendary and story telling contributions of some Middle Persian and Indian books to the Thousand and One Nights .

Travels in lands beyond Islam [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Al-Mas'udi's atlas of the world (reversed on the North–South axis) also includes a continent west of the Old World Ahmad Shboul notes that al-Mas'udi is distinguished above his contemporaries for the extent of his interest in and coverage of the non-Islamic lands and peoples of his day. Other authors, even Christians writing in Arabic in the Caliphate, had less to say about the Byzantine Empire than al-Mas'udi. He also described the geography of many lands beyond the Abbasid Caliphate , as well as the customs and religious beliefs of many peoples.

His normal inquiries of travelers and extensive reading of previous writers were supplemented in the case of India with his personal experiences in the western part of the subcontinent. He demonstrates a deep understanding of historical change, tracing current conditions to the unfolding of events over generations and centuries. He perceived the significance of interstate relations and of the interaction of Muslims and Hindus in the various states of the subcontinent.

He described previous rulers in China , underlined the importance of the revolt by Huang Chao in the late Tang dynasty , and mentioned, though less detailed than for India, Chinese beliefs. His brief portrayal of Southeast Asia stands out for its degree of accuracy and clarity. He surveyed the vast areas inhabited by Turkic peoples , commenting on what had been the extensive authority of the Khaqan , though this was no longer the case by al-Mas'udi's time. He conveyed the great diversity of Turkic peoples, including the distinction between sedentary and nomadic Turks. He spoke of the significance of the Khazars and provided much fresh material on them.

In the year 933 Al-Masudi mentions Muslim sailors, who call the Comoros islands: "The Perfume Islands".

[ 15 ] His account of the Rus is an important early source for the study of Russian history and the history of Ukraine . Again, while he may have read such earlier Arabic authors as Ibn Khordadbeh , Ibn al-Faqih , ibn Rustah and Ibn Fadlan , al-Mas'udi presented most of his material based on his personal observations and contacts made while traveling. He informed the Arabic reader that the Rus were more than just a few traders. They were a diverse and varied collection of peoples. He noted their independent attitude, the absence of a strong central authority among them and their paganism . He was very well informed on Rus trade with the Byzantines and on the competence of the Rus in sailing merchant vessels and warships. He was aware that the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea are two separate bodies of water.

Al-Masʿudi was also very well informed about Byzantine affairs , even internal political events and the unfolding of palace coups. He recorded the effect of the westward migration of various tribes upon the Byzantines, especially the invading Bulgars . He spoke of Byzantine relations with western Europe. And, of course, he was attentively interested in Byzantine-Islamic relations.

One example of al-Masʿudi's influence on Muslim knowledge of the Byzantine world is that the use of the name Istanbul (in place of Constantinople ) can be traced to his writings during the year 947, centuries before the eventual Ottoman use of this term. He writes that the Greeks (i.e. the Byzantines of the tenth century) call it "the City" ( bulin in the Arabic script , which lacks the letter p: so Greek polin ); "and when they wish to express that it is the capital of the Empire because of its greatness they say Istan Bulin. They do not call it Constantinople. It is only Arabs who so designate it".

[ 16 ] He has some knowledge of other peoples of eastern and western Europe, even far away Britain and Anglo-Saxon England . He names it, though he is sketchy about it. He knows Paris as the Frankish capital. He obtained a copy of a list of Frankish rulers from Clovis to his own time.

[ citation needed ] He makes several references to people interpreted as Vikings , described by him as Majus, they came to Al-Andalus from the North.

[ 17 ] Al-Masʿudi's global interest included Africa. He was well aware of peoples in the eastern portion of the continent (mentioning interesting details of the Zanj , for example). He mentioned that one of the most dangerous routes to travel is to the land of the Zanj, "I have sailed on many seas, but I do not know of one more dangerous than that of Zanj", also saying that several captains that he had sailed with drowned.

[ 18 ] He knows less of West Africa , though he names such contemporary states as Zagawa , Kawkaw and Ghana . He described the relations of African states with each other and with Islam. He provided material on the cultures and beliefs of non-Islamic Africans.

In general his surviving works reveal an intensely curious mind, a universalist eagerly acquiring as extensive a background of the entire world as possible.

Al-Masʿudi describes Sistan, Iran, in 947 AD: [ 19 ] " ... is the land of winds and sand. There the wind drives mills and raises water from the streams, whereby gardens are irrigated. There is in the world, and God alone knows it, no place where more frequent use is made of the winds" al-Masʿudi and the Abbasids [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lunde and Stone have provided the English reader with a fluent translation of some three-quarters of al-Masʿudi's material on the Abbasids from the Murūj al-dhahab . This is in the form of more than two hundred passages, many of these containing amusing and informative anecdotes. The very first one recounts the meeting of al-Mansur and a blind poet unaware of the identity of his distinguished interlocutor. The poet on two separate occasions recites praise poems for the defeated Umayyads to the Abbasid caliph; al-Mansur good naturedly rewards him.

There is the tale (p. 28 ff.) of the arrow that landed at al-Mansur's feet with verses inscribed in each of the three feathers and along the shaft causing him to investigate the unjust imprisonment of a distinguished notable from Hamadan. There is the story of the singer Harun al-Rashid asks to keep singing until the caliph falls asleep. Then a handsome young man arrives, snatches the lute from the singer's hand and shows him how it really should be done. On awakening Harun is told of this and suggests his singer had a supernatural visitation. Al-Mas'udi quotes the lines (five in English) of this remarkable song.

These anecdotes provide glimpses of other aspects of these prominent people, sharing, actually, greater realization of their humanity and the human concerns of their officials and ordinary subjects. One of the more interesting passages is the account of the symposium held at the home of Harun al-Rashid 's famous vizier Yahya the Barmakid on the topic of love. A dozen leading thinkers provide their definition of love and then a thirteenth, a Magian judge, speaks at greater length on that theme.

Works [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kitāb al-Tanbīh wa’l-Ishrāf ( كتاب التنبیه والأشراف ), ‘Book of Admonition and Revision’; an abridged Murūj al-Dhahab , about one-fifth its length, containing new material on the Byzantines, that al-Mas'udi wrote shortly before his death.

Les Prairies d’or (Arabic text with French translation [ 20 ] of Kitāb Murūj al-Dhahab wa-Ma‘ādin al-Jawhar ). Translated by Barbier de Meynard and Pavet de Courteille . 9 vols.  Paris, Societe Asiatique , Imprimerie impériale, 1861–69; Imprimerie nationale, 1871–77. Revised Arabic edition by Charles Pellat 5 vols. Universite Libanaise, Beirut, 1966–74. Incomplete revised French edition by Pellat. Lunde and Stone's English edition of Abbasid material, 1989.

Reception [ edit ] Ernest Renan compared al-Masʿudi to the second century A.D. Greek geographer Pausanias , while others compared him to the Roman writer Pliny the Elder . Even before al-Masʿudi's work was available in a European languages, orientalists had compared him to Herodotus , the ancient Greek historian called "The Father of History." Religious influences [ edit ] Some early commentators on al-Masudi indicate the influence of religious antagonisms.  The Sunni scholar Ibn Hajar wrote: "[al-Mas'udi's] books are imprecise because he was a Shi‘a, a Muʿtazili .".

[ 21 ] Adh-Dhahabi believed he espoused heretical Mu'tazili doctrine.

[ 22 ] However, according to Al-Subki al-Mas'udi was a student of ibn Surayj, the leading scholar of the Shafi'ite school. Al-Subki claimed he found al-Mas'udi's notes of ibn Surayj's lectures. Al-Mas'udi also met Shafi'ites during his stay in Egypt. He also met Zahirites in Baghdad and Aleppo such as Ibn Jabir and Niftawayh; modern scholarship leans toward the view that al-Mas'udi was an adherent of the latter school.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] List of pre-modern Arab scientists and scholars Yahya ibn Umar Abbasid Caliphate Notes [ edit ] ^ According to Al-Subki al-Mas'udi was a student of ibn Surayj, the leading scholar of the Shafi'ite school. Al-Subki claimed he found al-Mas'udi's notes of ibn Surayj's lectures.

^ He mentions meeting a number of influential jurists and the work of others and indicates training in jurisprudence.

^ "Al Masudi" .

History of Islam .

Archived from the original on 2022-04-12 . Retrieved 2014-09-26 .

^ Ter-Ghevondyan, Aram N.

(1965).

Արաբական Ամիրայությունները Բագրատունյաց Հայաստանում (The Arab Emirates in Bagratuni Armenia) (in Armenian). Yerevan, Armenian SSR: Armenian Academy of Sciences . p. 15.

^ "Al-Masʿūdī" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2022-04-09 . Retrieved 2021-06-06 .

^ John L. Esposito (ed.), The Oxford Dictionary of Islam , Oxford University Press (2004), p. 195 ^ Shboul, Ahmad A. M.

Al-Mas'udi and His World . London: Ithaca Press, 1979, pp. 3–4.

^ a b c [Mas‘udi.

The Meadows of Gold, The Abbasids , transl. Paul Lunde and Caroline Stone, Kegan Paul. London and New York, 1989, p. 11.

^ "Saudi Aramco World : The Model of the Historians" .

saudiaramcoworld.com . Archived from the original on 2010-01-03 . Retrieved 2011-08-27 .

^ Shboul.

Al-Mas'udi and His World , pp. 68–69.

^ Lunde and Stone, Masʿudi.

The Meadows of Gold, The Abbasids , p. 14.

^ Shboul.

Al-Masʿudi and His World , pp. 29ff.

^ a b Devin J. Stewart , "Muhammad b. Jarir al-Tabari's al-Bayan 'an Usul al-Ahkam and the Genre of Usul al-Fiqh in Ninth Century Baghdad," pg. 333. Taken from Abbasid Studies: Occasional Papers of the School of Abbasid Studies, Cambridge, 6–10 January 2002 , edited by James Montgomery.

Leuven : Peeters Publishers and the Department of Oriental Studies, 2004.

^ See (in Armenian) Ter-Ghevondyan, Aram N. ""Արա և Շամիրամ" առասպելի մի արձագանքը արաբ պատմիչ Մասուդի մոտ" ("An Echo of the Legend of ' Ara and Shamiram ' Found with Arab Historian Masudi").

Patma-Banasirakan Handes . No. 4 (31), 1965, pp. 249–253. With Russian abstract.

^ "Saudi Aramco World : The Islands of the Moon" .

saudiaramcoworld.com . Archived from the original on 2011-07-08 . Retrieved 2011-08-27 .

^ Companion to Historiography , ed. Michael Bentley. Chapter 1: "The Evolution of Two Asian Historiographical Traditions". Routledge Publishing. 2002.

^ Christys, Ann (2015).

Vikings in Spain . Bloomsbury. p. 23.

ISBN 9781474213752 .

^ Meredith, Martin (2014-09-11). "Chapter 9".

Fortunes of Africa: A 5,000 Year History of Wealth, Greed and Endeavour . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4711-3546-0 .

Archived from the original on 2024-01-17 . Retrieved 2023-12-26 .

^ R. J. Forbes.

Studies in ancient technology . Vol. 9. Brill, 1964.

^ For reception of the French translation in Europe see Ahmad Shboul, Al-Mas'udi and His World , p. xviii.

^ Lisan al-Mizan [258-256/4] ^ Siyar A'alam al-Nubala [Tabaqa al-'Ishroon / al-Mas'oodi] Further reading [ edit ] "Masʿūdī, Abuʾul-ḤasanʿAlī Ibn al-Ḥusayn Ibn ʿAlī al-".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 1970–1980.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

Shboul, Ahmad A. M.

Al-Mas'udi and His World , Ithaca Press, London, 1979 Mas'udi, The Meadows of Gold, The Abbasids , transl. Paul Lunde and Caroline Stone, Kegan Paul, London and New York, 1989 Haywood. John A.

Mas'udi, al- ." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 7 December 2006.

"Masūdī, al-." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica 2007 Ultimate Reference Suite. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2006.

Tolan, John, Giles Veinstein, and Henry Laurens, Europe and the Islamic World: A History Princeton University Press. 2013.

ISBN 978-0-691-14705-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Al-Masudi .

Muruj al-dhahab at Medieval Sourcebook: The Book of Golden Meadows , c.940 Meadows of Gold and Mines of Gems ; translation of Muruj al-dhahab by Aloys Sprenger , London, 1841.

Vol.1 (only volume published) Prairies d'or , Arabic edition and French translation of Muruj al-dhahab by Barbier de Meynard and Pavet de Courteille , Paris 1861–77; Vol.1/9 , Vol.2/9 , Vol.3/9 , Vol.4/9 , Vol.5/9 , Vol.6/9 , Vol.7/9 , Vol.8/9 , Vol.9/9 Al-Masūdī (1870), Goeje , M. J. de (ed.), "Kitāb At-Tanbīh Wa'l-Ischrāf auctore al-Masūdī" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 8 , Lugdunum Batavorum ( Leiden ): Brill v t e Muslim historians Historians 7th century Aban bin Uthman Urwah ibn Zubayr Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri 8th century Hisham ibn al-Kalbi Ibn Ishaq Al-Waqidi Abu Mikhnaf Sayf ibn Umar Al-Mada'ini Ibn Lahi'a Issa ibn Abi al-Muhajir 9th century Ibn ʽAbd al-Hakam Khalifah ibn Khayyat Ibn Hisham Ya'qubi Al-Tabari Al-Baladhuri Ibn Sa'd Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar Al-Azraqi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ibn Qutaybah Al-Mada'ini 10th century Ibn al-Nadim Ibn Duraid Ibn al-Qūṭiyya Al-Masudi Miskawayh al-Suli Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu al-Arab Abu Muhammad al-Hamdani Al-Musabbihi al-Kindi Ibn al-Saghir 11th century Arabic Ibn Faradi Ibn Hayyan Said al-Andalusi Al-Udri Al-Bakri Ibn Hazm Hilal al-Sabi' Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi Al-Quda'i Ibn Bassam Persian Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu Sa'id Gardezi 12th century Arabic Mohammed al-Baydhaq Ibn al-Jawzi Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Ibn al-Qalanisi Ibn ʽAsakir Usama ibn Munqidh Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad Ibn Hammad Al-Jawwani Ibn al-Sam'ani Persian Muhammad bin Ali Rawandi 13th century Arabic Yaqut al-Hamawi 'Abd al-Wahid al-Marrakushi Ibn Amira Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kardabūs Ibn al-Adim Ibn al-Athir Sibt ibn al-Jawzi Ibn Khallikan Al-Qifti Ibn Abi Zar Persian Ibn Bibi Muhammad Aufi Ibn Isfandiyar Minhaj-i-Siraj Ata-Malik Juvayni Rashid-al-Din Hamadani 14th century Arabic Abu'l-Fida Ibn Idhari Al-Dhahabi Ibn Battuta Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari Ibn Kathir Ibn al-Tiqtaqa Ibn al-Furat Al-Mufaddal Ibn Khaldun al-ʽAsqalani Persian Hamdallah Mustawfi Wassaf Ziauddin Barani Hafiz-i Abru 15th century Arabic al-Maqrizi Ibn Taghribirdi Al-Sakhawi Al-Suyuti Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi Persian Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi Mirkhvand Mullah Nadiri Zahir al-Din Mar'ashi Fazlallah Khunji Isfahani Idris Bitlisi Yahya bin Ahmad Sirhindi Turkish Oruç Bey Aşıkpaşazade Enveri Ibn Kemal Neshri Tursun Beg 16th century Arabic Ibn Iyas Mujir al-Din Abd al-Aziz al-Fishtali Ibn al-Qadi Mar'i al-Karmi Persian Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak Muhammad Khwandamir ʽAbd al-Qadir Badayuni Nizamuddin Ahmad Firishta Iskandar Beg Munshi Sharafkhan Bidlisi Turkish Mustafa Âlî Lûtfi Pasha Matrakçı Nasuh Sadeddin Effendi Mustafa Selaniki Taşköprüzade 17th century Arabic Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari Katib Çelebi Ibn al-Imad al-Hanbali Persian Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh Muhammad Saleh Kamboh Abd al-Fattah Fumani Mohsin Fani Turkish Ottoman Ibrahim Petchevi Solakzade Mehmed Hemdemi Kâtip Çelebi Munejjim Bashi Silahdar Findiklili Mehmed Agha Osman Aga of Temesvar Mustafa Naima Al-Hasan al-Burini Abdi Pasha Chagatai Abu al-Ghazi Bahadur Kurdish Ahmad Khani 18th century Arabic Mohammed al-Ifrani Mohammed al-Qadiri Khalil al-Muradi al-Zayyani al-Jabarti Persian Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi Abol-Hasan Golestaneh Turkish Ahmed Resmî Efendi 19th century Arabic Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Nasiri Mohammad Farid Ahmad ibn Abi Diyaf Jurji Zaydan Persian Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar Agha Ahmad Ali Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat Turkish Ottoman Ali Amiri Ahmed Cevdet Pasha Ahmed Cevad Pasha Azerbaijani Mirza Adigozal bey Ahmad bey Javanshir Karim agha Shakikhanov Kurdish Mahmud Bayazidi Mastoureh Ardalan Notable works The Meadows of Gold History of the Prophets and Kings Mu'jam al-Buldan Concise History of Humanity The Complete History Al-Bidaya wa'l-Nihaya The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Futuh al-Buldan Kitab al-I'tibar Al-Milal wa al-Nihal History of the Caliphs Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Tarikh al-Yaqubi Muqaddimah Book of Idols Rihla Concepts Isnad Islamic calendar Biographical evaluation Biographical dictionary Hadith studies Tabaqat Isra'iliyyat v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cqxvm
Cached time: 20250817050552
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.782 seconds
Real time usage: 0.960 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4702/1000000
Revision size: 27285/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 193032/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7732/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73914/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.520/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14612240/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  808.885      1 -total
 29.79%  240.985      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 19.15%  154.923      1 Template:Reflist
 18.87%  152.600     15 Template:Navbox
 13.32%  107.717      1 Template:Bulleted_list
 13.16%  106.433      1 Template:Arabic_historians
 13.06%  105.607      3 Template:Transliteration
 11.43%   92.468      3 Template:Cite_web
  8.45%   68.382      1 Template:Short_description
  5.18%   41.932      4 Template:More_footnotes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10219069:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050552 and revision id 1305429951. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Masudi&oldid=1305429951 " Categories : 890s births 956 deaths 10th-century historians from the Abbasid Caliphate 10th-century Arab people 10th-century geographers Geographers from the Abbasid Caliphate Khazar studies Writers from Baghdad Explorers of South Asia Travel writers of the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: CS1 Armenian-language sources (hy) Articles with Armenian-language sources (hy) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents al-Masudi 62 languages Add topic

