Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Academic career 1.3 Personal life 2 Philosophical work 3 Awards and honors 4 Works Toggle Works subsection 4.1 As sole author 4.2 As co-author or editor 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Patricia Churchland 25 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian-American analytic philosopher Patricia Churchland Born Patricia Smith ( 1943-07-16 ) July 16, 1943 (age 82) Oliver, British Columbia , Canada Spouse Paul Churchland Education Alma mater University of British Columbia University of Pittsburgh Somerville College, Oxford Philosophical work Era 20th- / 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Main interests Neurophilosophy Philosophy of mind Philosophy of science Medical and environmental ethics Notable ideas Neurophilosophy , Eliminative Materialism Patricia Smith Churchland (born 16 July 1943) [ 3 ] is a Canadian-American analytic philosopher [ 1 ] [ 2 ] noted for her contributions to neurophilosophy and the philosophy of mind . She is UC President's Professor of Philosophy Emerita at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD), where she has taught since 1984. She has also held an adjunct professorship at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies since 1989.

[ 4 ] She is a member of the Board of Trustees Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies of Philosophy Department, Moscow State University .

[ 5 ] In 2015, she was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences .

[ 6 ] Educated at the University of British Columbia , the University of Pittsburgh , and Somerville College, Oxford , she taught philosophy at the University of Manitoba from 1969 to 1984 and is married to the philosopher Paul Churchland .

[ 7 ] Larissa MacFarquhar , writing for The New Yorker , observed of the philosophical couple that: "Their work is so similar that they are sometimes discussed, in journals and books, as one person." [ 8 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Churchland was born Patricia Smith in Oliver, British Columbia , [ 3 ] and raised on a farm in the South Okanagan valley.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Both of her parents lacked a high-school education; her father and mother left school after grades 6 and 8 respectively.  Her mother was a nurse and her father worked in newspaper publishing in addition to running the family farm.  In spite of their limited education, Churchland has described her parents as interested in the sciences, and the worldview they instilled in her as a secular one.  She has also described her parents as eager for her to attend college, and though many farmers in their community thought this "hilarious and a grotesque waste of money", they saw to it that she did so.

[ 10 ] She took her undergraduate degree at the University of British Columbia , graduating with honors in 1965.

[ 7 ] She received a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship to study at the University of Pittsburgh , where she took an M.A.

in 1966.

[ 7 ] [ 11 ] Thereafter she studied at Somerville College, Oxford as a British Council and Canada Council Fellow, obtaining a B. Phil in 1969.

[ 7 ] Academic career [ edit ] Churchland's first academic appointment was at the University of Manitoba , where she was an assistant professor from 1969 to 1977, an associate professor from 1977 to 1982, and promoted to a full professorship in 1983.

[ 7 ] It was here that she began to make a formal study of neuroscience with the help and encouragement of Larry Jordan, a professor with a lab in the Department of Physiology there.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 12 ] From 1982 to 1983 she was a Visiting Member in Social Science at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.

[ 13 ] In 1984, she was invited to take up a professorship in the department of philosophy at UCSD , and relocated there with her husband Paul, where both have remained since.

[ 14 ] Since 1989, she has also held an adjunct professorship at the Salk Institute adjacent to UCSD's campus, where she became acquainted with Jonas Salk [ 4 ] [ 9 ] whose name the Institute bears.  Describing Salk, Churchland has said that he "liked the idea of neurophilosophy, and he gave me a tremendous amount of encouragement at a time when many other people thought that we were, frankly, out to lunch." [ 10 ] Another important supporter Churchland found at the Salk Institute was Francis Crick .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] At the Salk Institute, Churchland has worked with Terrence Sejnowski 's lab as a research collaborator.

[ 15 ] Her collaboration with Sejnowski culminated in a book, The Computational Brain (MIT Press, 1993), co-authored with Sejnowski.  Churchland was named the UC President's Professor of Philosophy in 1999, and served as Chair of the Philosophy Department at UCSD from 2000-2007.

[ 7 ] She attended and was a speaker at the secularist Beyond Belief symposia in 2006, 2007, and 2008.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Personal life [ edit ] Churchland first met her husband, the philosopher Paul Churchland , while they were both enrolled in a class on Plato at the University of Pittsburgh , [ 10 ] and they were married after she completed her B.Phil at Somerville College, Oxford .

[ 9 ] Their children are Mark M. Churchland (born 1972) and Anne K. Churchland (born 1974), both of whom are neuroscientists.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Churchland is considered an atheist , [ 21 ] but she identified herself as pantheist in a 2012 interview.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Churchland is broadly allied to a view of philosophy as a kind of 'proto-science' - asking challenging but largely empirical questions. She advocates the scientific endeavour, and has dismissed significant swathes of professional philosophy as obsessed with what she regards as unnecessary.

[ 24 ] Churchland's own work has focused on the interface between neuroscience and philosophy. According to her, philosophers are increasingly realizing that to understand the mind one must understand the brain. She applies findings from neuroscience to address traditional philosophical questions about knowledge, free will, consciousness and ethics. She is associated with a school of thought called eliminative materialism , which argues that common sense, immediately intuitive, or " folk psychological " concepts such as thought , free will , and consciousness will likely need to be revised in a physically reductionistic way as neuroscientists discover more about the nature of brain function.

[ 25 ] 2014 saw a brief exchange of views on these topics with Colin McGinn in the pages of the New York Review Of Books .

[ 26 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] MacArthur Fellowship , 1991 [ 7 ] [ 27 ] Humanist Laureate, International Academy of Humanism , 1993 [ 28 ] Honorary Doctor of Letters, University of Virginia , 1996 [ 7 ] Honorary Doctor of Law, University of Alberta , 2007 [ 9 ] Distinguished Cognitive Scientist, UC, Merced Cognitive and Information Sciences program, 2011 [ 29 ] Fellow of the Cognitive Science Society , 2011 [ 30 ] Works [ edit ] As sole author [ edit ] Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of the Mind-Brain . (1986) Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press .

"The Hornswoggle Problem". (1996) San Diego, La Jolla, CA.

Journal of Consciousness Studie s.

Brain-Wise: Studies in Neurophilosophy . (2002) Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

Braintrust: What Neuroscience Tells Us about Morality . (2011) Princeton University Press .  eBook ISBN 9781400838080 [ 31 ] Touching A Nerve: The Self As Brain .

(2013) W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393058321 Conscience: The Origins of Moral Intuition . (2019) W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-1324000891 As co-author or editor [ edit ] The Computational Brain . (1992) Patricia S. Churchland and T. J. Sejnowski. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

Neurophilosophy and Alzheimer's Disease . (1992) Edited by Y. Christen and Patricia S. Churchland. Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

The Mind-Brain Continuum (1996). Edited by R.R. Llinás and Patricia S. Churchland: The MIT Press.

On the Contrary: Critical Essays 1987-1997 . (1998). Paul M. Churchland and Patricia S. Churchland. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy Eliminative materialism Neurophilosophy List of American philosophers Materialism Monism Philosophy of mind Reductionism Scientism References [ edit ] ^ a b Dummett, Michael (2010).

The Nature and Future of Philosophy . Columbia University Press. p. 33.

A small number of analytic philosophers–notoriously the two Churchlands–treat the absence of any detailed correspondence [between specific mental occurrences and particular events in the brain] as an objection not to the thesis of mind/brain identity, but to reliance on our familiar mental constructs.

^ a b Smith, Quentin (1997).

Ethical and Religious Thought in Analytic Philosophy of Language . Yale University Press. pp.

93– 94.

[The postpositivist physicalism of philosophers such as the Churchlands and linguistic essentialism were the] "...two main movements of analytic philosophy of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s; no other analytic movement even compares with them in influence and acceptance." ^ a b Cavanna, Andrea E. (2014-09-30).

Consciousness: Theories in Neuroscience and Philosophy of Mind . Nani, Andrea. Heidelberg. p. 9.

ISBN 9783662440889 .

OCLC 892914346 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b "Salk Institute: Adjunct Faculty" . Salk Institute . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ "People" . Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies of Philosophy Department . Retrieved 15 September 2014 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "2015 Fellows and Their Affiliations at the Time of the Election" (PDF) .

American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h Churchland, Patricia.

"Curriculum Vitae" . Archived from the original on 14 August 2011 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ Larissa MacFarquhar (February 12, 2007).

"TWO HEADS A marriage devoted to the mind-body problem" .

NewYorker.com . Retrieved May 14, 2017 .

^ a b c d e f "University of Alberta - Fall Convocation 2007" . University of Alberta. 22 November 2007. Archived from the original (web page) on 28 November 2011 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ a b c d e f "From the Engine of Reason to the Seat of the Soul: A Brain-Wise Conversation" (video) .

The Science Studio .

The Science Network . 26 June 2006 . Retrieved 30 August 2011 .

^ "Fellows Of Note - Major Awards" . Princeton, NJ: The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation . Archived from the original on 28 September 2011 . Retrieved 30 August 2011 .

^ "Faculty of Medicine - Physiology" . University of Manitoba - Department of Physiology. Archived from the original (web page) on 3 April 2012 . Retrieved 30 August 2011 .

^ "Social Science Only" .

A Community of Scholars . Princeton, NJ: Institute for Advanced Study. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 30 August 2011 .

Churchland, Patricia Smith [V] SocSci 1982-83 ^ Churchland, Paul M. (19 January 2007).

"Curriculum Vitae" (PDF) . UCSD Philosophy Department . Retrieved 30 August 2011 .

^ "CNL - People" (web page) .

Computational Neurobiology Laboratory . The Salk Institute . Retrieved 30 August 2011 .

^ "Beyond Belief: Science, Religion, Reason and Survival" (web page and video) . The Science Network. 5–7 November 2006 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ "Beyond Belief: Enlightenment 2.0" (web page and video) . The Science Network. 31 October – 2 November 2007.

^ "Beyond Belief: Candles in the Dark" (web page and video) . The Science Network. 3–6 October 2008 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ "Anne Churchland - Assistant Professor" . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. Archived from the original (web page) on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 15 August 2011 .

^ "Movement Generation Laboratory - Mark Churchland" . Columbia University. 2 April 2013. Archived from the original (web page) on 16 March 2013 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ Bannister, Andy (2015-07-17).

The Atheist Who Didn't Exist: Or: the dreadful consequences of bad arguments . Monarch Books. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-85721-611-3 .

...another atheist writer, the philosopher Patricia Churchland...

^ Todd, Douglas (February 4, 2012).

"Pat Churchland fights for supremacy of the brain" .

Vancouver Sun . Retrieved 2021-05-04 .

When I asked her how she would define herself on the spiritual-philosophical spectrum, however, she surprisingly answered: "Pantheist," adding "I love nature." Pantheists are defined as people who view the natural world as the absolute, as the equivalent of God." ^ Todd, Douglas (February 11, 2012).

"B.C. academic star fights for beliefs" .

Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia) . p. 44.

^ "NOUS: Patricia Churchland on How We Evolved A Conscience" .

nousthepodcast.libsyn.com . Archived from the original on 2019-09-18 . Retrieved 2019-10-21 .

^ Warburton, Nigel; Edmonds, David (2010).

"Pat Churchland on Eliminative Materialism" (audio) . Philosophy Bites . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ McGinn, Colin; Churchland, Patricia.

"Of Brains & Minds: An Exchange | Patricia Churchland" .

{{ cite magazine }} : Cite magazine requires |magazine= ( help ) ^ "MacArthur Fellows List, "C" " . The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. Archived from the original (web page) on 26 September 2008 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ "International Academy of Humanism - Humanist Laureates" . Council For Secular Humanism. Archived from the original (web page) on 2 October 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ "Distinguished Cognitive Scientist Award" . University of California, Merced. 4 May 2011. Archived from the original (web page) on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ Leiter, Brian (7 October 2011).

"Two Philosophers Elected Fellows of the Cognitive Science Society" .

Leiter Reports: A Philosophy Blog . Retrieved 30 June 2017 .

^ "Braintrust: What Neuroscience Tells us about Morality | Patricia S. Churchland" .

The Montreal Review . September 2011 . Retrieved 2022-06-23 .

Further reading [ edit ] The Churchlands and Their Critics . (1996) Robert N. McCauley.  Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley-Blackwell On the Churchlands . (2004) William Hirstein.  Florence, Kentucky: Thomson Wadsworth External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Patricia Churchland .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Patricia Churchland .

Personal Homepage Interviewed on NOUS the podcast 'On How We Evolved A Conscience' Archived 2019-09-18 at the Wayback Machine "Philosophy of Brain - A Conversation with Patricia Churchland" Archived 2019-08-22 at the Wayback Machine , Ideas Roadshow , 2014 Pat Churchland interviews Archived 2019-04-14 at the Wayback Machine with Philosophy Bites on Self Control , on Eliminative Materialism , and on What Neuroscience Can Teach Us About Morality (audio) How your brain invents morality Patricia Churchland interviewed by Sigal Samuel on 'her theory of how we evolved a conscience' for Vox (2019).

v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Artists MusicBrainz People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patricia_Churchland&oldid=1306079022 " Categories : 1943 births Living people 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers Canadian expatriate academics in the United States 20th-century Canadian philosophers 21st-century Canadian philosophers American women philosophers American neuroscientists American women neuroscientists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences MacArthur Fellows Materialists American philosophers of mind Pantheists Academic staff of the University of Manitoba University of California, San Diego faculty University of Pittsburgh alumni University of British Columbia alumni Canadian women philosophers Fellows of the Cognitive Science Society Salk Institute for Biological Studies people Alumni of Somerville College, Oxford 20th-century American women 21st-century American women Canadian philosophers of mind Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patricia Churchland 25 languages Add topic

