Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Work 3 Juggling 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Helaman Ferguson 2 languages Deutsch Kreyòl ayisyen Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mathematician Helaman Ferguson Born 1940 Salt Lake City, Utah, US Helaman Rolfe Pratt Ferguson (born 1940 in Salt Lake City , Utah) is an American sculptor and a digital artist , specifically an algorist . He is also well known for his development of the PSLQ algorithm , an integer relation detection algorithm.

Early life and education [ edit ] Ferguson's mother died when he was about three and his father went off to serve in the Second World War .  He was adopted by an Irish immigrant and raised in New York. He learned to work with his hands in an old-world style with earthen materials from his adoptive father who was a carpenter and stonemason by trade. An art-inclined math teacher in high school helped him develop his dual interests in math and art.

Ferguson is a graduate of Hamilton College , a liberal arts school in New York. In 1971, he received a Ph.D. in mathematics from the University of Washington .

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] Umbilic Torus at Stony Brook University In 1977, Ferguson and another mathematician, Rodney Forcade , developed an algorithm for integer relation detection. It was the first viable generalization of the Euclidean algorithm for three or more variables.

[ 2 ] He later developed a more notable integer relation detection algorithm – the PSLQ algorithm – which was selected as one of the "Top Ten Algorithms of the Century" by Jack Dongarra and Francis Sullivan.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In January 2014, Ferguson and his wife Claire Ferguson delivered an MAA Invited Address, titled "Mathematics in Stone and Bronze," at the Joint Math Meetings in Baltimore Maryland. He is an active artist, often representing mathematical shapes in his works. One of the first bronze torii sculpted by Ferguson was exhibited at a computer art exhibition in 1989 at the Computer Museum in Boston. His most widely known piece of art is a 69 cm (27") bronze sculpture, Umbilic Torus . In 2010, the Simons Foundation , a private institution committed to the advancement of science and mathematics, commissioned him to create the Umbilic Torus SC , a massive 8.5 m (28½') high sculpture in cast bronze and granite weighing more than nine tons. With its installation completed in 2012, the torus sculpture was donated to Stony Brook University in Long Island, N.Y., and sits outside the Math and Physics buildings of the same university, near the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics . Mounted on a stainless steel column, the torus sits on a 7.7 m (25¼') diameter granite base, where various mathematical formulas defining the torus are inscribed.

[ 6 ] To create the huge sculpture, Ferguson wrote a program consisting of 25,000 movements to control a 4.9 m (16') x 6.1 m (20') robot arm and its affixed 30 cm (12") long industrial diamond-encrusted cutting tool.

[ 7 ] Juggling [ edit ] In 1987 Ferguson ran 50 miles in 16 hours while joggling .

[ 8 ] Around that time he used to make and sell juggling balls by mail.

See also [ edit ] Umbilic torus References [ edit ] ^ "helaman ferguson sculpture: the artist" . Archived from the original on 2007-03-27 . Retrieved 2008-03-11 .

^ "Ferguson-Forcade Algorithm" .

^ The Best of the 20th Century: Editors Name Top 10 Algorithms Archived 2018-03-28 at the Wayback Machine by Barry Arthur Cipra ; SIAM News, Volume 33, Number 4 ^ PSLQ Algorithm ^ "An Algorithm for the Ages: PSLQ, A Better Way to Find Integer Relations" . Archived from the original on 2006-10-05 . Retrieved 2006-10-25 .

^ Helaman Ferguson, "Two Theorems, Two Sculptures, Two Posters", American Mathematical Monthly, Volume 97, Number 7, August–September 1990, pages 589-610.

^ "Helaman Ferguson's sculpture blends the artistic, mathematic" . 11 December 2012.

^ "Joggling World Records (Joggling = Jogging plus Juggling)" .

External links [ edit ] Home page Celebrating Mathematics in Stone and Bronze by Helaman and Claire Ferguson, Notices of the AMS 57 :7, July 2010.

v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art String figure Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Kresge Auditorium Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Família Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Dürer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th–20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au café L'Oiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall René Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dalí Crucifixion The Swallow's Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh István Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimiņa Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Dürer Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali d'architettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dell'architettura Romantic Samuel Colman Nature's Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematician's Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gödel, Escher, Bach Nikos Salingaros The 'Life' of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Norway Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Helaman_Ferguson&oldid=1282071048 " Categories : 20th-century American mathematicians 21st-century American mathematicians American digital artists Latter Day Saints from New York (state) Hamilton College (New York) alumni University of Washington alumni Living people American adoptees 1940 births 20th-century American sculptors American male sculptors Mathematical artists Brigham Young University faculty Latter Day Saints from Washington (state) Latter Day Saints from Utah Mathematicians from New York (state) Jogglers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 03:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Helaman Ferguson 2 languages Add topic

