Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Global catastrophic risks 2 United Nations list 3 World Economic Forum List 4 Global environmental issues 5 See also 6 References 7 Literature 8 External links Toggle the table of contents List of global issues 18 languages العربية Basa Bali Беларуская Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Қазақша Кыргызча Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Саха тыла Shqip Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of environmental and other issues affecting life on Earth "Global issues" redirects here. For the global ideology, see Globalism .

A global issue is a matter of public concern worldwide. This list of global issues presents problems or phenomena affecting people around the world, including but not limited to widespread social issues , economic issues , and environmental issues . Organizations that maintain or have published an official list of global issues include the United Nations, and the World Economic Forum.

Global catastrophic risks [ edit ] Main article: Global catastrophic risk Not all of these risks are independent, because the majority, if not all of them are a result of human activity.

Biodiversity loss Climate change Destructive artificial intelligence Environmental disaster Nuclear holocaust Pandemic Biotechnology risk Molecular nanotechnology Societal collapse United Nations list [ edit ] The UN has listed issues that it deems to be the most pressing as of 2023 [update] : [ 1 ] Category Issues Relevant UN directives/initiatives Africa poverty , diseases , desertification , malnutrition , regional conflict Office of the Special Adviser on Africa , African Union , New Partnership for Africa’s Development , United Nations–African Union Mission in Darfur Ageing ageing population , demographic transition Vienna International Plan of Action on Ageing , United Nations Principles for Older Persons , Proclamation on Ageing , International Year of Older Persons AIDS Prevention of HIV/AIDS , HIV and pregnancy , HIV/AIDS denialism Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS , The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Atomic energy nuclear weapons , nuclear waste International Atomic Energy Agency , Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Big data for sustainable development Applying ICTs to sustainable development supporting and tracking the Sustainable Development Goals Child and youth safety online Fighting cyberbullying , online child abuse and human trafficking of children Children Child poverty , Child labour , Child abuse , Child mortality , Global education Education First , United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme , Global Education First Initiative [ 2 ] Climate change Carbon footprint of the human race, Climate change mitigation Kyoto Protocol , Paris Agreement , United Nations Climate Change conference Decolonization exploitation United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization , United Nations Trust Territories , International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism Democracy democratization Universal Declaration of Human Rights , International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , UNDP , UNDEF , DPKO , DPA , OHCHR , UN Women Disarmament weapons of mass destruction , chemical and biological weapons , conventional weapons , landmines and small arms United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs Ending poverty Measuring poverty Sustainable Development Goal #1: No poverty Food world hunger , sustainable agriculture , food security , safety , food riots Sustainable Development Goal #2: Zero hunger , Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), World Food Programme Gender equality Women's rights , global feminism Commission on the Status of Women , Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) Health maternal health , extreme poverty Millennium Development Goals Human rights human rights violations Universal Declaration of Human Rights International law and justice war crimes , discrimination , state-corporate crime International Law Commission , Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (1948), International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1965), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966), Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979), United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982), Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (1996), International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (1999), Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006) International migration Human migration International Organization for Migration Oceans and the Law of the Sea (cf. Water) marine pollution , ocean governance United Nations Conference on the Human Environment , Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter Peace and security United Nations peacekeeping , List of United Nations peacekeeping missions , Peacebuilding Commission People with disabilities discrimination , lack of universal design Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Population overpopulation , world population UNFPA Refugees (cf. Humanitarian Assistance) United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Terrorism Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism Volunteerism United Nations Volunteers Water (cf. Oceans and the Law of the Sea) water scarcity , water conflict , water privatization , water pollution UN-Water , System of Environmental and Economic Accounting for Water , Water for Life Decade , International Recommendations on Water Statistics , United Nations Water Conference , Millennium Development Goals , International Conference on Water and the Environment (1992), Earth Summit (1992) As part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development , the UN Millennium Development Goals (2000-2015) were superseded by the UN Sustainable Development Goals (2016-2030), which are also known as The Global Goals . There are associated Targets and Indicators for each Global Goal .

World Economic Forum List [ edit ] In keeping with their economy-centered view, the World Economic Forum formulated a list of 10 most pressing points in 2016: [ 3 ] Food security Inclusive growth Future of work/ unemployment Climate change 2008 financial crisis Future of the internet / Fourth Industrial Revolution Gender equality Global trade and investment and regulatory frameworks Long-term investment / Investment strategy Future healthcare See also: sustainable growth , green economy , global recession , International Monetary Fund , and World Trade Organization Global environmental issues [ edit ] Main article: List of environmental issues No single issue can be analysed, treated, or isolated from the others.

[ 4 ] For example, habitat loss and climate change adversely affect biodiversity. Deforestation and pollution are direct consequences of overpopulation and both, in turn, affect biodiversity. While overpopulation locally leads to rural flight , this is more than counterbalanced by accelerating urbanization and urban sprawl. Theories like the world-system theory and the Gaia hypothesis focus on the inter-dependency aspect of environmental and economic issues. Among the most evident environmental problems are: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Overconsumption – situation where resource use has outpaced the sustainable capacity of the ecosystem.

Overpopulation – too many people for the planet to sustain.

Biodiversity loss Deforestation Desertification Global warming / climate change Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Pollution Waste and waste disposal Water pollution Resource depletion Urban sprawl See also: Zero population growth and Green economy See also [ edit ] Politics portal Society portal World portal Sustainable Development Goals – United Nations goals for people for 2030 Antimicrobial resistance – Resistance of microbes to drugs directed against them Center for Global Food Issues Chicago Council on Global Affairs – Foreign affairs think tank in Chicago, Illinois, US Climate change – Human-caused changes to climate on Earth Cybersecurity – Protection of computer systems from information disclosure, theft or damage Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Developing country – Nation with a relatively low living standard Earth Economics – U.S. non-profit organization Earth system science – Scientific study of the Earth's spheres and their natural integrated systems Ecological footprint – Individual's or a group's human demand on nature Ecological collapse – Ecological communities abruptly losing biodiversity, often irreversibly Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Ecosystem collapse – Ecological communities abruptly losing biodiversity, often irreversibly Effective altruism – Philosophical and social movement Energy crisis – Low availability of energy resources Environmental social science – Interaction of humans with the environment Financial crisis – Situation in which financial assets suddenly lose a large part of their nominal value Global catastrophic risk – Hypothetical global-scale disaster risk Global Challenges Foundation – Swedish non-profit organization Global change – Planetary-scale changes in the Earth system Global governance – Movement towards political cooperation among transnational actors Global health – Health of populations in a global context Global justice – Issue in political philosophy Global Rights – Human rights capacity-building NGO Global warming controversy – List of debates over global warming Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Human impact on the environment – Impact of human life on Earth and environment Human security – People-centric approach to national security Intergovernmental organization – Organization established by treaty between governments Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets List of United Nations peacekeeping missions – List of all former and current United Nations peacekeeping missions Liu Institute for Global Issues – Research organization at the University of British Columbia Mass surveillance – Intricate surveillance of an entire or a substantial fraction of a population Ozone depletion and climate change Pandemic – Widespread, often global, epidemic of severe infectious disease Peak oil – Point in time when the maximum rate of petroleum extraction is reached Social justice – Concept in political philosophy Species extinction – Termination of an organism by the death of its last member Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Washington consensus – Economic policies for developing nations Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Wicked problem – Problem that is difficult or impossible to solve World Community Grid – BOINC based volunteer computing project to aid scientific research WorldRiskReport – Annual cooperation report on global disaster risks World-systems theory – Approach emphasizing the world-system as the primary unit of social analysis World War – War involving major global states Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Crime – Unlawful act punishable by an authority References [ edit ] ^ "Global Issues" .

United Nations . Retrieved 13 October 2023 .

^ "Global Education First Initiative - United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" . Archived from the original on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 20 October 2015 .

^ Hutt, Rosamond (21 January 2016).

"What are the 10 biggest global challenges?" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

^ http://www.geni.org/globalenergy/issues/global/major-global-issues-diagram-lg.jpg [ bare URL image file ] ^ Rinkesh (27 June 2014).

"15 Current Environmental Problems That Our World is Facing - Conserve Energy Future" .

^ "The World's 6 Most Pressing Environmental Issues" . 22 April 2012.

^ "About NRDC" .

www.nrdc.org .

^ "Environmental Issues — Global Issues" . 2 February 2015.

Literature [ edit ] John L. Seitz, Kristen A. Hite (2012).

Global Issues (4 ed.). Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-470-65564-1 .

Richard J. Payne (2012).

Global Issues (4th ed.). Pearson.

ISBN 978-0205854592 .

Michael T. Snarr, D. Neil Snarr, ed. (2012).

Introducing Global Issues (5th ed.). Lynne Rienner Pub.

ISBN 978-1588268457 .

Shirley A. Fedorak (2013).

Global Issues: A Cross-Cultural Perspective Paperback . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-1442605961 .

Global Education Magazine Global Environmental Politics External links [ edit ] List of global issues at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Wikimedia Commons has media related to Globalization issues .

The UN's Global Issues page "Think Global: Learn More About Global Issues" .

dus.psu.edu . Retrieved 31 January 2018 .

"Global issues" .

TED.com . 11 May 2016 . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

"Global Issues" .

TakingITGlobal . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

"Global Issues : social, political, economic and environmental issues that affect us all" .

Global Issues . 24 September 2011 . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

"Global Issues Network" .

Global Issues Network . 28 March 2013 . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

"Issues of resilience, interdependence and growth affect global climate change risk" .

Carbon Brief . 20 February 2014 . Retrieved 18 January 2018 .

"A list of the most urgent global issues" .

80,000 Hours . 30 April 2017 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

v t e Human impact on the environment General Anthropocene Ecological footprint Environmental impact assessment Environmental issues list of issues Human impact on marine life List of global issues Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Social ecology (ethics) Causes Causes of climate change Agriculture animal agriculture cannabis cultivation irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil (US) Bitcoin Corporate behavior Deforestation and climate change Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity energy fashion fracking (US) nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs transport Genetic pollution Environmental crime Explosives Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete fashion plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Marine life fishing fishing down the food web marine pollution overfishing Mining Overconsumption Overdrafting Overexploitation Overgrazing Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation rail roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change runaway climate change in the United States Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Ecological crisis Effects of climate change Effects of climate change on agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Effects of climate change on livestock Environmental insecurity Environmental issues in the United States Coral reefs Externality Forest dieback Environmental degradation Erosion Freshwater cycle Greenhouse gas emissions Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss and damage Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Technofossilization Tropical cyclones and climate change Water degradation Water pollution Water scarcity Mitigation Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Community resilience Cultured meat Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Recycling Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainability Sustainable consumption Waste minimization Commons Category by country assessment mitigation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐5dwhn
Cached time: 20250818132152
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.731 seconds
Real time usage: 1.003 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7976/1000000
Revision size: 15423/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100708/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21617/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64586/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.498/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24772882/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  886.733      1 -total
 45.87%  406.718      1 Template:Columns-list
 43.42%  384.983     42 Template:Annotated_link
 14.84%  131.605      1 Template:Reflist
 13.89%  123.178     14 Template:Cite_web
  9.29%   82.369      1 Template:Human_impact_on_the_environment
  8.93%   79.222      1 Template:Navbox
  6.11%   54.198      1 Template:Short_description
  6.03%   53.508      1 Template:Sisterlinks
  3.74%   33.184      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48289744:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132152 and revision id 1293813484. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_global_issues&oldid=1293813484 " Categories : Global issues Global inequality Lists of environmental organizations Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with image file bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages using Sister project links with default search Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 20:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of global issues 18 languages Add topic

