Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Projectile velocity 2 Conventional guns 3 Rifles 4 Categories of velocity 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Muzzle velocity 36 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Velocity of projectile the moment it leaves the gun barrel For the video game, see Muzzle Velocity (video game) .

Women of the Auxiliary Territorial Service firing a 25 pounder shell at the Royal Artillery experimental station at Shoeburyness . The shells are fired through a velocity screen, which has a grid of copper wire. When the shell is fired through the wire, the circuit is broken, by which the speed of the shell can be checked.

The velocity screen being disassembled after use.

Muzzle velocity is the speed of a projectile ( bullet , pellet , slug , ball / shots or shell ) with respect to [ 1 ] the muzzle at the moment it leaves the end of a gun 's barrel (i.e. the muzzle ).

[ 2 ] Firearm muzzle velocities range from approximately 120 m/s (390 ft/s) to 370 m/s (1,200 ft/s) in black powder muskets , [ 3 ] to more than 1,200 m/s (3,900 ft/s) [ 4 ] in modern rifles with high-velocity cartridges such as the .220 Swift and .204 Ruger , all the way to 1,700 m/s (5,600 ft/s) [ 5 ] for tank guns firing kinetic energy penetrator ammunition. To simulate orbital debris impacts on spacecraft, NASA launches projectiles through light-gas guns at speeds up to 8,500 m/s (28,000 ft/s).

[ 6 ] Several factors, including the type of firearm, the cartridge, and the barrel length, determine the bullet's muzzle velocity.

[ 7 ] Projectile velocity [ edit ] For projectiles in unpowered flight , its velocity is highest at leaving the muzzle and drops off steadily because of air resistance .  Projectiles traveling less than the speed of sound (about 340 m/s (1,100 ft/s) in dry air at sea level ) are subsonic , while those traveling faster are supersonic and thus can travel a substantial distance and even hit a target before a nearby observer hears the sound of the weapon being fired.  Projectile speed through air depends on a number of factors such as barometric pressure , humidity , air temperature and wind speed .

A 1-gram (15- grain ) projectile was accelerated to velocities exceeding 9,000 m/s (30,000 ft/s) at Sandia National Laboratories in 1994.  The gun operated in two stages.  First, burning gunpowder was used to drive a piston to pressurize hydrogen to 10,000 atm (1.0 GPa).  The pressurized gas was then released to a secondary piston, which traveled forward into a shock-absorbing "pillow", transferring the energy from the piston to the projectile on the other side of the pillow.

[ 8 ] Conventional guns [ edit ] In conventional guns, muzzle velocity is determined by the quantity of the propellant , its quality (in terms of chemical burn speed and expansion), the mass of the projectile, and the length of the barrel. A slower-burning propellant needs a longer barrel to finish its burn before leaving, but conversely can use a heavier projectile. This is a mathematical tradeoff.

[ 9 ] A faster-burning propellant may accelerate a lighter projectile to higher speeds if the same amount of propellant is used. Within a gun, the gaseous pressure created as a result of the combustion process is a limiting factor on projectile velocity. Consequently, propellant quality and quantity, projectile mass, and barrel length must all be balanced to achieve safety and to optimize performance.

Longer barrels give the propellant force more time to work on propelling the bullet.

[ 9 ] For this reason longer barrels generally provide higher velocities, everything else being equal.  As the bullet moves down the bore, however, the propellant's gas pressure behind it diminishes. Given a long enough barrel, there would eventually be a point at which friction between the bullet and the barrel, and air resistance, would equal the force of the gas pressure behind it, and from that point, the velocity of the bullet would decrease.

Rifles [ edit ] Rifled barrels have spiral twists carved inside them that spin the bullet so that it remains stable in flight. This mechanism is known as rifling . Longer barrels provide more opportunity to rotate the bullet before it leaves the gun. Provided there's enough rifling in the barrel to adequately stabilize a particular round, there is no appreciable increase in precision with increasing barrel length. Longer barrels make it easier to aim if using iron sights, because of the longer sight radius, and with the right propellant load they can increase muzzle velocity, which gives a flatter trajectory and reduces the need to adjust for range.

A bullet, while moving through its barrel, is being pushed forward by the gas expanding behind it. This gas is created following the trigger being pulled, causing the firing pin to strike the primer , which in turn ignites the solid propellant packed inside the bullet cartridge , making it combust while situated in the chamber . Once it leaves the barrel, the force of the expanding gas ceases to propel the bullet forth.

[ 10 ] When a bullet is fired from a handgun with a 2-inch (51 mm) barrel, the bullet only has a 2-inch (51 mm) "runway" to be spun before it leaves the barrel. Likewise, it has only a 2-inch (51 mm) space in which to accelerate before it must fly without any additional force behind it. In some instances, the powder may not have even been fully burned in guns with short barrels. So, the muzzle velocity of a 2-inch (51 mm) barrel is less than that of a 4-inch (100 mm) barrel, which is less than that of a 6-inch (150 mm) barrel.

Large naval guns will have high length-to-diameter ratios, ranging between 38:1 to 50:1. This length ratio maximizes the projectile velocity.  There is much interest in modernizing naval weaponry by using electrically powered railguns , which shoot projectiles using an electromagnetic pulse. These overcome the limitations noted above. With these railguns, a constant acceleration is provided along the entire length of the device by means of the electromagnetic pulse. This greatly increases the muzzle velocity. Another significant advantage of railguns is not requiring explosive propellant.

[ 11 ] The result of this is that a ship will not need to transport propellant and that a land-station will not have to maintain an inventory of it either. Explosive propellant, stored in large quantities, is susceptible to explosion.

[ 12 ] While this can be mitigated with safety precautions, [ 12 ] railguns eschew the need for such measures altogether. Even the projectile's internal charges may be eliminated due to the already high velocity. This means the projectile becomes a strictly kinetic weapon.

Categories of velocity [ edit ] The United States Army defines different categories of muzzle velocity for different classes of weapons: [ 13 ] Weapon Low velocity High velocity Hypervelocity Artillery cannons Less than 396 m/s (1,299 ft/s) Between 910 and 1,070 m/s (3,000–3,500 ft/s) Greater than 1,070 m/s (3,500 ft/s) Tank guns - Between 470 and 1,020 m/s (1,550–3,350 ft/s) Greater than 1,020 m/s (3,350 ft/s) Small arms - Between 1,070 and 1,520 m/s (3,500–5,000 ft/s) Greater than 1,520 m/s (5,000 ft/s) See also [ edit ] Firearm Gun chronograph Internal ballistics Muzzle energy References [ edit ] ^ "muzzle velocity" .

Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms . 2005 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 .

^ "Muzzle Velocity" . Archived from the original on 15 May 2010 . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ "The Accuracy of Black Powder Muskets" (PDF) . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ "Speed of a Bullet" . Retrieved 10 December 2013 .

^ "120mm Tank Gun KE Ammunition" . Archived from the original on 6 January 2010 . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ "Remote Hypervelocity Test Laboratory" . Archived from the original on 30 July 2014 . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

^ "How Fast Does A Bullet Travel?" .

^ Brown, Malcolm (22 March 1994).

"Fastest Gun on Earth: Goals Go Beyond Planet" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ a b "The Rifle Barrel" . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ Mizokami, Kyle (7 March 2018).

"How guns work" . Retrieved 28 April 2019 .

^ "Rail Strike" .

The Economist . 9 May 2015.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2015 . Retrieved 28 April 2019 .

^ a b Government of Western Australia (January 2018).

"Storage of explosives" (PDF) .

Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety . Retrieved 28 April 2019 .

^ "Dictionary of United States Army Terms" (PDF) .

v t e Firearms ( list , glossary , and topics ) Firearm lists Gun History Safety War Weapon Types of firearms Breechloader versus muzzleloader Combination weapons Combination Elephant Flare gun Line thrower Long gun Carbine Musket Takedown Multiple-barrel ( list ) Needler Net gun Pen gun Riot gun Rotary Single-shot Sleeve gun Smoothbore Spring-gun Underwater firearm Handguns Cane gun Derringer Duelling Pistol list Machine Pepper-box Pocket Revolver list Semi-automatic pistol list Pistol caliber Personal defence weapon Submachine gun Starting Wallet gun Rifles ( list ) Anti-materiel Anti-tank Assault list Automatic Battle list Carbine list Double Hunting Buffalo Elephant Express Punt Varmint Marksman Rifling Polygonal Repeating Sniper list Machine guns General purpose Light Medium Heavy SAW Shotguns ( list ) Automatic shotgun Coach gun Combat shotgun Double-barreled Pump action Riot Sawed-off Boomstick Ammunition 20-gauge shotgun Breaching round Dragon's breath Shotgun shell .410 bore Shot Slug Historic or famous AK-47 AR-15 M16 M4 Antique firearms Barrett M82 Gatling gun Winchester rifle Browning machine gun M1 Garand Mauser rifles TEC-9 Tommy Gun MP 40 MAC-10 Uzi Colt Peacemaker Calico M1911 Glock Mechanics and components Components Barrel Feed ramp Slug Threads Trunnion Bayonet Belt Blank-firing adapter Breechblock Breechface Bolt Rotating Telescoping Flapper Roller Tilting Bump stock Chamber Cocking handle Cylinder Extractor Firing pin Flash suppressor Fluting Forward assist Freebore Forearm Foregrip Hammer Half-cock Linear Striker Lock Flintlock Wheellock Magazine Bottom metal Clip Drum High-capacity Speedloader Stripper clip Muzzle brake Muzzle shroud Pistol grip Pistol slide Rail system Receiver Recoil pad Rim Safety Sear Auto sear Shroud Silencer Squeeze bore Choke Stock Synchronization gear Tapering Trigger guard Sights Diopter Finderscope Globe Holographic Iron Laser Reticle Reflex Red dot Magnifier Scope mount Tang Telescopic Night vision Thermal Zeroing Actions Blowback Blow-forward Bolt Boxlock Breechloading Break Open bolt Closed bolt Electronic Gas-operated Lever Muzzleloading Out-of-battery Pump Push/Controlled feed Recoil-operated Repeating Revolver Self-loading Single-shot Slamfire Physics Ballistics Ballistic coefficient External Terminal Transitional Physics of firearms Rangefinding/keeping Mathematics Stadiametric Metrics Accurizing Bore axis Caliber Circular error probable Effective range Gauge Gun chronograph Gun harmonisation Headspace Length of pull Lock time Match grade Mean time between failures Minute of Angle (MOA) Muzzle Energy Rise Velocity Penetration Power factor Precision-guided Rate of fire Recoil Group Stock measurements Stopping power Handgun effectiveness Twist rate Shooting and ammunition Gunshot Dry fire Firing (Shooting) Gunshot Firefight Maintenance Field strip Fouling Malfunction Cooking off Hang fire Squib load Ricochet Ignition Fire forming Obturation Primer Gunpowder Percussion cap Rimfire Tubes and Primers Propellant Ball propellant Cordite Improved Military Rifle Ramrod Smokeless powder Ammunition Cannelure Dummy round Snap cap Flechette Gas check Overpressure ammunition PCA Sabot Wadding Bullets Armour piercing Cast Expanding Full metal jacket Frangible Green Incendiary High explosive HEIAP Projectile Raufoss Round shot SLAP Soft point Supercavitating Total metal jacket Tracer Hollow base Hollow point Minié Meplat Plastic tipped ABCBC Snake shot Spitzer VLD Cartridges Blank Caseless Centrefire Handloading Rifle cartridge Fully powered Intermediate list Paper Pinfire Wildcat Society , safety , industry , and laws Society Celebratory gunfire Civilian gun ownership Household ownership rates Exhibition shooting Gun cultures United States Gun shows State firearms Hunting Jungle style Pistol duelling Politics Shooting sports Civilian Marksmanship Program Gun violence and safety in the United States Assassinations Deaths Forensics Gunfighter Gun safety Firearm industry 3D printed firearm list Firearm brands Firearms by country Gun shops list Gunsmith Improvised firearm Most-produced Privately made Small arms trade Arms control Arms and Gun control Disarmament Campaign Against Arms Trade Featureless rifles Gun laws Air travel Assault weapons Concealed carry in the U.S.

License High-capacity magazine ban Right to bear arms Small Arms & Light Weapons (SALW) United States Gun Laws ( by U.S. state ) Legislation Politics Federal Assault Weapons Ban Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muzzle_velocity&oldid=1299278147 " Categories : Ammunition Ballistics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2015 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muzzle velocity 36 languages Add topic

