Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Relics 2 Theology and works Toggle Theology and works subsection 2.1 Writings 2.2 Philosophy 2.3 Theology 3 Canonisation 4 Places, churches, and schools named in his honour Toggle Places, churches, and schools named in his honour subsection 4.1 Europe 4.2 schools 4.3 United States 4.4 Canada 4.5 Philippines 4.6 Latin America 4.7 Southern Asia 5 Works 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bonaventure 62 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian theologian (1221–1274) This article is about the Italian medieval theologian. For other uses, see Bonaventure (disambiguation) .

Saint Bonaventure OFM 17th-century portrait of Bonaventure by French painter and friar Claude François Friar Cardinal Bishop of Albano Doctor of the Church Seraphic Doctor Teacher of the Faith Born Giovanni di Fidanza 1221 Civita di Bagnoregio , Latium , Papal States Died 15 July 1274 (1274-07-15) (aged 52–53) Lyon , Lyonnais , Kingdom of Burgundy-Arles Venerated in Catholic Church Church of England Canonized 14 April 1482, Rome by Pope Sixtus IV Feast 15 July Attributes Cardinal 's hat on a bush; ciborium ; Holy Communion ; cardinal in Franciscan robes, usually reading or writing Other names Doctor Seraphicus ("Seraphic Doctor") Education Alma mater University of Paris Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scholasticism Augustinianism Neoplatonism [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Philosophical realism Medieval realism ( moderate realism ) Institutions University of Paris Main interests Metaphysics Notable ideas Bonaventure's version of Anselm of Canterbury 's ontological argument Exemplarism Illuminationism Ecclesiastical career Religion Christianity Church Catholic Church Offices held Cardinal-Bishop of Albano Ordination history History Episcopal consecration Consecrated by Pope Gregory X Date 11 November 1273 Place Lyon , Archdiocese of Lyon , France Cardinalate Elevated by Pope Gregory X Date 3 June 1273 Source(s): [ 5 ] Part of a series on Scholasticism Schools Thomism Scotism Occamism Major works Summa Theologica Cur Deus Homo Summa Grammatica Summa logicae Opus Oxoniense Libri Quattuor Sententiarum Precursors Augustine of Hippo Boethius Pope Gregory I Alcuin of York John Scotus Eriugena Philosophers Anselm of Canterbury ("Doctor Marianus") Peter Abelard ("Doctor Scholasticus") Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") Albertus Magnus ("Doctor Universalis") Thomas Aquinas ("Doctor Angelicus") Bonaventure ("Doctor Seraphicus") Duns Scotus ("Doctor Subtilis") William of Ockham ("Doctor Invincibilis") Francisco Suárez ("Doctor Eximius") Related Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Dominican Order Franciscan Order Catholic theology Islamic philosophy Empiricism Neoplatonism Neo-scholasticism Protestant scholasticism Problem of universals Protoscholastic writing Philosophy portal Catholicism portal v t e Bonaventure OFM ( / ˈ b ɒ n ə v ɛ n tʃ ər , ˌ b ɒ n ə ˈ v ɛ n tʃ ər / BON -ə-ven-chər, -⁠ VEN - ; Italian : Bonaventura da Bagnoregio Italian pronunciation: [ˌbɔnavenˈtuːra da (b)baɲɲoˈrɛːdʒo] ; Latin : Bonaventura de Balneoregio ; born Giovanni di Fidanza ; 1221 – 15 July 1274) [ 6 ] was an Italian Catholic Franciscan bishop , cardinal , scholastic theologian and philosopher .

The seventh Minister General of the Order of Friars Minor , he also served for a time as Bishop of Albano . He was canonised on 14 April 1482 by Pope Sixtus IV and declared a Doctor of the Church in 1588 by Pope Sixtus V , becoming known as the "Seraphic Doctor" (Latin: Doctor Seraphicus ). His feast day is 15 July.

Many writings from the Middle Ages once attributed to him have been subsequently re-classified under the name " Pseudo-Bonaventure ".

Life [ edit ] He was born at Civita di Bagnoregio , not far from Viterbo , then part of the Papal States . Almost nothing is known of his childhood, other than the names of his parents, Giovanni di Fidanza and Maria di Ritella.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Bonaventure reports that in his youth he was saved from an untimely death by the prayers of Francis of Assisi , which is the primary motivation for Bonaventure's writing the vita .

[ 9 ] He entered the Franciscan Order in 1243 and studied at the University of Paris , possibly under Alexander of Hales , and certainly under Alexander's successor, John of Rochelle .

[ 10 ] In 1253 he held the Franciscan chair at Paris. A dispute between seculars and mendicants delayed his reception as Master until 1257, where his degree was taken in friendship with Thomas Aquinas .

[ 11 ] Bonaventure also met and was a friend of the cardinal Hugh of Saint-Cher , [ 12 ] from whom he was influenced.

[ 13 ] Three years earlier his fame had earned him the position of lecturer on The Four Books of Sentences —a book of theology written by Peter Lombard in the twelfth century—and in 1255 he received the degree of master, the medieval equivalent of doctor.

[ 10 ] After having successfully defended his order against the reproaches of the anti- mendicant party, he was elected Minister General of the Franciscan Order. On 24 November 1265, he was selected for the post of Archbishop of York ; however, he was never consecrated and resigned the appointment in October 1266.

[ 14 ] During his tenure, the General Chapter of Narbonne, held in 1260, promulgated a decree prohibiting the publication of any work out of the order without permission from superiors. This prohibition has induced modern writers to pass severe judgment upon Roger Bacon 's superiors, who were assumed to be envious of Bacon's abilities. However, the prohibition enjoined on Bacon was a general one, which extended to the whole order. Its promulgation was not directed against him, but rather against Gerard of Borgo San Donnino . In 1254 Gerard had published without permission a work, Introductorius in Evangelium æternum ( An Introduction to the Eternal Gospel ) that was judged heretical within a year. Thereupon the General Chapter of Narbonne promulgated their decree, identical with the "constitutio gravis in contrarium" Bacon speaks of. The prohibition was rescinded in Roger's favor unexpectedly in 1266.

[ 15 ] Bonaventure's coat of arms of Cardinal Bishop of Albano Bonaventure was instrumental in procuring the election of Pope Gregory X , who rewarded him with the title of Cardinal Bishop of Albano , and insisted on his presence at the great Second Council of Lyon in 1274.

[ 10 ] There, after his significant contributions led to a union of the Greek and Latin churches, Bonaventure died suddenly and under suspicious circumstances. The 1913 edition of the Catholic Encyclopedia has citations that suggest he was poisoned, but no mention is made of this in the 2003 second edition of the New Catholic Encyclopedia .

He steered the Franciscans on a moderate and intellectual course that made them the most prominent order in the Catholic Church until the coming of the Jesuits. His theology was marked by an attempt completely to integrate faith and reason. He thought of Christ as the "one true master" who offers humans knowledge that begins in faith, is developed through rational understanding, and is perfected by mystical union with God.

[ 16 ] Relics [ edit ] In the year 1434, 160 years after his death, his body was moved to a new church that was considered more fitting. Upon doing so, the head was found to be entirely incorrupt. "The hair, lips, teeth, and tongue were perfectly preserved and retained their natural colour. The people of Lyon were profoundly affected by this miracle, and they chose Bonaventure for the patron of their city. The movement, already afoot, to obtain his canonization received thereby a new and powerful impetus."  However, a century later in 1562, the city of Lyon was captured by Huguenots , who burned Bonaventure's body in the public square. In the 19th century, during the " dechristianization of France " during the French Revolution, the urn containing the incorrupt head was hidden, after which the church was razed to the ground. The urn has never been recovered.

[ 17 ] The only extant relic of Bonaventure is the arm and hand with which he wrote his Commentary on the Sentences , which is now conserved at Bagnoregio, in the parish church of St. Nicholas.

[ 18 ] Theology and works [ edit ] Legenda maior, 1477 Writings [ edit ] Bonaventure was formally canonised in 1482 by the Franciscan Pope Sixtus IV , and ranked along with Thomas Aquinas as the greatest of the Doctors of the Church by another Franciscan, Pope Sixtus V , in 1587. Bonaventure was regarded as one of the greatest philosophers of the Middle Ages.

[ 19 ] His works, as arranged in the most recent Critical Edition by the Quaracchi Fathers ( Collegio S. Bonaventura ), consist of a Commentary on the Sentences of Lombard , in four volumes, and eight other volumes, including a Commentary on the Gospel of St Luke and a number of smaller works; the most famous of which are The Mind's Road to God ( Itinerarium mentis in Deum ), an outline of his theology or Brief Reading ( Breviloquium ), Reduction of the Arts to Theology ( De reductione artium ad theologiam ), and Soliloquy on the Four Spiritual Exercises ( Soliloquium de quatuor mentalibus exercitiis ), The Tree of Life ( Lignum vitae ), and The Triple Way ( De Triplici via ), the latter three written for the spiritual direction of his fellow Franciscans.

[ citation needed ] The German philosopher Dieter Hattrup denies that Reduction of the Arts to Theology was written by Bonaventure, claiming that the style of thinking does not match Bonaventure's original style.

[ 20 ] His position is no longer tenable given recent research: the text remains "indubitably authentic".

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] A work that for many years was falsely attributed to Bonaventure, De septem itineribus aeternitatis , was actually written by Rudolf von Biberach ( c.

1270 – 1329).

[ 23 ] For Isabelle of France , the sister of King Louis IX of France , and her monastery of Poor Clares at Longchamps, Bonaventure wrote the treatise Concerning the Perfection of Life .

[ 6 ] The Commentary on the Sentences , written at the command of his superiors when he was twenty-seven, [ 19 ] is Bonaventure's major work and most of his other theological and philosophical writings are in some way dependent on it. However, some of Bonaventure's later works, such as the Lectures on the Six Days of Creation , show substantial developments beyond the Sentences .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Bonaventure wrote on almost every subject treated by the Scholastics and his writings are substantial. A great number of them deal with faith in Christ, God and theology. No work of Bonaventure's is exclusively philosophical, a striking illustration of the mutual interpenetration of philosophy and theology that is a distinguishing mark of the Scholastic period.

[ 19 ] Much of Bonaventure's philosophical thought shows a considerable influence by Augustine of Hippo , so much so that De Wulf considers him the best medieval representative of Augustinianism . Bonaventure adds Aristotelian principles to the Augustinian doctrine, especially in connection with the illumination of the intellect and the composition of human beings and other living creatures in terms of matter and form.

[ 26 ] Augustine, who had introduced into the west many of the doctrines that would define scholastic philosophy, was a critically important source of Bonaventure's Platonism. The mystic pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite was another notable influence.

In philosophy, Bonaventure presents a marked contrast to his contemporaries, Roger Bacon , Albert the Great , and Thomas Aquinas . While these may be taken as representing, respectively, physical science yet in its infancy, and Aristotelian scholasticism in its most perfect form, Bonaventure presents the mystical and Platonizing mode of speculation that had already, to some extent, found expression in Hugo and Richard of St. Victor , Alexander of Hales , and in Bernard of Clairvaux . To him, the purely intellectual element, though never absent, is of inferior interest when compared with the living power of the affections or the heart.

[ 10 ] Bonaventure receives the envoys of the Byzantine Emperor at the Second Council of Lyon .

Like Thomas Aquinas, with whom he shared numerous profound agreements in matters theological and philosophical, he combated the Aristotelian notion of the eternity of the world vigorously (though he disagreed with Aquinas about the abstract possibility of an eternal universe). Bonaventure accepts the general Christian Neoplatonic doctrine, found in Augustine and pseudo-Dionysius, that "forms" do not exist as subsistent entities, but as ideals, predefinitions, archetypes, or in Bonaventure's words: "exemplars", in the mind of God, according to which actual things were formed. This conception has no slight influence upon his philosophy. Physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein described  Bonaventure as a "half-mystic" and wrote that he showed "strong pandeistic inclinations".

[ 27 ] Theology [ edit ] Emanationism, exemplarism, and consummation are explicitly listed by Bonaventure as the core principles of theology, all of which are heavily Platonic themes and carry equally Platonic subtopics and discussions but yet are all rooted in the second Person of the Trinity, the Son, incarnate as Jesus Christ, who is the 'principio' of divine exemplars, from which creation emanates and by which creation is made intelligible and which creation finds as its goal.

[ 28 ] Creation is two-fold, expressing the divine truth, the divine exemplar in the Word of God; it "speaks" of that which it is the likeness and subsists in itself and in the Son.

[ 29 ] Bonaventure's mature work, the Collationes in Hexaemeron , takes exemplarism, drawn out from his transformation of Platonic Realism, as the basis for vital points of Christian theological dogma: God's love of creation, God's foreknowledge, providence and divine governance, the unconstrained but perfect will of God, divine justice and the devil, the immortality of and uniqueness of human soul, and the goodness and beauty of creation. This also serves as his repudiation of Avicennan peripatetic necessitarianism and pure Aristotelian identified by the Greek Fathers, if left uncorrected by Plato and Revelation which teach the same thing under different modes.

[ 30 ] Upon [rejection of exemplarism], there follows another [error], that is, that God has neither foreknowledge nor providence, since He does not have within Himself a rational justification of things by which He could know them. They also say that there are no truths concerning the future except that of necessary things. And from this it follows that all things come about either by chance or by necessity. And since it is impossible that things come about by chance, the Arabs conclude to absolute necessity, that is, that these substances that move the globe are the necessary causes of all things. From this it follows that truth is hidden, that is, the truth of government of worldly things in terms of pain and glory. If, indeed, these substances are inerrant movers, nothing is supposed concerning hell or the existence of the devil: neither did Aristotle ever suppose the existence of the devil, nor happiness after this life, as it appears. Here, then, there is a threefold error: a concealment of exemplarity, of divine providence and of world government.

[ 31 ] Like all the great scholastic doctors, Bonaventure  starts with the discussion of the relations between reason and faith. All the sciences are but the handmaids of theology; reason can discover some of the moral truths that form the groundwork of the Christian system, but other truths can only be received and apprehended through divine illumination. To obtain this illumination, the soul must employ the proper means, which are prayer; the exercise of the virtues , whereby it is rendered fit to accept the divine light; and meditation that may rise even to ecstatic union with God . The supreme end of life is a union in contemplation or intellect or intense absorbing love ; but it cannot be entirely reached in this life, and remains as a hope for the future.

[ 10 ] Like Aquinas and other notable thirteenth-century philosophers and theologians, Bonaventure believed that it is possible to logically prove the existence of God and the immortality of the soul. In fact, unlike Aquinas, Bonaventure holds that reason can demonstrate the beginning of the world.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] He offers several arguments for the existence of God, including versions of Anselm of Canterbury 's ontological argument and Augustine's argument from eternal truths. His main argument for the immortality of the soul appeals to humans' natural desire for perfect happiness, and is reflected in C. S. Lewis 's argument from desire . Contrary to Aquinas, Bonaventure did not believe that philosophy was an autonomous discipline that could be pursued successfully independently of theology. Any philosopher is bound to fall into serious error, he believed, who lacks the light of faith.

[ 34 ] A master of the memorable phrase, Bonaventure held that philosophy opens the mind to at least three different routes humans can take on their journey to God. Non-intellectual material creatures he conceived as shadows and vestiges (literally, footprints) of God, understood as the ultimate cause of a world that philosophical reason can prove was created at a first moment in time. Intellectual creatures he conceived of as images and likenesses of God, the workings of the human mind and will leading us to God understood as illuminator of knowledge and donor of grace and virtue. The final route to God is the route of being, in which Bonaventure brought Anselm 's argument together with Aristotelian and Neoplatonic metaphysics to view God as the absolutely perfect being whose essence entails its existence, an absolutely simple being that causes all other, composite beings to exist.

[ 16 ] Bonaventure's thoughts on our ability to see the Trinity in creation, lost or hampered in the Fall , [ 35 ] are recorded and praised by Pope Francis in his encyclical letter , Laudato si' : Saint Bonaventure went so far as to say that human beings, before sin, were able to see how each creature "testifies that God is three". The reflection of the Trinity was there to be recognized in nature "when that book was open to man and our eyes had not yet become darkened". [Bonaventure] teaches us that each creature bears in itself a specifically Trinitarian structure, so real that it could be readily contemplated if only the human gaze were not so partial, dark and fragile. In this way, he points out to us the challenge of trying to read reality in a Trinitarian key.

[ 36 ] Bonaventure, however, is not only a meditative thinker, whose works may form good manuals of devotion; he is a dogmatic theologian of high rank, and on all the disputed questions of scholastic thought, such as universals , matter, seminal reasons, the principle of individuation, or the intellectus agens , he gives weighty and well-reasoned decisions. He agrees with Albert the Great in regarding theology as a practical science; its truths, according to his view, are peculiarly adapted to influence the affections. He discusses very carefully the nature and meaning of the divine attributes; considers universals to be the ideal forms pre-existing in the divine mind according to which things were shaped; holds matter to be pure potentiality that receives individual being and determinateness from the formative power of God, acting according to the ideas; and finally maintains that the agent intellect has no separate existence. On these and on many other points of scholastic philosophy the "Seraphic Doctor" exhibits a combination of subtlety and moderation, which makes his works particularly valuable.

[ 10 ] In form and intent the work of Bonaventure is always the work of a theologian; he writes as one for whom the only angle of vision and the proximate criterion of truth is the Christian faith. This fact affects his importance as a philosopher; when coupled with his style, it makes Bonaventure perhaps the least accessible of the major figures of the thirteenth century. This is true because philosophy interests him largely as a praeparatio evangelica , as something to be interpreted as a foreshadow of or deviation from what God has revealed.

[ 37 ] Canonisation [ edit ] Bonaventure's feast day was included in the General Roman Calendar immediately upon his canonisation in 1482. It was at first celebrated on the second Sunday in July, but was moved in 1568 to 14 July, since 15 July, the anniversary of his death, was at that time taken up with the feast of Saint Henry . It remained on that date, with the rank of "double", until 1960, when it was reclassified as a feast of the third class. In 1969 it was classified as an obligatory memorial and assigned to the date of his death, 15 July.

[ 38 ] He is the patron saint of bowel disorders.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Bonaventure is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 15 July.

[ 41 ] Places, churches, and schools named in his honour [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] Italy St. Bonaventure's Church with convent of CC. Capuchin friars in Albano Laziale , founded 1619 St. Bonaventure's Church in Bagnoregio , founded 1632 Concathedral of SS Nicolaus, Donatus and Bonaventura in Bagnoregio St. Bonaventure's Church in Napoli St. Bonaventure's Church in Nulvi St. Bonaventure Hermit's Church with convent of Sisters Francescans in Padova St. Bonaventura al Palatino Church in Rome San Bonaventura da Bagnoregio Church in Rome Santa Croce e San Bonaventura alla Pilotta Church in Rome St. Bonaventure's Church in Venezia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2025 ) other countries St. Bonaventure's Cathedral in Banja Luka , ( Bosnia and Herzegovina ) St. Bonaventure's Church with former school in Mladá Boleslav , ( Czech Republic ) Église Saint-Bonaventure in Lyon , ( France ) St. Bonaventure's Church in Mühlen , ( Germany ) St. Bonaventure's Church in Steinfeld , ( Germany ) Sankt Bonaventur und Hl. Kreuz Kirche in Solingen , ( Germany ) United Kingdom St Bonaventure's Catholic School , in Forest Gate , London , England St Bonaventure's Catholic Church, and Primary School in Bishopston, Bristol .

St Bonaventure's Catholic Church, in Welwyn Garden City , England St Bonaventure's Local Missionary Area (the Catholic Parishes of Wythenshawe) in Wythenshawe , England St. Bonaventure's Roman Catholic Church in Glasgow , ( Scotland ) schools [ edit ] Pontifical University of St. Bonaventure in Rome in the Italy St. Bonaventura College is a Catholic high school in Leiden in the Netherlands .

United States [ edit ] St. Bonaventure University , a Franciscan university, in Allegany , New York Mission San Buenaventura and the City of Ventura, California , officially named San Buenaventura St. Bonaventure High School in Ventura, California , United States St. Bonaventure Catholic Church in Chicago, Illinois St. Bonaventure Monastery , a complex of religious buildings, built for the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin , located in Detroit, Michigan.

Solanus Casey served here as the monastery porter from 1924 to 1946, meeting visitors at the friary door. The site is a popular pilgrimage site for Metro Detroit Catholics .

Bonaventure Hall, in Sacred Heart Parish Catholic School, in Patterson, California , United States Bonaventure Residence Hall, in Viterbo University, in La Crosse, Wisconsin , United States Buenaventura Boulevard in Redding, California St. Bonaventure Parish in Huntington Beach, California San Buenaventura de los Tres Arrollos, a lost settlement in the far NE of Custer County, Colorado San Buenaventura de Cochiti built in 1628 in [Pueblo de Cochiti, New Mexico] who remains the patron saint for Native American Village who celebrate on 14 July St. Bonaventure-St. Benedict the Moor (combined) parish, Jamaica, New York St. Bonaventure Church , in Paterson, New Jersey .

San Jose St. Bonaventure Hospital, a fictional hospital that serves as a setting in American TV show The Good Doctor St. Bonaventure Catholic Church, Davie, Florida St. Bonaventure Catholic Church, elementary school, and cemetery, Columbus, Nebraska St. Bonaventure Church, in Allegany, New York St. Bonaventure Church, in Glenshaw, Pennsylvania St. Bonaventure Catholic Community and Church, in Bloomington, Minnesota St. Bonaventure Catholic Parish and School, in Huntington Beach, California St. Bonaventure Catholic Church in Concord, California St. Bonaventure Parish , in Plymouth, Massachusetts Canada [ edit ] The town of Bonaventure , Quebec , Canada Bonaventure Highway in Quebec Place Bonaventure and the adjacent Bonaventure Metro Station in Montreal , Quebec Bonaventure Island and the Bonaventure River in the Gaspé Peninsula Region of Quebec St. Bonaventure's College , a private Roman Catholic school, in Newfoundland and Labrador , Canada St Bonaventure Catholic School, at Edwards Gardens , Toronto , Ontario , Canada St. Bonaventure School, Calgary, Alberta , Canada St. Bonaventure Parish, Calgary, Alberta , Canada Lake Bonaventure, in the community of Lake Bonavista , Calgary, Alberta , Canada St. Bonaventure Parish, Tracadie Cross, in Prince Edward Island , Canada Bonaventure Drive/Bonaventure public school, in London, Ontario, Canada Bonaventure Place, Debert Nova Scotia Philippines [ edit ] St. Bonaventure Parish, Mauban, Quezon is the oldest settlement in the Philippines to have been placed under the protection of El Serafico Padre Doctor San Buenaventura in 1599. In 1647, an image of St. Bonaventure was miraculously found on a branch of a Malauban tree. In this same year, the priest formally recognized San Buenaventura as Patron del Pueblo de Mauban. It is recorded in the writings of Fray Huertas that in 1759 an unknown man wearing the colors of San Buenaventura defended the town from a moro attack. The people of Mauban have since regarded this as a miracle of their Santo Patron. The largest bell in Mauban that was recast in 1843 is named after San Buenaventura and is rung during the Consecration, Angelus and Plegaria.

St. Bonaventure chapel or Capilla de San Buenaventura in St. John the Baptist Parish, Liliw, Laguna, Philippines, erected in honor of the Seraphic Doctor, San Buenaventura because of the 1664 miracle were tears of blood were seen flowing from the eyes of the venerated image, which was witnessed by the Cura Parroco, Padre Juan Pastor and 120 witnesses; in recognition of this miracle, the first major bell in the church of Lilio was dedicated in honor of San Buenaventura Barangay San Buenaventura, a village in San Pablo City, Philippines. Three small chapels can be found within the village in honour of Saint Bonaventura. The oldest chapel and the original image of Saint Bonaventura is located in Purok-3 Chapel St. Bonaventure Parish, Balangkayan Eastern Samar, Philippines San Buenaventura, barangay in the Municipality of Buhi, Camarines Sur, Philippines. Has a chapel dedicated to the namesake saint.

St. Bonaventure Chapel in Barangay San Buenaventura, Luisiana, Laguna.

St. Bonaventure Chapel in Barangay San Bueno, Sampaloc, Quezon.

St. Bonaventure Parish, Talavera, Toledo City, Cebu Bonaventure Colleges of Sorsogon in the town of Irosin, Sorsogon.

Latin America [ edit ] The Municipality of Buenaventura on the Pacific Coast of Colombia The cities of San Buenaventura in Chihuahua , San Buenaventura in Coahuila , and San Buenaventura in the state of Mexico , all in Mexico Southern Asia [ edit ] St. Bonaventure's Church, a 16th-century Portuguese church is situated on the beach in Erangal near Mumbai. The annual Erangal Feast held on second Sunday of January, celebrating the Feast day of St. Bonaventure, attracts thousands of people of all faiths to this scenic spot. The Feast day of St. Bonaventure is celebrated on 15 July every year.

St Bonaventure's High School , a school in Hyderabad, Pakistan Works [ edit ] Bonaventure Texts in Translation Series, St. Bonaventure, NY, Franciscan Institute Publications (15 volumes): On the Reduction of the Arts to Theology , Translation, Introduction and Commentary by Zachary Hayes , OFM, vol. 1, 1996.

Journey of the Soul into God - Itinerarium Mentis in Deum translation and Introduction by Zachary Hayes, OFM, and Philotheus Boehner, OFM, vol. 2, 2002.

ISBN 978-1-57659-044-7 Disputed Questions on the Mystery of the Trinity , translated by Zachary Hayes, vol. 3, 1979.

ISBN 978-1-57659-045-4 .

Disputed Questions on the Knowledge of Christ , translated by Zachary Hayes, vol. 4, 1992.

Writings Concerning the Franciscan Order , translated by Dominic V. Monti, OFM, vol. 5, 1994.

Collations on the Ten Commandments , translated by Paul Spaeth, vol. 6, 1995.

Commentary on Ecclesiastes , translated by Campion Murray and Robert J. Karris, vol. 7, 2005.

Commentary on the Gospel of Luke , translated by Robert J. Karris (3 vols), vol. 8, 2001–4.

Breviloquium , translated by Dominic V. Monti, OFM, vol. 9, 2005.

Writings on the Spiritual Life , [includes translations of The Threefold Way, On the Perfection of Life, On Governing the Soul , and The Soliloquium: A Dialogue on the Four Spiritual Exercises , the prologue to the Commentary on Book II of the Sentences of Peter Lombard and three short sermons: On the Way of Life, On Holy Saturday , and On the Monday after Palm Sunday , vol. 10, 2006.] Commentary on the Gospel of John , translated by Robert J. Karris, vol. 11, 2007.

The Sunday sermons of St. Bonaventure , edited and translated by Timothy J. Johnson, vol. 12, 2008.

Disputed questions on evangelical perfection , edited and translated by Thomas Reist and Robert J. Karris, vol. 13, 2008.

Collations on the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit , introduced and translated by Zachary Hayes, vol. 14, 2008.

Defense of the mendicants , translated by Jose de Vinck and Robert J. Karris, vol. 15, 2010.

The Life of Christ translated and edited by William Henry Hutchings, 1881.

The Journey of the Mind into God [ Itinerarium mentis in Deum ]. Indianapolis: Hackett. 1993.

ISBN 978-0-8722-0200-9 .

On the Reduction of the Arts to Theology (De Reductione Artium ad Theologiam) , translated by Zachary Hayes, Saint Bonaventure, NY: Franciscan Institute, 1996.

ISBN 978-1-57659-043-0 Bringing forth Christ: five feasts of the child Jesus , translated by Eric Doyle, Oxford: SLG Press, 1984.

The soul's journey into God; The tree of life; The life of St. Francis . Translated by Cousins, Ewert (The Classics of Western Spirituality ed.). Mahwah, New Jersey: Paulist Press. 1978.

ISBN 0-8091-2121-2 .

The Mystical Vine: a Treatise on the Passion of Our Lord , translated by a friar of SSF, London: Mowbray, 1955.

Life of St Francis of Assisi , TAN Books , 2010.

ISBN 978-0-89555-151-1 References [ edit ] ^ "Bonaventure on the Neoplatonic Hierarchy of Virtues - Medieval Philosophy" .

Wilmington For Christ . 17 December 2020.

^ "Bonaventure (c.1217–74) - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.rep.routledge.com .

^ "Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109)" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2006 , retrieved 10 November 2017 ^ "Bonaventure - On the Necessity of Being - Introduction" .

bartholomew.stanford.edu .

^ "St. Bonaventura (Giovanni) Cardinal [Catholic-Hierarchy]" .

^ a b M. Walsh, ed. (1991).

Butler's Lives of the Saints . New York: HarperCollins. p.

216 .

ISBN 9780060692995 .

^ Robinson, Paschal (1907). " St. Bonaventure" . In Catholic Encyclopedia .

2 . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Hammond, Jay M. (2003). "Bonaventure, St.". In Marthaler, Bernard L. (ed.).

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 2 (2nd. ed.). Detroit: Thomson/Gale in association with the Catholic University of America . p. 479.

ISBN 0-7876-4006-9 .

^ Bonaventure (1904).

The Life of Saint Francis . London: J. M. Dent and Co. p. prol. 3.

^ a b c d e f Adamson, Robert (1911). " Bonaventura, Saint ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica .

4.

(11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 197-198.

^ Knowles, David (1988).

The Evolution of Medieval Thought (2nd ed.). Edinburgh Gate: Longman Group.

ISBN 978-0-394-70246-9 .

^ Taddeo di Bartolo , Thomas exposes the Corpus Christi liturgy to Urban IV , 1403, MusArt Philadelphia. Inspired by the panel by Ugolino di Prete Ilario in  Corporal Chapel of the Cathedral of Orvieto (1357), which was derived from the tile in the reliquary of Ugolino di Vieri (1338). Cf.

Manglaviti, Silvio.

SAN TOMMASO D'AQUINO AD ORVIETO COLONNA TEOLOGICA DI PAPA URBANO IV NELL'ISTITUZIONE DEL CORPUS DOMINI . p. 1 . Retrieved 1 April 2025 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) . In 1250 Bonaventura pronounced the Sermo de Santissimo Corpore Christi in Germany, which Pope Urban IV also made him preach at the Consistory of Orvieto (1264).

^ On the Commentary on the Gospel of St. Luke, Bonaventure has only four scripture citations in common with Hugh of St. Cher: Isaiah 58:7; John 14:2;. Proverbs 9:1; Matthew 21:13. Twenty distinctiones (of a total of thirty-six) were adapted from Hugh of St. Cher's commentary. Cf.

Robert J. Karris (2002). "St. Bonaventure use of distinctiones: his independence of and dependence on Hugh of St. Cher".

Franciscan Studies .

60 . St. Bonaventure University - Franciscan Institute Publications: 209– 250.

doi : 10.1353/frc.2002.0013 .

JSTOR 41975302 .

OCLC 5183714551 .

^ Fryde, E. B.; Greenway, D. E.; Porter, S.; Roy, I. (1996).

Handbook of British Chronology (3rd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 282.

ISBN 0-521-56350-X .

^ Witzel, Theophilus (1912).

"Roger Bacon" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company . Retrieved 12 February 2014 .

^ a b Noone, Tim; Houser, R. E. (2010).

"Saint Bonaventure" .

plato.stanford.edu .

^ Costelloe, Laurence.

"Saint Bonaventure" .

Project Gutenberg . Retrieved 15 July 2021 .

^ Laurence Costelloe (1911).

Saint Bonaventure: The Seraphic Doctor, Minister-general of the Franciscan Order, Cardinal Bishop of Albano . Longmans, Green & Company. p.

54 .

^ a b c Robinson, Paschal (1907).

"St. Bonaventure" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company . Retrieved 5 January 2013 .

^ Hattrup, Dieter (1993).

Ekstatik der Geschichte. Die Entwicklung der christologischen Erkenntnistheorie Bonaventuras (in German). Paderborn: Schöningh.

ISBN 3-506-76273-7 .

^ Schlosser, Marianne (2013). "Bonaventure: Life and Works". In Hammond, Jay M.; Hellmann, J. A. Wayne; Goff, Jared (eds.).

A Companion to Bonaventure . Brill's Companions to the Christian Tradition. Boston: Brill. p. 12. n.7.

ISBN 978-90-04-26072-6 .

This treatise has always been recognized as indubitably authentic. A few years ago, Dieter Hattrup voiced his doubts: 'Bonaventura zwischen Mystik und Mystifikation. Wer ist der Autor von De reductione?' Theologie und Glaube 87 (1997): 541–562. However, the recent research of Joshua Benson indicates the text's authenticity: 'Identifying the Literary Genre of the De reductione artium ad theologiam: Bonaventure's Inaugural Lecture at Paris', Franciscan Studies 67 (2009): 149–178.

^ Benson, Joshua C. (2009). "Identifying the Literary Genre of the "De reductione artium ad theologiam": Bonaventure's Inaugural Lecture at Paris".

Franciscan Studies .

67 (1). Franciscan Institute Publications: 149– 178.

doi : 10.1353/frc.0.0031 .

JSTOR i40092600 .

S2CID 191451067 .

^ Hindsley, Leonard P. (March 1990). "Reviewed Work: De septem itinerabus aeternitatis. Mystik in Geschichte und Gegenwart, Abteilung I, Christliche Mystik Band 1 & 2 by Rudolf von Biberach, edited and translated by Margot Schmidt".

Mystics Quarterly .

16 (1). Penn State University Press: 48– 50.

JSTOR 20716971 .

^ Ratzinger, J. (1971) Theology of History in St. Bonaventure , trans. Zachary Hayes, Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press ^ White, J. (2011).

"St. Bonaventure and the problem of doctrinal development" .

American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly .

85 (1): 177– 202.

doi : 10.5840/acpq201185110 .

^ "Brother John Raymond, "The Theory of Illumination in St. Bonaventure" " . Archived from the original on 24 February 2015 . Retrieved 4 January 2013 .

^ Max Bernhard Weinsten, Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis ( World and Life Views, Emerging from Religion, Philosophy and Perception of Nature ) (1910), page 303: "Andere Ganz- oder Halbmystiker, wie den Alanus (gegen 1200), seinerzeit ein großes Kirchenlicht und für die unseligen Waldenser von verhängnisvoller Bedeutung, den Bonaventura (1221 im Kirchenstaate geboren), der eine Reise des Geistes zu Gott geschrieben hat und stark pandeistische Neigungen zeigt, den Franzosen Johann Gersan (zu Gersan bei Rheims 1363 geboren) usf., übergehen wir, es kommt Neues nicht zum Vorschein." ^ Cullen, Christopher M. (2006). "4. Natural Philosophy".

Bonaventure . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 60.

ISBN 0-19-514925-4 .

^ (St. Bonaventure, In I Sent., d. 39 a. I q. I ad 3) ^ St. Bonaventure - Collationes in Hexaemeron, Collatio VI. De Visione Prima, Tractatio Tertia, 1-8 ^ St. Bonaventure - Collationes in Hexaemeron, Collatio VI. De Visione Prima, Tractatio Tertia, 2 ^ "Cosmological Argument" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2022.

^ Davis, Richard (August 1996).

"Bonaventure and the Arguments for the Impossibility of an Infinite Temporal Regression" .

American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly .

70 (3): 361– 380.

doi : 10.5840/acpq199670335 .

^ Frederick Copleston, A History of Philosophy , vol. 2 (Westminster, MD: Newman Press, 1950), p. 248.

^ Bonaventure, Disputed Questions on the Mystery of the Trinity , 1, 2 concl.

^ Pope Francis, Laudato si' , paragraph 239, published 24 May 2015, accessed 27 May 2024 ^ http://maritain.nd.edu/jmc/etext/hwp219.htm McInerny, Ralph, A History of Western Philosophy , Vol.II, Chapter 5, "St. Bonaventure: the Man and His Work", Jacques Maritain Center, Notre Dame University.

^ Calendarium Romanum . Libreria Editrice Vaticana. 1969. pp. 97, 130.

^ Online, Catholic.

"Patron Saints A-Z - Saints & Angels" .

Catholic Online . Retrieved 12 November 2019 .

^ Craughwell, T.J. (2016).

Heaven Help Us: 300 Patron Saints to Call Upon for Every Occasion . Book Sales. p. 72.

ISBN 978-0-7858-3465-6 . Retrieved 12 November 2019 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wolter, Allan B. (1967).

"Bonaventure, St. (C. 1217–1274)" . In Paul Edwards (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. I. New York: MacMillan . Retrieved 19 July 2024 .

Fr. Laurence Costelloe, O.F.M: Saint Bonaventure: The Seraphic Doctor Minister-General of the Franciscan Order at Project Gutenberg Hammond, Jay M. (2003).

"Bonaventure, St." . In Marthaler, Bernard L. (ed.).

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 2 (2nd. ed.). Detroit: Thomson/Gale in association with the Catholic University of America . pp.

479– 493.

ISBN 0-7876-4006-9 .

Hammond, Jay M.; Hellmann, J.A. Wayne; Goff, Jared, eds. (2013).

A Companion to Bonaventure . Brill's Companions to the Christian Tradition. Boston: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-26072-6 .

LaNave, Gregory F. "Bonaventure", in Paul L. Gavrilyuk and Sarah Coakley (eds.), The Spiritual Senses: Perceiving God in Western Christianity , Cambridge: Cambridge, University of Cambridge, 2011, 159–173.

Quinn, John Francis (1973).

The Historical Constitution of St. Bonaventure's Philosophy . Toronto: Pontificial Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

Tavard, George Henry .

From Bonaventure to the Reformers , Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 2005 (Marquette Studies in Theology).

ISBN 0-87462-695-1 ISBN 9780874626957 .

Tim Noone and R. E. Houser, "Saint Bonaventure." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Dales, D. J. (2017).

Divine Remaking: St Bonaventure & the Gospel of Luke . Cambridge: James Clarke & Co.

ISBN 978-0227176535 .

Dales, D. J. (2019).

Way back to God: the Spiritual Theology of St Bonaventure . Cambridge: James Clarke & Co.

ISBN 978-0227176931 .

[in Italian] General index of the academic journal Doctor Seraphicus from 1954 to 2019 External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Bonaventure Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bonaventure .

Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: Scriptor:Bonaventura Wikiquote has quotations related to Bonaventure .

Manselli, Raoul (1969).

"BONAVENTURA da Bagnoregio, santo" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 11: Boccadibue–Bonetti (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

John Francis Quinn, Bonaventure at the Encyclopædia Britannica Bonaventure , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy MS 2/3 Meditationes super Genesim; Novella materia super septem peccatis capitalibus at OPenn Noone, Tim; Houser, R. E.

"Saint Bonaventure" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Adamson, Robert (1911).

"Bonaventura, Saint" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). pp.

197– 198.

St Bonaventure from the Franciscan Archive.

S Bonaventura: Opera Omnia Peltiero Edente (Latin original texts).

Colonnade Statue St Peter's Square Works by Bonaventure at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works of Boaventura (Saint) at the National Library of Portugal Catholic Church titles Preceded by John of Parma Minister General of the Order of Friars Minor 1257–1274 Succeeded by Jerome of Ascoli Preceded by William Langton Archbishop of York 1265–1266 Succeeded by Walter Giffard v t e Bishops and archbishops of York Pre- Reformation bishops Paulinus Chad Wilfrid Bosa John of Beverley Wilfrid II Pre-Reformation archbishops Egbert Æthelbert Eanbald I Eanbald II Wulfsige Wigmund Wulfhere Æthelbald Hrotheweard Wulfstan I Oscytel Edwald Oswald Ealdwulf Wulfstan II Ælfric Puttoc Cynesige Ealdred Thomas of Bayeux Gerard Thomas II Thurstan William FitzHerbert Henry Murdac William FitzHerbert Roger de Pont L'Évêque Geoffrey Plantagenet Simon Langton Walter de Gray Sewal de Bovil Godfrey Ludham William Langton Bonaventure Walter Giffard William de Wickwane John le Romeyn Henry of Newark Thomas of Corbridge William Greenfield William Melton William Zouche John of Thoresby Alexander Neville Thomas Arundel Robert Waldby Richard le Scrope Thomas Langley Robert Hallam Henry Bowet Philip Morgan Richard Fleming John Kemp William Booth George Neville Lawrence Booth Thomas Rotherham Thomas Savage Christopher Bainbridge Thomas Wolsey Post-Reformation archbishops Edward Lee Robert Holgate Nicholas Heath Thomas Young Edmund Grindal Edwin Sandys John Piers Matthew Hutton Tobias Matthew George Montaigne Samuel Harsnett Richard Neile John Williams Episcopacy abolished ( Commonwealth ) Accepted Frewen Richard Sterne John Dolben Thomas Lamplugh John Sharp Sir William Dawes Bt Lancelot Blackburne Thomas Herring Matthew Hutton John Gilbert Robert Hay Drummond William Markham Edward Venables-Vernon-Harcourt Thomas Musgrave Charles Longley William Thomson William Connor Magee William Maclagan Cosmo Lang William Temple Cyril Garbett Michael Ramsey Donald Coggan Stuart Blanch John Habgood David Hope John Sentamu Paul Ferguson (acting diocesan) Stephen Cottrell Links to related articles v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐glwbj
Cached time: 20250817045322
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.321 seconds
Real time usage: 1.633 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14512/1000000
Revision size: 51256/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 488573/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 99914/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 289926/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.779/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22558024/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1294.327      1 -total
 48.47%  627.352      7 Template:Infobox
 30.49%  394.650      1 Template:Infobox_saint
 27.72%  358.794      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.54%  175.251      1 Template:Reflist
 10.04%  129.950      1 Template:Ordination
  9.73%  125.935      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.01%  103.690     20 Template:Cite_book
  7.76%  100.454      1 Template:Scholasticism
  6.68%   86.397      4 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:95429:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045322 and revision id 1299000194. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bonaventure&oldid=1299000194 " Categories : 1221 births 1274 deaths Augustinian philosophers People from the Province of Viterbo Italian Friars Minor Catholic philosophers Scholastic philosophers Academic staff of the University of Paris 13th-century Italian philosophers 13th-century writers in Latin 13th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians 13th-century Christian mystics Rationalists Cardinal-bishops of Albano Italian Roman Catholic saints Italian Roman Catholic writers 13th-century Christian saints Franciscan mystics Franciscan bishops Franciscan cardinals Franciscan saints Franciscan scholars Franciscan spirituality Franciscan theologians Franciscan Doctors of the Church Ministers General of the Order of Friars Minor Neoplatonists 13th-century English Roman Catholic archbishops Anglican saints Systematic theologians University of Paris alumni Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Use British English from June 2013 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with hCards Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Pages using ordination template and denomination parameter Pages with template ordination embedded Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles to be expanded from June 2025 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with LibriVox links Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 00:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bonaventure 62 languages Add topic

