Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Safety issues 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fireman's pole 8 languages Català Deutsch Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pole that firefighters slide down to reach ground level The firepole in a fire station in Toronto, Ontario A fireman's pole (also called a firefighter's pole , sliding pole or a fire pole ) is a pole that firefighters slide down to quickly reach the ground floor of a fire station . This allows them to respond to an emergency call faster, as they arrive at the fire engine faster than by using a standard staircase.

In the 1870s, answering an alarm, Chicago fireman George Reid decided to use the long-pole the company employed to lift horse's hay from the upper-loft to slide to the ground floor, arriving well ahead of the rest of the company.  Company Captain David Kenyon of Engine Company 21 then successfully petitioned the department be allowed to install a pole through the floor of the loft sleeping space to create what became the standard set-up.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The firefighter's pole is found in multi-level fire stations, if the firefighters ' living quarters are located upstairs. When they are dispatched to an emergency, the firefighters descend to the ground floor, put on their firefighting gear, and board the fire engine as quickly as possible. The pole may run through a hole in the floor, or it may be accessed from a balcony. To use a pole, a firefighter grasps it with their hands, then clamps their legs around it, and then replaces their tight hand grip with a looser hand or arm grip to allow themselves to descend, using their legs to control the speed. This is somewhat similar to the technique used for fast-roping .

History [ edit ] Vancouver firemen using firepoles to leave their dormitory, 1910 Spiral staircases or sliding chutes were once common, but not particularly fast. Fire houses were also equipped with spiral staircases so horses would not try to climb the stairs into the living quarters.

[ 2 ] Captain David B. Kenyon of Chicago's all-black Engine Company No. 21 worked in a three-story fire station. The ground floor contained the firefighting equipment , the floor above was for recreation and sleeping, and the top floor was the hayloft to store the winter supply of hay for the fire engines ' horses. During transport, the hay was secured to a wagon using a wooden binding pole, which was stored in the hayloft when not in use. Firefighter George Reid slid down the pole to respond to a call for help once, which inspired Kenyon to create a permanent pole.

[ 3 ] Captain David B. Kenyon In 1878 Kenyon convinced his chief to make the necessary hole in the building and install the pole, after agreeing to pay for any necessary maintenance . The company crafted a pole out of a Georgia pine beam by shaving and sanding it into a 3-inch (7.6 cm) diameter pole which they gave several coats of varnish and a coat of paraffin .

[ 4 ] Despite being the butt of many jokes, others soon realized Company 21 was usually the first company to arrive when called, especially at night, [ 4 ] and the chief of the department ordered the poles to be installed in all Chicago fire stations. In 1880 the first brass pole was installed in the Worcester Fire Department .

[ 5 ] Safety issues [ edit ] A firepole in Cologne with a door at the entry Losing one's grip on the pole can result in falling from a great height; the firefighter may hit an object such as a door extending from a truck; poor speed control can result in injured or even broken legs upon impact with the floor; and burns can occur due to friction if the skin rubs against the pole. If the pole runs through an unprotected hole in the floor, there is a risk of a person falling through it, as well as exhaust fumes rising into the living quarters.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] For these reasons, fire stations built since the 1970s are often built with the living quarters downstairs, and some older fire stations have had their poles removed.

[ 7 ] In the United States, the National Fire Protection Association has called for the removal of all poles from US fire stations due to safety hazards.

[ 8 ] The fire service in New Zealand has already removed most of them.

[ 9 ] In the United Kingdom, more modern fire stations are built with one storey negating the need for a pole and they are sometimes removed from old stations that no longer require the upper floors for operational purposes.

[ 10 ] In October 6, 2016, China Fire Services Guangdong Fire Department [ zh ] , Shenzhen Fire Department firefighter Private 1st Class Zhu Yicong died from a fall while sliding down the fireman's pole, being the only confirmed death from a fireman's pole.

[ 11 ] However, due to the strong tradition, time advantages and new safety features, poles are common worldwide even in newly built stations.

[ 7 ] Slide poles can be made safer. Cushions can be placed around the base of the pole to soften landings. Exhaust control systems can stop fumes from rising upstairs. To prevent accidental falls, the pole can be guarded by railings, baskets, a door or a weight-activated trapdoor that opens only when weight is applied to the pole.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Grossman, Ron (February 24, 2022).

"In response to White Chicagoans mocking the first Black fire crew in 1872, they wanted to prove themselves as good, if not better" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ "Fire Houses and Fire Fighting" .

[ unreliable source?

] ^ Black Heroes of Fire .

ASIN B07M6ZG2XF .

^ a b Alfred, Randy.

"April 21, 1878: Thinking Fast, Firefighter Slides Down a Pole" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved October 5, 2023 .

^ Worcester, MA.

"History of the WFD" . Retrieved September 18, 2020 .

^ a b Castro, Hector (April 24, 2008).

"What's a fire station without a fire pole? $150,000 cheaper" .

Seattle Post-Intelligencer .

^ a b c d Hamill, Sean.

"Fire poles survive thanks to land values, tradition, efficiency" . The Associated Press . Retrieved June 3, 2011 .

^ Newcomb, Tim (December 23, 2010).

"Sorry, Kids. Fire Stations Are Ditching Fire Poles" .

Time . Archived from the original on December 25, 2010.

^ "The legacy of the fire station pole: relics being phased outnationwide due to health and safety" .

The New Zealand Herald . May 4, 2018 . Retrieved July 27, 2018 .

^ Fish, Elizabeth (April 20, 2011).

"Fire Station says goodbye to pole" .

The Lincolnite . Retrieved December 19, 2022 .

^ "朱弈聪" .

MPS Honor Roll .

v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fireman%27s_pole&oldid=1291293965 " Categories : Firefighting equipment American inventions Hidden categories: All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2022 Articles needing additional references from November 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 08:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fireman's pole 8 languages Add topic

