Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and usage 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 The Catholic Church 2.2 Native Americans 2.2.1 Yámana 2.3 Noon Gun 2.4 Aboriginal Australians 2.5 Goryeo and Joseon 2.6 Aviation 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Smoke signal 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Smoke used as a mode of communication "Fire signal" redirects here. For the beacon, see Beacon (fire signal) .

For other uses, see Smoke signal (disambiguation) .

A painting of Native Americans using a smoke signal by Frederic Remington The smoke signal is one of the oldest forms of long-distance communication. It is a form of visual communication used over a long distance. In general smoke signals are used to transmit news, signal danger, or to gather people to a common area.

History and usage [ edit ] In ancient China , soldiers along the Great Wall sent smoke signals on its beacon towers to warn one another of enemy invasion.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The colour of the smoke communicated the size of the invading party.

[ 1 ] By placing the beacon towers at regular intervals, and situating a soldier in each tower, messages could be transmitted over the entire 7,300 kilometres of the Wall.

[ 1 ] Smoke signals also warned the inner castles of the invasion, allowing them to coordinate a defense and garrison supporting troops.

[ 2 ] Misuse of the smoke signal is traditionally considered to have contributed to the fall of the Western Zhou dynasty in the 8th century BCE .

King You of Zhou was said to have had a habit of fooling his warlords with false warning beacons to amuse Bao Si , his concubine.

[ 3 ] From at least the 13th century onwards, the use of smoke signals is documented in the cities, castles, towers, and villages of northern and central Italy as a means of warning of enemy approach in times of war. A single column of smoke would indicate that the enemy forces were large in number, whereas two columns signified that the threat consisted of only a small contingent. At night, the same signals were conveyed by means of fires or lanterns.

[ 4 ] During Sri Lanka 's Kandyan period , soldiers stationed on the mountain peaks alerted each other of impending enemy attack (from English , Dutch or Portuguese people ) by signaling from peak to peak. In this way, they could transmit a message to the King in just a few hours.

[ 5 ] [ failed verification ] North American indigenous peoples also communicated via smoke signal. Each tribe had its own signaling system and understanding. A signaler started a fire on an elevation typically using damp grass, which caused a column of smoke to rise. The grass was taken off as it dried and another bundle was placed on the fire. Reputedly the location of the smoke along the incline conveyed a meaning. If it came from halfway up the hill, it signaled that all was well; but from the top of the hill, it signified danger.

[ 6 ] Colored smoke grenades are commonly used by military forces to mark positions, especially during calls for artillery or air support.

Smoke signals may also refer to smoke-producing devices used to send distress signals .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Examples [ edit ] The Catholic Church [ edit ] Since the 19th century the College of Cardinals has used smoke signals to indicate the taking of a vote during a papal conclave . Eligible cardinals conduct a secret ballot until a Papal candidate receives a vote of two-thirds plus one. The ballots are burned after each vote; since 1914 black smoke has indicated a failed ballot, and white smoke means a new Pope has been elected.

Native Americans [ edit ] Lewis and Clark's journals cite several occasions when they adopted the Native American method of setting the plains on fire to communicate the presence of their party or their desire to meet with local tribes.

[ 9 ] Yámana [ edit ] Yámanas of South America used fire to send messages by smoke signals, for instance if a whale drifted ashore.

[ 10 ] The large amount of meat required notification of many people so that it would not be wasted.

[ 11 ] They might also have used smoke signals on other occasions—thus it is possible that Magellan saw such fires and was inspired to name the landscape Tierra del Fuego ("Land of Fire"); however, he may have seen the smoke or lights of natural phenomena.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Noon Gun [ edit ] The Cape Town Noon Gun , specifically the smoke its firing generates, was used to set marine chronometers in Table Bay .

Aboriginal Australians [ edit ] Aboriginal Australians throughout Australia have used smoke signals for various purposes— [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] sometimes to notify others of their presence, particularly when entering lands which were not their own.

[ 14 ] Sometimes used to describe visiting Whites, smoke signals were the fastest way to send messages.

[ 17 ] Smoke signals were sometimes used to notify of incursions by hostile tribes, or to arrange meetings between hunting parties of the same tribe. This signal could be from a fixed lookout on a ridge or from a mobile band of tribesman.

[ 16 ] "Putting up a smoke" often promoted nearby individuals or groups to reply with their own signals.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Different colours of smoke (black, white or blue, depending on whether the material being burnt was wet grass, dry grass, reeds or other materials) were used to convert information, as was the smoke's shape (a column, ball or ring), allowing a messaging system sophisticated enough to include the names of individual tribesmen.

[ 16 ] Like other means of communication, signals could be misinterpreted. In one recorded instance, a smoke signal reply translated as "we are coming" was misinterpreted as joining a war party for protection of the tribe, when it was actually to indicate hunting parties coming together after a successful hunt.

[ 16 ] Goryeo and Joseon [ edit ] The beacon fire signal system (bongsu, 봉수, 烽燧) was formally institutionalized during the early Goryeo period in 1149 (the 3rd year of King Uijong’s reign ).

[ 18 ] According to historical records, it was enacted by royal decree following a memorial submitted by Jo Jin-yak (曺晋若), the Military Commissioner of the Northwestern Region (Seobukmyeon Byeongmasa, 西北面兵馬使). Under this system, signals were sent using smoke during the day and fire at night.

[ 19 ] The method of bongsu involved using fire at night and smoke during the day. The signaling system followed a five-tiered structure: one torch (geo, 炬) was lit in times of peace; two when enemy ships were spotted at sea; three when they approached the coast; four when they engaged with Korean naval forces; and five when enemy troops landed on shore. These signals were immediately reported by local commanders(ojang, 오장, 五將) to regional governors. In the capital, the Ministry of War (Byeongjo, 병조, 兵曹) monitored the beacons and reported the situation to the Royal Secretariat (Seungjeongwon, 승정원, 承政院), which then informed the king.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Aviation [ edit ] Modern aviation has made skywriting possible.

See also [ edit ] Polybius square Optical telegraph Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Ivan, Djordjevic (2010).

Coding for Optical Channels . Springer US. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-4419-5569-2 .

OCLC 699999686 .

^ a b Du, Yumin; Chen, Wenwu; Cui, Kai; Guo, Zhiqian; Wu, Guopeng; Ren, Xiaofeng (2021-02-16).

"An exploration of the military defense system of the Ming Great Wall in Qinghai Province from the perspective of castle-based military settlements" .

Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences .

13 (3): 46.

Bibcode : 2021ArAnS..13...46D .

doi : 10.1007/s12520-021-01283-7 .

ISSN 1866-9557 .

S2CID 231940516 .

^ Sima Qian .

Records of the Grand Historian . Vol. 4.

^ Romanoni, Fabio (2025).

"Enemy at the Gates: Self-defense Strategies and Measures Taken by the Rural Communities of the Visconti State in the 14th Century" .

Edad Media. Revista de Historia .

26 : 166– 169.

ISSN 2530-6448 .

^ Knox, Robert (2004).

An Historical Relation of the Island Ceylon in the East Indies Together with an Account of the Detaining in Captivity the Author and Divers other Englishmen Now Living There, and of the Author's Miraculous Escape . Project Gutenberg.

OCLC 703947445 at Project Gutenberg ^ "Smoke Signal" .

addpmp.slamjam.com . Retrieved 2022-09-13 .

^ Pyrotechnic device , Feb 4, 1964 , retrieved 2017-02-01 ^ Smoke signal , Nov 28, 1967 , retrieved 2017-02-01 ^ "Lewis and Clark Journals, July 20, 1805" .

^ Gusinde 1966:137–139, 186 ^ Itsz 1979:109 ^ "The Patagonian Canoe" . Pages.interlog.com . Retrieved 2013-02-19 .

^ Extracts from the following book. E. Lucas Bridges: Uttermost Part of the Earth. Indians of Tierra del Fuego.

1949, reprinted by Dover Publications, Inc (New York, 1988).

^ a b Myers, 1986: 100 ^ a b "Report on Patrol to Lake Mackay Area June/July 1957" . National Archives of Australia . Retrieved 2014-01-31 .

^ a b c d e Idriess, Ion L (1953).

The Red Chief . ettimprint.

^ a b Idriess, Ion L (1937).

Over the Range . ettimprint.

^ "봉수" .

terms.naver.com (in Korean) . Retrieved 2025-04-26 .

^ "봉수 - 디지털김천문화대전" .

gimcheon.grandculture.net . Retrieved 2025-04-26 .

^ 문화관광, 창원시.

"창원시 문화관광" .

new.changwon.go.kr (in Korean) . Retrieved 2025-04-26 .

^ "봉수" .

terms.naver.com (in Korean) . Retrieved 2025-04-26 .

References [ edit ] Gusinde, Martin (1966).

Nordwind—Südwind. Mythen und Märchen der Feuerlandindianer (in German). Kassel: E. Röth.

Itsz, Rudolf (1979). "A kihunyt tüzek földje".

Napköve. Néprajzi elbeszélések (in Hungarian). Budapest: Móra Könyvkiadó. pp.

93– 112.

Translation of the original: Итс, Р.Ф. (1974).

Камень солнца (in Russian). Ленинград: Detskaya Literatura .

Title means: “Stone of sun”; chapter means: “The land of burnt-out fires”. (Leningrad: "Children's Literature" Publishing.) Myers, Fred (1986).

Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self . USA: Smithsonian Institution.

External links [ edit ] Look up smoke signal in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Smoke_signal&oldid=1300600953 " Categories : History of telecommunications Ancient China Native American culture Native American history Smoke Optical communications Semaphore Hidden categories: Articles with Project Gutenberg links Pages with Gutenberg book template using bullet CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2024 CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 08:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Smoke signal 31 languages Add topic

