Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 History 3 Focus 4 Sub-theories 5 Structural and Dialectic critiques of human agency 6 Critical Practice models 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Critical social work 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Critical theory applied to social work This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Critical social work" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Critical social work is the application to social work of a critical theory perspective. Critical social work seeks to address social injustices, as opposed to focusing on individualized issues.

Critical theories explain social problems as arising from various forms of oppression and injustice in globalized capitalist societies and forms of neoliberal governance.
This approach to social work theory is formed by a polyglot of theories from across the humanities and social sciences , borrowing from various schools of thought, including anarchism , anti-capitalism , anti-racism , Marxism , feminism , biopolitics , and social democracy .

[ 1 ] Introduction [ edit ] Social workers have an ethical commitment to working to overcome inequality and oppression. For radical social workers, this implies working towards the transformation of capitalist society towards building social arrangements which are more compatible with these commitments. Mullaly & Keating (1991) suggest three schools of radical thought corresponding to three versions of socialist analysis; social democracy , eurocommunist , and revolutionary Marxism. However, they work in institutional contexts which paradoxically implicates them in maintaining capitalist functions.

[ 1 ] Social work theories have three possible strategies of analysis, as identified by Rojek et al. (1986).  These are: The progressive position . Social work is seen as a catalyst for social change. Social workers work with the oppressed and marginalized and so are in a good position to harness class resistance to capitalism and transform society into a more social democracy or socialist state. ( Bailey & Brake, 1975, [ 2 ] Galper, 1975, Simpkin, 1979, Ginsberg, 1979) The reproductive position . Social work is seen as an indispensable tool of the capitalist social order. Its function is to produce and maintain the capitalist state machine and to ensure working class subordination. Social workers are the ‘soft cops’ of the capitalist state machine. ( Althusser , 1971, Poulantzas , 1975, Donzelot, 1976, Muller & Neususs, 1978, Webb, 2016) The contradictory position . Social work can undermine capitalism and class society. While it acts as an instrument of class control it can simultaneously create the conditions for the overthrow of capitalist social relations. (Corrigan & Leonard, Phillipson, 1979, Bolger, 1981) [ 1 ] The fourth strategy of analysis Biopolitics identified in the field of critical social work is The biopolitical perspective . Social work is regarded as a key functioning part of biopolitical operations of power or the reproductive manifestation of the biopolitical modern State (Webb 2019 and Webb, 2023). Drawing on the writings of Foucault, Agamben and Esposito "Biopolitics links control and political command with risk factors of statistically produced populations as a distinctive form of power. In contrast to disciplining, biopolitics turns power's grasp from the coercive control of the individual subject to “life itself ” (Clough 2008). Stephen A. Webb is a main contributor to the biopolitical perspective which is linked to critical social work. Two major international reference works Webb, Stephen A., ed. (2019).

The Routledge Handbook of Critical Social Work . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138578432 .

and Webb, Stephen A., ed. (2023).

The Routledge Handbook of International Critical Social Work . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781032078908 .

make a significant international and inter-disciplinary contribution to this perspective. Webb argues that "biopolitics now has a guaranteed status as the primary framework of analysis for critical social work" (2023:11) and "we should concentrate our efforts on theorising power from the vantage point of biopolitical theory" (ibid.) History [ edit ] Critical social work is heavily influenced by Marxism , the Frankfurt School of Critical Theory and by the earlier approach of Radical social work , which was focused on class oppression .  Critical social work evolved from this to oppose all forms of oppression.
Several writers helped codify radical social work, such as Jeffry Galper (1975), Mike Brake (1975) and Harold Throssell (1975).  They were building on the views expounded by earlier social workers such as Octavia Hill , Jane Addams & Bertha Reynolds , who had at various points over the previous 200 years sought to make social work & charity more focused on structural forces. More recently writers such as Stephen A. Webb , Iain Ferguson, Susan White, Lena Dominelli, Paul Michael-Garrett, and Stan Houston have further developed the paradigm by incorporating inter-disciplinary ideas from contemporary political philosophy, anthropology and social theory. These include the ideas of Michel Foucault , Jacques Donzelot , Gilles Deleuze , Judith Butler , Pierre Bourdieu , Antonio Gramsci and Jürgen Habermas . For the last decade and since 2010 the writings of Italian political philosophers such as Giorgio Agamben and Roberto Esposito , especially their theorizing about community, states of exception, destituent politics, affirmative biopolitics and governance have come to the fore in critical social work. This influenced a critical engagement of the relationship between social work and the COVID-19 pandemic.

A journal published by Policy Press called Critical and Radical Social Work: An international journal promotes debate and scholarship around a range of engaged social work themes and issues. The journal publishes papers which seek to analyze and respond to issues, such as the impact of global neo-liberalism on social welfare; austerity and social work; social work and social movements; social work, inequality and oppression.

[ 3 ] Stephen A. Webb was commissioned by Routledge to edit a major international reference work 'A Handbook of Critical Social Work' (due for publication 2018). Webb published 'The New Politics of Social Work' in 2013 written closely in the tradition of critical social work (also see Webb, 2019, and 2023) Focus [ edit ] Major themes that critical social work seeks to address are: Poverty , unemployment and social exclusion Racism and other forms of discrimination relating to disability, age and gender.

Inadequacies in housing , health care and education and workplace opportunities Crime and social unrest (although the critical approach would be more focused on the structural causes than the behaviour itself) Abuse and exploitation The inhumane impacts of neoliberalism and austerity capitalism [ 1 ] such as the introduction of food banks and precarious zero hours work.

Sub-theories [ edit ] As critical social work grew out of radical social work, it split into various theories. They are listed below, with a selection of writers who have influenced the theory.

Structural social work theory ( Ann Davis, Maurice Moreau, Robert Mullaly) Anti-discriminatory and anti-oppressive social work theory (Neil Thompson, Dalrymple & Burke) Postcolonial social work theory (Linda Briskman) New structural social work theory (Robert Mullaly) Critical social work theory  (Jan Fook, Karen Healy, Stephen A. Webb , Bob Pease, Paul Michael Garrett) Radical social work theory (Mike Brake, Iain Ferguson) [ 1 ] Structural and Dialectic critiques of human agency [ edit ] While critical social work has a strong commitment to structural change, it does not discount the role of agency, albeit a constrained form of potential.  Critical analysis in social work looks at competing forces such as the capitalist economic system, the welfare state as all affecting individual choices. Therefore, according to the critical theory, the aim of social work is to emancipate people from oppression and allow a critique of the ideology of "operativity", State law and governance. Critical social work takes a stance against common assumptions about the necessity of work, capitalist labor and managerial systems of control.

"A dialectical approach to social work avoids the simplistic linear cause-effect notion of historical materialism and the naïve romanticism associated with the notion of totally free human will." (Mullaly and Keating, 1991). "Dialectical analysis helps to illuminate the complex interplay between people and the world around them and to indicate the role of social work within society" (Mullaly, 2007:241).

[ 1 ] Critical Practice models [ edit ] Various practice theories influence critical social work including: Working collectively and recognizing that "community" emerges temporarily around issues and matters of concern.

Relationship based social work (Sue White and Brigid Featherstone) Finding ways in which community, cooperation and consciousness can empower disadvantaged people Helping people to understand the social consequences of the market system, neo liberalism and the economisation of life Helping people deal collectively with social issues rather than individualising them Making alliances with working class organisations and recognise social workers as 'workers' themselves Civil disobedience, such as the intentional and surreptitious violation of agency policies that perpetuate capitalist oppression [1] [ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Original material adapted from presentation by M. Hanlon, School of Social Work, ACU ^ Bailey, Roy; Mike Brake (1975).

Radical Social Work . Pantheon Books.

^ - See more at: "Policy Press - Journals - Critical and Radical Social Work" . Archived from the original on 2015-08-01 . Retrieved 2015-08-22 .

4. The Routledge Handbook of International Critical Social Work: New Perspectives and Agendas [2] 2023, Routledge, London.

External links [ edit ] Interprofessional and inter-agency collaboration Exploring Stress Resilience in Trainee Social Workers [ dead link ] Identifying ‘the critical’ in a relationship-based model of reflection v t e Social work and related concepts Concepts Primary Social work Secondary Anti-oppressive practice Crisis intervention Community practice Community organization Critical social work Financial social work Gerontology Group development Leadership Management New Public Management Policy analysis Program evaluation Performance measurement Psychometrics Psychosocial assessment Cognitive behavioral therapy Recreational therapy Health psychology Solution focused brief therapy Strength-based practice Systems thinking Social justice Social actions Social medicine Social learning (social pedagogy) Types of social work Social case worker Child protection Forensic social worker Medical social worker Psychiatric social worker Rehabilitation worker School social worker Social work in the military Social group worker Social planning Welfare worker Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW) Youth services Qualifications Qualifications for professional social work Bachelor of Social Work (BA, BSc or BSW) degree Socionom (Scandinavia) Master of Social Work degree (MA, MSc or MSW) Doctor of Social Work degree (Ph.D or DSW) International Association of Schools of Social Work Council on Social Work Education Schools of social work Social workers by nationality American Argentine Austrian Australian Bangladeshi Belgian British Canadian Dutch French German Guyanese Hong Kong Indian Indonesian Israeli Japanese Nepalese New Zealand Norwegian Pakistani Polish Swedish Trinidad and Tobago Ugandan Professional associations International Federation of Social Workers (IFSW) National Alliance of Professional Social Workers National Association of Social Workers (American) Australian Association of Social Workers British Association of Social Workers Institute of Medical Social Workers (British) Canadian Association of Social Workers Scottish Children's Reporter Administration Professional Social Workers' Association (PSWA) Biographies Jane Addams Amartya Sen Harry Hopkins Joyce Lishman v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_social_work&oldid=1294410666 " Categories : Social work Critical theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 15:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical social work 1 language Add topic

