Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Shanghai massacre and Northern Expedition (1927) 2 Communist insurgency (1927–1937) Toggle Communist insurgency (1927–1937) subsection 2.1 Negotiations and the Xi'an Incident 3 Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) 4 Immediate post-war clashes (1945–1946) 5 Resumed fighting (1946–1949) Toggle Resumed fighting (1946–1949) subsection 5.1 Background and disposition of forces 5.2 Outbreak of war 5.3 Pushing south 6 Aftermath Toggle Aftermath subsection 6.1 Taiwan Strait tensions 6.2 Political fallout 7 Analysis Toggle Analysis subsection 7.1 Poor governance by Nationalists 7.2 Popular support for Communists and cohesion 7.3 International factors 8 Atrocities Toggle Atrocities subsection 8.1 Nationalist atrocities 8.2 Communist atrocities 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Chinese Civil War 81 languages Afrikaans अंगिका العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 16 August 2025 .

1927–1949 civil war in China For other uses, see Chinese Civil War (disambiguation) .

Chinese Civil War Part of the interwar period , the Chinese Communist Revolution and the Cold War in Asia Clockwise from top left: Communist troops at the Battle of Siping National Revolutionary Army troops during the Shangdang Campaign Chiang Kai-shek inspecting soldiers ROCA members boarding a ship during the retreat to Taiwan in 1949 Mao Zedong in the 1930s CCP general Su Yu inspecting troops shortly before the Menglianggu campaign Date 1 August 1927 – 26 December 1936 (first phase) [ 1 ] 10 August 1945 – 7 December 1949 (second phase) Location Mainland China Result Communist victory Territorial changes Communist control of mainland China Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan Belligerents 1927–1936 Republic of China Kuomintang National Revolutionary Army 1927–1936 Chinese Soviet Republic (from 1931) Jiangxi Soviet (1931–1934) Chinese Communist Party Chinese Red Army 1945–1949 Republic of China Kuomintang Republic of China Armed Forces 1945–1949 Yan'an Soviet People's Republic of China (1949) Chinese Communist Party People's Liberation Army Commanders and leaders Chiang Kai-shek Chen Cheng Bai Chongxi Li Zongren Yan Xishan Zhang Xueliang Feng Yuxiang (until 1930) Mao Zedong Zhou Enlai Zhu De Lin Biao Peng Dehuai Su Yu Zhang Guotao (until 1936) Strength 2 million regular troops 2.3 million militia (August 1948) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] 1.2 million regular troops 2.6 million militia (July 1945) [ 3 ] [ 5 ] Casualties and losses 370,000 killed [ 6 ] [ 7 ] 1.5–1.7 million total (second phase) [ 8 ] [ 4 ] [ 6 ] 263,800 killed 190,000 missing 850,000 wounded (second phase) [ 9 ] [ 8 ] over 1.3 million total (second phase) est.

7 million (first phase) [ 10 ] est.

2.5 million (second phase) [ 11 ] up to 6 million total (second phase) [ 8 ] v t e Campaigns of the Chinese Civil War Outline of the Chinese Civil War First Phase (1927–1937) Autumn Harvest Uprising Li Lisan line Encirclement campaigns Japanese invasion of Manchuria Long March Southern Guerilla War Resumption of hostilities (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Northeast China Liaoshen Huaihai Pingjin Yangtze River Shanghai Hainan Guningtou Wanshan Aftermath Xinjiang Kuomintang Islamic insurgency China–Burma border Cross-strait conflict Chinese Civil War Traditional Chinese 國共內戰 Simplified Chinese 国共内战 Literal meaning Kuomintang–Communist civil war Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Guó-Gòng Nèizhàn Bopomofo ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄍㄨㄥˋ ㄋㄟˋ ㄓㄢˋ Wade–Giles Kuo 2 -Kung 4 Nei 4 -chan 4 Tongyong Pinyin Guó-Gòng Nèi-jhàn IPA [kwǒ.kʊ̂ŋ nêɪ.ʈʂân] Wu Romanization Koh-gon-ne-tsoe Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Gwok3 gung6 noi6 zin3 IPA [kʷɔk̚˧ kʊŋ˨ nɔj˨ tsin˧] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Kok-kiōng lāi-chiàn Part of a series on the Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Chairman Mao Zedong and leading revolutionaries proclaim the People's Republic of China on October 1, 1949.

Outline of the Chinese Civil War Origins Context Century of Humiliation 1911 Revolution Warlord Era Ideas Nationalism Anarchism Marxism Movements New Culture Movement May Fourth Movement Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement Early history First United Front Founding of the Communist Party Far Eastern Bureau of the Communist International Sun–Joffe Manifesto Left Kuomintang Peasant Movement Training Institute Canton Coup 28 Bolsheviks Labor organizing 1922 seamen's strike May Thirtieth Movement Canton–Hong Kong strike Northern Expedition Wuhan Government Hunan Report Hankou incident Nanjing Incident Shanghai Commune Break with the KMT Civil War Aftermath of purge Nanchang Little Long March Autumn Harvest Guangzhou Internal Purges AB League Incident Futian incident Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Chinese Red Army Long March Zunyi Conference Anti-Japanese resistance Xi'an Incident Second United Front Second Sino-Japanese War New Fourth Army Eighth Route Army East River Column Hundred Regiments Offensive New Fourth Army Incident Communist base areas Yan'an Soviet Jin-Cha-Ji Border Region Yan'an Rectification Campaign Yan'an Forum Women's movement Resumed Civil War Military conflict " Millet plus rifles " People's Liberation Army Operation Beleaguer Liaoshen campaign Huaihai campaign Pingjin campaign Retreat of the ROC to Taiwan Urban support for Communists China Democratic League Shen Chong case Jiaochangkou incident Yu Zisan Incident Revolutionary Committee of the KMT Forming the People's Republic Government Central People's Government Writing the Constitution 1954 Constitution Reforms Land Reform New Marriage Law First five-year plan Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns Suppression of counterrevolutionaries Foreign relations Sino-Soviet Cooperation Annexation of Tibet Intervention in Korea Intervention in Vietnam Legacy Mao Zedong Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism National Day 100th Anniversary of the CCP China portal Communism portal v t e The Chinese Civil War was fought between the Kuomintang -led government of the Republic of China and the forces of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Armed conflict continued intermittently from 1 August 1927 until Communist victory resulted in their total control over mainland China on 7 December 1949.

The war is generally divided into two phases with an interlude: from August 1927 to 1937, the First United Front alliance of the KMT and CCP collapsed during the Northern Expedition , and the Nationalists controlled most of China. From 1937 to 1945, hostilities were mostly put on hold as the Second United Front fought the Japanese invasion of China with eventual help from the Allies of World War II . However, armed clashes between the groups remained common. Exacerbating the divisions within China further was the formation of the Wang Jingwei regime , a Japan-sponsored puppet government led by Wang Jingwei , which was established to nominally govern the regions of China that came under Japanese occupation.

The civil war resumed as soon as it became apparent that Japanese defeat was imminent, with the communists gaining the upper hand in the second phase of the war from 1945 to 1949, generally referred to as the Chinese Communist Revolution . The Communists gained control of mainland China and proclaimed the People's Republic of China in 1949, forcing the leadership of the Republic of China to retreat to the island of Taiwan .

[ 12 ] Starting in the 1950s, a lasting political and military stand-off between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait has ensued, with the ROC in Taiwan and the PRC on the mainland both claiming to be the legitimate government of all China. After the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis , both tacitly ceased to engage in open conflict in 1979; however, no armistice or peace treaty has ever been signed.

[ 13 ] Background [ edit ] History of the Republic of China Culture Economy Education Geography Politics 1912–1949 Mainland rule 1911 Revolution ( Sun Yat-sen ) Provisional Gov't Beiyang Government Warlord Era Northern Expedition Shanghai massacre Chinese Civil War Nationalist Government Second Sino-Japanese War ( Nanjing Massacre ) Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Constitutional government 1945–present Taiwan rule Retrocession of Taiwan February 28 incident White Terror Exodus to Taiwan Korean War First Taiwan Strait Crisis Vietnam War Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Three Noes Lieyu massacre Wild Lily student movement Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Anti-Secession Law 100th anniversary Sunflower Student Movement 2015 Ma–Xi meeting 2017 Summer Universiade History of China the PRC (1949–present) Taiwan (geographical) Taipei Kaohsiung Beijing the Kuomintang the Taiwan issue Taiwan portal v t e Following the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the 1911 Revolution , Sun Yat-sen assumed the presidency of the newly formed Republic of China, and was shortly thereafter succeeded by Yuan Shikai .

[ 14 ] [ page needed ] Yuan failed in a short-lived attempt to declare himself emperor , and China fell into power struggle after his death in 1916.

The Kuomintang (KMT), led by Sun Yat-sen, created a new government in Guangzhou to rival the warlords who ruled over large swathes of China and prevented the formation of a solid central government.

[ 15 ] After Sun's efforts to obtain aid from Western countries were ignored, he turned to the Soviet Union . In 1923, Sun and Soviet representative Adolph Joffe in Shanghai pledged Soviet assistance to China's unification in the Sun–Joffe Manifesto , a declaration of cooperation among the Comintern , KMT, and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

[ 16 ] Comintern agent Mikhail Borodin arrived in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of both the CCP and the KMT along the lines of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union . The CCP, which was initially a study group, and the KMT jointly formed the First United Front .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 1923, Sun sent Chiang Kai-shek , one of his lieutenants, for several months of military and political study in Moscow.

[ 17 ] Chiang then became the head of the Whampoa Military Academy that trained the next generation of military leaders. The Soviets provided the academy with teaching material, organization, and equipment, including munitions.

[ 17 ] They also provided education in many of the techniques for mass mobilization. With this aid, Sun raised a dedicated "army of the party", with which he hoped to defeat the warlords militarily. CCP members were also present in the academy, and many of them became instructors, including Zhou Enlai , who was made a political instructor.

[ 18 ] Communist members were allowed to join the KMT on an individual basis.

[ 16 ] The CCP itself was still small at the time, having a membership of 300 in 1922 and only 1,500 by 1925.

[ 19 ] As of 1923, the KMT had 50,000 members.

[ 19 ] However, after Sun died in 1925, the KMT split into left- and right-wing movements. KMT members worried that the Soviets were trying to destroy the KMT from inside using the CCP. The CCP then began movements in opposition of the Northern Expedition , passing a resolution against it at a party meeting.

Then, in March 1927, the KMT held its second party meeting where the Soviets helped pass resolutions against the Expedition and curbing Chiang's power. Soon, the KMT would be clearly divided.

Throughout this time, the Soviet Union sent money and spies to support the CCP. Without their support, the CCP likely would have failed. This is evidenced by documents showing other communist parties in China at the time, one with as many as 10,000 members, which all failed without support from the Soviet Union.

[ 20 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] Shanghai massacre and Northern Expedition (1927) [ edit ] In early 1927, the KMT–CCP rivalry led to a split in the revolutionary ranks. The CCP and the left wing of the KMT decided to move the seat of the KMT government from Guangzhou to Wuhan , where communist influence was strong.

[ 19 ] However, Chiang and Li Zongren , whose armies defeated the warlord Sun Chuanfang , moved eastward toward Jiangxi . The leftists rejected Chiang's demand to eliminate Communist influence within KMT, and Chiang denounced them for betraying Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People by taking orders from the Soviet Union. According to Mao Zedong , Chiang's tolerance of the CCP in the KMT camp decreased as his power increased.

[ 21 ] On 7 April, Chiang and several other KMT leaders held a meeting, during which they proposed that Communist activities were socially and economically disruptive and had to be undone for the Nationalist revolution to proceed. On 12 April, many communists within the KMT were purged in Shanghai through hundreds of arrests and executions on the orders of General Bai Chongxi .

[ 15 ] [ 22 ] The CCP referred to this as the 12 April Incident , the Shanghai massacre , and the beginning of the White Terror .

[ 23 ] This incident widened the rift between Chiang and Wang Jingwei , the leader of the left wing faction of the KMT. The left wing of the KMT also expelled CCP members from the Wuhan Government , which in turn was toppled by Chiang Kai-shek. The KMT resumed its campaign against the warlords and captured Beijing in June 1928.

[ 24 ] Soon, most of eastern China was under the control of the Nanjing central government, which received prompt international recognition as the sole legitimate government of China. The KMT government announced, in conformity with Sun Yat-sen, the formula for the three stages of revolution: military unification, political tutelage, and constitutional democracy.

[ 25 ] Communist insurgency (1927–1937) [ edit ] See also: Encirclement Campaigns Communist insurgency (1927–1937) Chinese name Traditional Chinese 第二次國內革命戰爭 Simplified Chinese 第二次国内革命战争 Literal meaning Second National Revolutionary War Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Dìèrcì guónèi gémìng zhànzhēng On 1 August 1927, the CCP launched an uprising in Nanchang against the Nationalist government in Wuhan . This conflict led to the creation of the Red Army .

[ 1 ] [ 26 ] On 4 August, the main forces of the Red Army left Nanchang and headed southwards for an assault on Guangdong. Nationalist forces quickly reoccupied Nanchang while the remaining members of the CCP in Nanchang went into hiding.

[ 1 ] A CCP meeting on 7 August confirmed the objective of the party was to seize political power by force, but the CCP was quickly suppressed the next day by the Nationalist government in Wuhan, led by Wang Jingwei. On 14 August, Chiang Kai-shek announced his temporary retirement, as the Wuhan faction and Nanjing faction of the Kuomintang were allied once again with common goal of suppressing the CCP after the earlier split. Wang Jingwei took the leadership of KMT after Chiang.

[ citation needed ] Attempts were later made by the CCP to take the cities of Changsha , Shantou and Guangzhou. The Red Army consisting of mutinous former National Revolutionary Army (NRA) soldiers as well as armed peasants established control over several areas in southern China .

[ 26 ] KMT forces continued to attempt to suppress the rebellions.

[ 26 ] Then, in September, Wang Jingwei was forced out of Wuhan. September also saw an unsuccessful armed rural insurrection, known as the Autumn Harvest Uprising , led by Mao Zedong.

[ 27 ] Borodin then returned to the Soviet Union in October via Mongolia. In November, Chiang Kai-shek went to Shanghai and invited Wang to join him. On 11 December, the CCP started the Guangzhou Uprising , establishing a soviet there the next day, but lost the city by 13 December to a counter-attack under the orders of General Zhang Fakui . On 16 December, Wang Jingwei fled to France. There were now three capitals in China: the internationally recognized republic capital in Beijing , the CCP and left-wing KMT at Wuhan and the right-wing KMT regime at Nanjing , which would remain the KMT capital for the next decade.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] This marked the beginning of a ten-year armed struggle, known in mainland China as the "Ten-Year Civil War" (十年内战) which ended with the Xi'an Incident , when Chiang Kai-shek was forced to form the Second United Front against invading forces from the Empire of Japan . In 1930, the Central Plains War broke out as an internal conflict of the KMT; launched by Feng Yuxiang , Yan Xishan , and Wang Jingwei. The attention was turned to root out remaining pockets of CCP activity in a series of five encirclement campaigns .

[ 30 ] The first and second campaigns failed, and the third was aborted due to the Mukden Incident . The fourth campaign (1932–1933) achieved some early successes, but Chiang's armies were badly mauled when they tried to penetrate into the heart of Mao's Soviet Chinese Republic . During these campaigns, KMT columns struck swiftly into CCP areas, but were easily engulfed by the vast countryside and were not able to consolidate their foothold.

Finally, in late 1934, Chiang launched a fifth campaign that involved the systematic encirclement of the Jiangxi Soviet region with fortified blockhouses .

[ 31 ] The blockhouse strategy was devised and implemented in part by newly hired Nazi advisors.

[ 32 ] Unlike previous campaigns in which they penetrated deeply in a single strike, this time the KMT troops patiently built blockhouses, each separated by about eight kilometres (five miles), to surround the Communist areas and cut off their supplies and food sources.

[ 31 ] In October 1934, the CCP took advantage of gaps in the ring of blockhouses (manned by the forces of a warlord ally of Chiang Kai-shek's, rather than regular KMT troops) and broke out of the encirclement. The warlord armies were reluctant to challenge Communist forces for fear of losing their own men and did not pursue the CCP with much fervor. In addition, the main KMT forces were preoccupied with annihilating Zhang Guotao 's army, which was much larger than Mao's. The massive military retreat of Communist forces lasted a year and covered what Mao estimated as 12,500 km (25,000 Li ); it became known as the Long March .

[ 33 ] This military retreat was undertaken by the Chinese Communist Party, led by Mao Zedong, to evade the pursuit or attack of the Kuomintang army. It consisted of a series of marches, during which numerous Communist armies in the south escaped to the north and west. Over the course of the march from Jiangxi the First Front Army, led by an inexperienced military commission, was on the brink of annihilation by Chiang Kai-Shek's troops as their stronghold was in Jiangxi. The Communists, under the command of Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai, "escaped in a circling retreat to the west and north, which reportedly traversed over 9,000 kilometers over 370 days." The route passed through some of the most difficult terrain of western China by traveling west, and then northwards towards Shaanxi. "In November 1935, shortly after settling in northern Shaanxi, Mao officially took over Zhou Enlai's leading position in the Red Army. Following a major reshuffling of official roles, Mao became the chairman of the Military Commission, with Zhou and Deng Xiaoping as vice-chairmen." This marked Mao's position as the pre-eminent leader of the CCP, with Zhou in second position to him.

[ citation needed ] The march ended when the CCP reached the interior of Shaanxi .

Zhang Guotao 's army (Red 4th Front Army), which took a different route through northwest China, was largely destroyed by the forces of Chiang Kai-shek and his Chinese Muslim allies, the Ma clique . Along the way, the Communist army confiscated property and weapons from local warlords and landlords, while recruiting peasants and the poor, solidifying its appeal to the masses. Of the 90,000–100,000 people who began the Long March from the Soviet Chinese Republic, only around 7,000–8,000 made it to Shaanxi.

[ 34 ] The remnants of Zhang's forces eventually joined Mao in Shaanxi, but with his army destroyed, Zhang, even as a founding member of the CCP, was never able to challenge Mao's authority. Essentially, the great retreat made Mao the undisputed leader of the Chinese Communist Party.

The Kuomintang used Khampa troops – who were former bandits – to battle the Communist Red Army as it advanced and to undermine local warlords who often refused to fight Communist forces to conserve their own strength. The KMT enlisted 300 "Khampa bandits" into its Consolatory Commission military in Sichuan, where they were part of the effort of the central government to penetrate and destabilize local Han warlords such as Liu Wenhui . The government was seeking to exert full control over frontier areas against the warlords. Liu had refused to battle the Communists in order to conserve his army. The Consolatory Commission forces were used to battle the Red Army, but they were defeated when their religious leader was captured by the Communists.

[ 35 ] The situation in China in 1929: After the Northern Expedition , the KMT had direct control over east and central China, while the rest of China proper as well as Manchuria was under the control of warlords loyal to the Nationalist government.

Map showing the communist-controlled Soviet Zones of China during and after the encirclement campaigns Route(s) taken by Communist forces during the Long March A Communist leader addressing survivors of the Long March Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek , Commander-in-Chief of the National Revolutionary Army , emerged from the Northern Expedition as the leader of the Republic of China NRA soldiers marching NRA troops firing artillery at Communist forces Negotiations and the Xi'an Incident [ edit ] Main article: Xi'an Incident In late 1935, Chiang Kai-shek started secret negotiations with the Soviet Union in the hopes of gaining material assistance if war broke out between China and Japan. As a precondition for an agreement, the Soviets wanted Chiang to negotiate a ceasefire with the CCP.

[ 36 ] Although reluctant to engage with a group he saw as a rebels, Chiang cautiously sought to establish contact with the CCP.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The CCP Central Committee told them that the CCP was interested in a united anti-Japanese army under a government of national defense.

[ 39 ] Given the wide gap between the CCP and KMT's conditions, further negotiations did not take place during the first half of 1936.

[ 37 ] Meanwhile, the CCP opened up separate negotiations with the Nationalist forces besieging them in northwest China. They managed to sign secret ceasefire agreements with Zhang Xueliang , leader of the Northeastern Army , and Yang Hucheng , leader of the Northwestern Army.

[ 40 ] These generals were frustrated that Chiang' was prioritizing Civil War over resistance to Japan.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Yan Xishan, another neighboring warlord, also signed a secret agreement with the Communists, although he was not as closely aligned with them as Zhang or Yang.

[ 43 ] The members of this northwestern alliance were united by their desire to resist Japan, but they differed over the details of how this could best be accomplished.

[ 40 ] The Communists supported a plan to use Soviet support to take over Shaanxi , Gansu , Ningxia , Qinghai , and Xinjiang and turn northwest China into a base under Zhang's command to resist Japan and oppose Chiang.

[ 44 ] Zhang, Yang, and Yan were still committed to convincing Chiang to lead the anti-Japanese resistance.

[ 40 ] As they continued to negotiate, they kept their alliance secret and even staged fake military battles to allay the suspicions of the Nanjing government.

[ 45 ] [ 40 ] Negotiations between Chiang and the CCP began in earnest in late 1936.

[ 46 ] Chiang continued to try to resolve the civil war militarily; he continued to consider a negotiated settlement with the CCP to be a last resort.

[ 47 ] He was encouraged by the results of the Ningxia campaign in mid-to-late October. In that campaign, the Second and Fourth Corps of the Red Army marched north to pick up supplies dropped in Mongolia by the Soviet Union, but found themselves trapped on the wrong side of the Yellow River.

[ 48 ] They were cut to pieces by the Hui cavalry allied with the Nationalists.

[ 49 ] Chiang began making preparations for a sixth encirclement campaign, and instructed Zhang and Yang to participate.

[ 50 ] In early November, Chen Lifu presented Pan Hannian with a set of extremely harsh conditions for a deal.

[ a ] Pan balked, calling them "conditions for surrender".

[ 53 ] In late November, Chiang ordered the Northeastern Army and forces from the central Nationalist Army, Hu Zongnan 's Right Route Army, to attack towards the Communist capital at Bao'an . At the resulting Battle of Shanchengbao, the Northeastern Army withheld most of its forces from the attack. This allowed the Red Army to ambush and nearly wipe out Hu's 78th regiment.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] This reversed the diplomatic situation: Chen Lifu moderated his conditions, but the CCP recalled Pan Hannian from Nanjing on December 10.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] In late 1936, Zhang Xueliang decided that his repeated attempts to persuade Chiang to create a united front with the Communists were not going to be enough. To Zhang, Chiang appeared dead-set on continuing the Civil War even as the threat of Japanese invasion loomed ever larger. Following Yang Hucheng's advice, he decided to resort to drastic measures.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] On 12 December 1936, the disgruntled Zhang and Yang conspired to kidnap Chiang and force him into a truce with the CCP. The incident became known as the Xi'an Incident .

[ 60 ] Both parties suspended fighting to form a Second United Front to focus their energies and fight the Japanese.

[ 60 ] Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) [ edit ] Main article: Second Sino-Japanese War Japanese occupation (red) of eastern China near the end of the war, and Communist bases (striped) In 1937, Japan launched its full-scale invasion of China and its well-equipped troops overran KMT defenders in northern and coastal China.

The alliance of CCP and KMT was in name only.

[ 61 ] Unlike the KMT forces, CCP troops shunned conventional warfare and instead waged guerrilla warfare against the Japanese. The level of actual cooperation and coordination between the CCP and KMT during World War II was minimal.

[ 61 ] In the midst of the Second United Front, the CCP and the KMT were still vying for territorial advantage in " Free China " (i.e., areas not occupied by the Japanese or ruled by Japanese puppet governments such as Manchukuo and the Reorganized National Government of China ).

[ 61 ] The situation came to a head in late 1940 and early 1941 when clashes between Communist and KMT forces intensified. Chiang demanded in December 1940 that the CCP's New Fourth Army evacuate Anhui and Jiangsu Provinces, due to its provocation and harassment of KMT forces in this area. Under intense pressure, the New Fourth Army commanders complied. The following year they were ambushed by KMT forces during their evacuation, which led to several thousand deaths.

[ 62 ] It also ended the Second United Front, formed earlier to fight the Japanese.

[ 62 ] As clashes between the CCP and KMT intensified, countries such as the United States and the Soviet Union attempted to prevent a disastrous civil war. After the New Fourth Army incident, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt sent special envoy Lauchlin Currie to talk with Chiang Kai-shek and KMT party leaders to express their concern regarding the hostility between the two parties, with Currie stating that the only ones to benefit from a civil war would be the Japanese. The Soviet Union, allied more closely with the CCP, sent an imperative telegram to Mao in 1941, warning that civil war would also make the situation easier for the Japanese military. Due to the international community's efforts, there was a temporary and superficial peace. Chiang criticized the CCP in 1943 with the propaganda piece China's Destiny , which questioned the CCP's power after the war, while the CCP strongly opposed Chiang's leadership and referred to his regime as fascist in an attempt to generate a negative public image. Both leaders knew that a deadly battle had begun between themselves.

[ 63 ] In general, developments in the Second Sino-Japanese War were to the advantage of the CCP, as its guerrilla war tactics had won them popular support within the Japanese-occupied areas. In occupied areas, the Communists established military and political bases from which it carried out guerilla warfare.

[ 64 ] : 35 The Communists built popular support in these areas, returning land to poor peasants, reducing peasant's rent, and arming the people.

[ 64 ] : 35 By Spring 1945, there were 19 Communist-governed areas in China in which 95 million people lived.

[ 64 ] : 36 In Fall 1945, the Communist armies had 1.27 million men and were supported by 2.68 million militia members.

[ 64 ] : 36 The KMT had to defend the country against the main Japanese campaigns, since it was the legal Chinese government, a factor which proved costly to Chiang Kai-shek and his troops. Japan launched its last major offensive against the KMT, Operation Ichi-Go , in 1944, which resulted in the severe weakening of Chiang's forces.

[ 65 ] The CCP also suffered fewer losses through its guerrilla tactics.

[ clarification needed ] [ 66 ] Immediate post-war clashes (1945–1946) [ edit ] The Soviet Red Army invaded Manchuria in August 1945.

Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong met in Chongqing in 1945.

Under the terms of the Japanese unconditional surrender dictated by the Allies, Japanese troops were to surrender to KMT troops but not to the CCP, which was present in some of the occupied areas as well.

[ 67 ] In Manchuria , however, where the KMT had no forces, the Japanese surrendered to the Soviet Union. Chiang Kai-shek reminded Japanese troops to remain at their posts to receive the KMT, but Communist forces soon began taking surrenders from the Japanese and fighting those who resisted.

[ 67 ] General Wedemeyer of the United States Army became alarmed at these developments and wanted seven American divisions to be sent to China, but General Marshall replied that it should not be given priority over Japan and Korea.

[ 68 ] The first post-war peace negotiation, attended by both Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong, was in Chongqing from 28 August to 10 October 1945. Chiang entered the meeting at an advantage because he had recently signed a friendly treaty with the Soviet Union while the Communists were still forcing the Japanese to surrender in some places. Mao was accompanied by American ambassador Patrick J. Hurley , who was devoted to Chiang but also wanted to ensure Mao's safety in light of the past history between the two Chinese leaders.

[ 69 ] It concluded with the signing of the Double Tenth Agreement .

[ 70 ] Both sides stressed the importance of a peaceful reconstruction, but the conference did not produce any concrete results.

[ 70 ] Battles between the two sides continued even as peace negotiations were in progress, until the agreement was reached in January 1946. However, large campaigns and full-scale confrontations between the CCP and Chiang's troops were temporarily avoided. On 26 November 1945, Hurley resigned, viewing Chiang as having gone against his agreement with the Communists.

[ 64 ] : 53 In December 1945, Hurley's former position was filled by Marshall.

[ 64 ] : 54 In the last month of World War II in East Asia, Soviet forces launched the huge Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation against the Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria and along the Chinese-Mongolian border.

[ 71 ] This operation destroyed the Kwantung Army in just three weeks and left the USSR occupying all of Manchuria by the end of the war in a total power vacuum of local Chinese forces. Consequently, the 700,000 Japanese troops stationed in the region surrendered. Later in the year Chiang Kai-shek realized that he lacked the resources to prevent a CCP takeover of Manchuria following the scheduled Soviet departure.

[ 72 ] He therefore made a deal with the Soviets to delay their withdrawal until he had moved enough of his best-trained men and modern materiel into the region. However, the Soviets refused permission for the Nationalist troops to traverse its territory and spent the extra time systematically dismantling the extensive Manchurian industrial base (worth up to $2 billion) and shipping it back to their war-ravaged country.

[ 72 ] KMT troops were then airlifted by the US to occupy key cities in North China, while the countryside was already dominated by the CCP. On 15 November 1945, the KMT began a campaign to prevent the CCP from strengthening its already strong base.

[ 73 ] At the same time, however, the return of the KMT also brought widespread graft and corruption, with an OSS officer remarking that the only winners were the Communists.

[ 74 ] In the winter of 1945–1946, Joseph Stalin commanded Marshal Rodion Malinovsky to give Mao Zedong most Imperial Japanese Army weapons that were captured.

[ 75 ] Chiang Kai-shek's forces pushed as far as Jinzhou by 26 November 1945, meeting with little resistance. This was followed by a Communist offensive on the Shandong Peninsula that was largely successful, as all of the peninsula, except what was controlled by the US, fell to the Communists.

[ 73 ] The truce fell apart in June 1946 when full-scale war between CCP and KMT forces broke out on 26 June 1946. China then entered a state of civil war that lasted more than three years.

[ 76 ] Chinese Communist soldiers march north to occupy rural Manchuria , 1945.

Shangdang Campaign , September–October 1945 Resumed fighting (1946–1949) [ edit ] Further information: Chinese Communist Revolution Background and disposition of forces [ edit ] Resumed fighting (1946–1949) Name in mainland China Traditional Chinese 第三次國內革命戰爭 Simplified Chinese 第三次国内革命战争 Literal meaning Third National Revolutionary War Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Dìsāncì guónèi gémìng zhànzhēng Second name in mainland China Traditional Chinese 解放戰爭 Simplified Chinese 解放战争 Literal meaning War of Liberation Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Jiěfàng Zhànzhēng Wu Romanization Chia-fhon-tsan-zen Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Gaai2 fong3 zin3 zang1 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Kái-hòng chiàn-cheng Name in Taiwan Traditional Chinese 反共戡亂戰爭 Simplified Chinese 反共戡乱战争 Literal meaning Anti-Communist Rebellion Suppression War Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Fǎngòng kānluàn zhànzhēng Third name in mainland China Traditional Chinese 中國人民解放戰爭 Simplified Chinese 中国人民解放战争 Literal meaning Chinese People's Liberation War Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó rénmín jiěfàng zhànzhēng By the end of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the power of the Chinese Communist Party grew considerably. Their main force grew to 1.2 million troops, backed with additional militia of 2 million, totalling 3.2 million troops.

[ 64 ] : 36 Their "Liberated Zone" in 1945 contained 19 base areas, [ 64 ] : 36 including one-quarter of the country's territory and one-third of its population; this included many important towns and cities. Moreover, the Soviet Union turned over all of its captured Japanese weapons and a substantial amount of their own supplies to the Communists, who received Northeastern China from the Soviets as well.

[ 77 ] In March 1946, despite repeated requests from Chiang, the Soviet Red Army under the command of Marshal Rodion Malinovsky continued to delay pulling out of Manchuria, while Malinovsky secretly told the CCP forces to move in behind them, which led to full-scale war for the control of the Northeast. These favorable conditions also facilitated many changes inside the Communist leadership: the more radical hard-line faction who wanted a complete military take-over of China finally gained the upper hand and defeated the careful opportunists.

[ 78 ] Before giving control to Communist leaders, on 27 March, Soviet diplomats requested a joint venture of industrial development with the Nationalist Party in Manchuria.

[ 79 ] Although General Marshall stated that he knew of no evidence that the CCP was being supplied by the Soviet Union, the CCP was able to utilize a large number of weapons abandoned by the Japanese, including some tanks. When large numbers of well-trained KMT troops began to defect to the Communist forces, the CCP was finally able to achieve material superiority.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] The CCP's most effective political reform was its land reform policy. This drew the massive number of landless and starving peasants in the countryside into the Communist cause.

[ 82 ] This strategy enabled the CCP to access an extensive supply of manpower for both combat and logistical purposes; despite suffering heavy casualties throughout many of the war's campaigns, manpower continued to grow. For example, during the Huaihai Campaign alone the CCP was able to mobilize 5,430,000 peasants to fight against the KMT forces.

[ 83 ] Nationalist warplanes being prepared for an air raid on Communist bases After the war with the Japanese ended, Chiang Kai-shek quickly moved KMT troops to newly liberated areas to prevent Communist forces from receiving the Japanese surrender.

[ 77 ] The US airlifted many KMT troops from central China to the Northeast (Manchuria). President Harry S. Truman was very clear about what he described as "using the Japanese to hold off the Communists". In his memoirs he writes: It was perfectly clear to us that if we told the Japanese to lay down their arms immediately and march to the seaboard, the entire country would be taken over by the Communists. We therefore had to take the unusual step of using the enemy as a garrison until we could airlift Chinese National troops to South China and send Marines to guard the seaports.

— President Truman [ 84 ] Using the pretext of "receiving the Japanese surrender", business interests within the KMT government occupied most of the banks, factories and commercial properties, which had previously been seized by the Imperial Japanese Army.

[ 77 ] They also conscripted troops at an accelerated pace from the civilian population and hoarded supplies, preparing for a resumption of war with the Communists. These hasty and harsh preparations caused great hardship for the residents of cities such as Shanghai, where the unemployment rate rose dramatically to 37.5%.

[ 77 ] Hyperinflation meant those employed in the Kuomintang forces lost the purchasing power of their pay.

[ 85 ] : 204 This resulted in corruption and the embezzlement of supplies which disappeared into the barter economy.

[ 85 ] : 204 Ordinary Kuomintang soldiers were often malnourished and desertion was common.

[ 85 ] : 204 The US strongly supported the Kuomintang forces. About 50,000 US soldiers were sent to guard strategic sites in Hebei and Shandong in Operation Beleaguer . The US equipped and trained KMT troops, and transported Japanese and Koreans back to help KMT forces to occupy liberated zones as well as to contain Communist-controlled areas.

[ 77 ] According to William Blum , American aid included substantial amounts of mostly surplus military supplies, and loans were made to the KMT.

[ 86 ] Within less than two years after the Sino-Japanese War, the KMT had received $4.43 billion from the US – most of which was military aid.

[ 77 ] Highlighting the aid provided by the US to the KMT, the Communists' position was that the US was stirring domestic warfare and characterized the civil war as both a national revolution against the KMT and a revolution against US colonization and aggression.

[ 87 ] : 14 Outbreak of war [ edit ] Situation in 1947 North China areas of politico-military control in August 1947 Situation in the fall of 1948 Map of the Far East from the Time magazine showing the situation of the Chinese Civil War in late 1948 Situation in the winter of 1948 and 1949 Situation in April to October 1949 The Nationalists' retreat to Taipei: after the Nationalists lost Nanjing they next moved to Guangzhou , then to Chongqing , Chengdu and finally, Xichang before arriving Taipei in 1949.

The PLA enters Beiping in the Pingjin Campaign Republic of China FT tanks As postwar negotiations between the Nationalist government and the CCP failed, the civil war between these two parties resumed. This stage of war is referred to in mainland China and Communist historiography as the "War of Liberation" (Chinese: 解放战争 ; pinyin: Jiěfàng Zhànzhēng ). On 20 July 1946, Chiang Kai-shek launched a large-scale assault on Communist territory in North China with 113 brigades (a total of 1.6 million troops).

[ 77 ] Knowing their disadvantages in manpower and equipment, the CCP executed a "passive defense" strategy. It avoided the strong points of the KMT army and was prepared to abandon territory in order to preserve its forces. In most cases the surrounding countryside and small towns had come under Communist influence long before the cities. The CCP also attempted to wear out the KMT forces as much as possible. This tactic seemed to be successful; after a year, the power balance became more favorable to the CCP. They wiped out 1.12 million KMT troops, while their strength grew to about two million men.

[ 77 ] In March 1947, the KMT achieved a symbolic victory by seizing Yan'an, the capital of the Yan'an Soviet .

[ 88 ] The Communists counterattacked soon afterwards. With KMT efforts for an all-out offensive failing, the Nationalists changed strategy from broad assaults to concentrating on key targets, including Communist-controlled areas in Shandong and Shaanxi.

[ 64 ] : 56 This approach also failed.

[ 64 ] : 56 From June to September 1947, the Communists launched offensives and Nationalist-controlled areas became the primary battlefields.

[ 64 ] : 56 On 30 June 1947, CCP troops crossed the Yellow River and moved to the Dabie Mountains area, restored and developed the Central Plain . At the same time, Communist forces also began to counterattack in Northeastern China, North China and East China.

[ 77 ] The period of August 1948 through October 1949 included the three most significant Communist military campaigns of the civil war: the Liaoshen Campaign (northeast China), Huaihai Campaign (east China), and Pingjin Campaign (Beijing-Tianjin).

[ 64 ] : 57 The Liaoshen campaign was launched on 12 September 1948 and led by Lin Biao .

[ 64 ] : 57 The main focus of the campaign was Jinzhou.

[ 64 ] : 57 On 14 October, the Communists launched an all-out assault and captured the city in 24 hours.

[ 64 ] : 57 Most of the 90,000 Nationalists casualties in this battle were incorporated into the Communist ranks.

[ 64 ] : 57 The siege of Changchun ended on 19 October when the Nationalist garrison surrendered.

[ 64 ] : 57 On 1 November, the Communists captured Shenyang .

[ 64 ] : 57 By late 1948, the CCP had taken control of the Northeast through the decisive Liaoshen Campaign.

[ 89 ] The capture of large KMT units provided the CCP with the tanks, heavy artillery and other combined-arms assets needed to execute offensive operations south of the Great Wall. By April 1948, the city of Luoyang fell, cutting the KMT army off from Xi'an.

[ 90 ] Following a fierce battle, the CCP captured Jinan and Shandong province on 24 September 1948. During this period, Battle of Weixian took place, which was an important battle for the CCP to liberate Shandong. Through the Weixian Campaign, the CCP controlled the Jiaoji Railway and cut off the connection between Jinan and Qingdao.

The Huaihai Campaign of late 1948 and early 1949 secured east-central China for the CCP.

[ 89 ] It was the largest military operation of the civil war.

[ 64 ] : 57 A large number of KMT troops deserted and changed sides in these conflicts.

[ 85 ] : 204 The outcome of these encounters were decisive for the military outcome of the civil war.

[ 89 ] The Pingjin campaign lasted 64 days, from 21 November 1948 to 31 January 1949.

[ 91 ] The PLA suffered heavy casualties while securing Zhangjiakou , Tianjin along with its port and garrison at Dagu and Beiping .

[ 91 ] The CCP brought 890,000 troops from the northeast to oppose some 600,000 KMT troops.

[ 90 ] There were 40,000 CCP casualties at Zhangjiakou alone. They in turn killed, wounded or captured some 520,000 KMT troops during the campaign.

[ 91 ] The KMT's defeat in the Pingjin campaign ended its ability to be an effective fighting force on the mainland.

[ 64 ] : 58 After achieving decisive victory through the Liaoshen, Huaihai, and Pingjin campaigns, the CCP destroyed 144 regular and 29 irregular KMT divisions, including 1.54 million veteran KMT troops.

[ 77 ] [ 64 ] : 58 Stalin initially favored a coalition government in postwar China, and tried to persuade Mao to stop the CCP from crossing the Yangtze and attacking the KMT positions south of the river.

[ 92 ] Mao rejected Stalin's position and on 21 April, began the Yangtze River Crossing Campaign . On 23 April, they captured the KMT's capital, Nanjing.

[ 33 ] The KMT government retreated to Canton (Guangzhou) until 15 October, Chongqing until 25 November, and then Chengdu before retreating to Taiwan on 7 December. By late 1949, the People's Liberation Army was pursuing remnants of KMT forces southwards in southern China, and only Tibet was left. A Chinese Muslim Hui cavalry regiment, the 14th Tungan Cavalry, was sent by the Kuomintang to attack Mongol and Soviet positions along the border during the Pei-ta-shan Incident .

[ 93 ] The Kuomintang made several last-ditch attempts to use Khampa troops against the Communists in southwest China. The Kuomintang formulated a plan in which three Khampa divisions would be assisted by the Panchen Lama to oppose the Communists.

[ 94 ] Kuomintang intelligence reported that some Tibetan tusi chiefs and the Khampa Su Yonghe controlled 80,000 troops in Sichuan, Qinghai and Tibet. They hoped to use them against the Communist army.

[ 95 ] Pushing south [ edit ] See also: Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Communist conquest of Hainan Island in mid 1950 On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong officially proclaimed the People's Republic of China with its capital at Beiping, which was returned to the former name Beijing. Chiang Kai-shek and approximately two million Nationalist soldiers retreated from mainland China to the island of Taiwan in December after the PLA advanced into Sichuan province. Isolated Nationalist pockets of resistance remained in the area, but the majority of the resistance collapsed after the fall of Chengdu on 10 December 1949, with some resistance continuing in the far south.

[ 96 ] A PRC attempt to take the ROC-controlled island of Quemoy was thwarted in the Battle of Kuningtou , halting the PLA advance towards Taiwan.

[ 97 ] In December 1949, Chiang proclaimed Taipei the temporary capital of the Republic of China and continued to assert his government as the sole legitimate authority in China.

The Communists' other amphibious operations of 1950 were more successful: they led to the Communist conquest of Hainan Island in April 1950, the Wanshan Islands off the Guangdong coast (May–August 1950), and Zhoushan Island off Zhejiang (May 1950).

[ 98 ] Aftermath [ edit ] Main articles: Cross-strait relations and Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan See also: Political status of Taiwan and Two Chinas Map of the Chinese Civil War (1946–1949, and 1950) Most observers expected Chiang's government to eventually fall to the imminent invasion of Taiwan by the People's Liberation Army, and the US was initially reluctant in offering full support for Chiang in their final stand. US President Harry S. Truman announced on 5 January 1950 that the United States would not engage in any dispute involving the Taiwan Strait, and that he would not intervene in the event of an attack by the PRC.

[ 99 ] Truman, seeking to exploit the possibility of a Titoist-style Sino-Soviet split , announced in his United States Policy toward Formosa that the US would obey the Cairo Declaration's designation of Taiwan as Chinese territory and would not assist the Nationalists. However, the Communist leadership was not aware of this change of policy, instead becoming increasingly hostile to the US.

[ 100 ] The situation quickly changed after the sudden onset of the Korean War in June 1950. This led to changing political climate in the US, and President Truman ordered the United States Seventh Fleet to sail to the Taiwan Strait as part of the containment policy against potential Communist advance.

[ 101 ] "Forget not that you are in Jǔ " – a rock in Jinhu, Kinmen with Chiang Kai-shek's calligraphy signifying the retaking of one's homeland In June 1949, the ROC declared a "closure" of all mainland China ports and its navy attempted to intercept all foreign ships. The closure was from a point north of the mouth of Min River in Fujian to the mouth of the Liao River in Liaoning .

[ 102 ] Since mainland China's railroad network was underdeveloped, north–south trade depended heavily on sea lanes. ROC naval activity also caused severe hardship for mainland China fishermen.

During the retreat of the Republic of China to Taiwan , KMT troops, who could not retreat to Taiwan, were left behind to fight a guerrilla war against the Communists. These KMT remnants were eliminated in what the PRC called the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries and the Campaigns to Suppress Bandits.

[ 103 ] According to official statistics from the CCP in 1954, during the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries, at least 2.6 million people were arrested, some 1.29 million people were imprisoned , and 712,000 people were executed.

[ 104 ] Most of those killed were former Kuomintang officials, businessmen, former employees of Western companies and intellectuals whose loyalty was suspect.

[ 105 ] Winning China proper in 1950, also after annexation of Tibet , the CCP controlled the entire mainland in late 1951 (excluding Kinmen and Matsu Islands ). But a group of approximately 3,000 KMT Central soldiers retreated to Burma and continued launching guerrilla attacks into south China during the Kuomintang Islamic Insurgency in China (1950–1958) and Campaign at the China–Burma Border . Their leader, Li Mi , was paid a salary by the ROC government and given the nominal title of Governor of Yunnan . Initially, the US-supported these remnants and the Central Intelligence Agency provided them with military aid. After the Burmese government appealed to the United Nations in 1953, the US began pressuring the ROC to withdraw its loyalists. By the end of 1954 nearly 6,000 soldiers had left Burma and Li declared his army disbanded. However, thousands remained, and the ROC continued to supply and command them, even secretly supplying reinforcements at times to maintain a base close to China.

Following World War II, civil conflicts erupted in Vietnam . With victory in the civil war and the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the Chinese communists supported the communist Viet Minh guerrillas against France . The PRC recognized the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) in January 1950 and began supplying military equipment in accordance with the agreement of April 1, 1950. By the end of that year, the Viet Minh had secured control over remote regions in northern Vietnam and along the Sino-Vietnamese border, and the communists had consolidated their positions in Laos and Cambodia. This territorial control enabled the flow of supplies and weapons into Vietnam and facilitated the establishment of training camps and base areas. Chinese military aid played a key role in the Viet Minh's victory at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] The recognition of the DRV by the PRC and other Eastern Bloc countries also prompted the United States and the Western Bloc to recognize the State of Vietnam as a counterweight to the communists. As Chinese communist troops neared complete victory in December 1949, Vietnamese nationalist revolutionary Vũ Hồng Khanh moved from China to lead a force of Vietnamese, upland minorities, and Kuomintang soldiers toward Lạng Sơn to attack the Viet Minh and the French. Defeated by both, he crossed over to the State of Vietnam. Some Kuomintang soldiers were sent to Phú Quốc for temporary internment and repatriation, but by the late 1950s they were still farming pepper while directing the island militias.

[ 109 ] After the ROC complained to the United Nations against the Soviet Union for violating the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance to support the CCP, the UN General Assembly Resolution 505 was adopted on 1 February 1952, condemning the Soviet Union.

In the end, the Communist military forces suffered 1.3 million combat casualties in the 1945–1949 phase of the war: 260,000 killed, 190,000 missing, and 850,000 wounded, discounting irregulars. Nationalist casualties in the same phase were recorded after the war by the PRC: 5,452,700 regulars and 2,258,800 irregulars.

[ 9 ] [ page needed ] After the formation of the PRC, the PRC government named the Western nations, led by the U.S., as the biggest threat to its national security.

[ 110 ] Basing this judgment on multiple factors, including the idea of a Chinese century of humiliation at the hands of Western powers beginning in the mid-19th century, [ 111 ] U.S. support for the Nationalists during the Chinese Civil War, [ 112 ] and the ideological struggles between revolutionaries and reactionaries, [ 113 ] the PRC leadership believed that China would become a critical battleground in the U.S.'s crusade against Communism.

[ 114 ] As a countermeasure and to elevate China's standing among the worldwide Communist movements, the PRC leadership adopted a foreign policy that actively promoted Communist revolutions throughout territories on China's periphery.

[ 115 ] Monument in memory of the crossing of the Yangtze in Nanjing Taiwan Strait tensions [ edit ] Though viewed as a military liability by the US, the ROC viewed its remaining islands in Fujian as vital for any future campaign to defeat the PRC and retake mainland China. On 3 September 1954, the First Taiwan Strait Crisis started with the PRC shelling Kinmen .

[ 102 ] The PRC captured the Yijiangshan Islands on 19 January 1955, leading to the ROC abandoning the Dachen Islands the following month.

[ 116 ] On 24 January 1955, the United States Congress passed the Formosa Resolution authorizing the President to defend the ROC's offshore islands. The First Taiwan Straits crisis ended in March 1955 when the PLA ceased its bombardment. The crisis ended during the Bandung conference .

[ 102 ] The Second Taiwan Strait Crisis began on 23 August 1958 with air and naval engagements between PRC and ROC forces, leading to intense artillery bombardment of Kinmen by the PRC and Xiamen by the ROC, and ended on November of the same year.

[ 102 ] PLA patrol boats blockaded the islands from ROC supply ships. Though the US rejected Chiang Kai-shek's proposal to bomb mainland China artillery batteries, it quickly moved to supply fighter jets and anti-aircraft missiles to the ROC. It also provided amphibious assault ships to land supplies, as a sunken ROC naval vessel was blocking the harbor. On 7 September, the US escorted a convoy of ROC supply ships and the PRC refrained from firing.

The third crisis occurred in 1995–96. The PRC responded to Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui's visit to the United States, and the U.S. recognition of Lee as a representative of Taiwan, with military exercises. The exercises were also meant to deter Taiwanese voters from supporting Lee in the 1996 election; Lee won the election. Two U.S. aircraft carriers were deployed during the crisis; they were not attacked and deescalation followed.

[ 117 ] US Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi 's visit to Taiwan in August 2022 triggered PRC military exercises across the Taiwan Strait. She originally intended to travel to Taiwan in April 2022, [ 118 ] but was delayed due to COVID-19 .

[ 119 ] She rescheduled the trip to August as part of a wider Asian trip. The White House was reported to have been initially divided over the appropriateness of the trip but later affirmed Pelosi's right to visit Taiwan.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] As a result, the PLA announced four days of unprecedented military live-fire drills, [ 124 ] in six zones that encircle the island on the busiest international waterways and aviation routes.

[ 125 ] In response to the announcement, ROC officials complained that the PRC's live-fire drills were an invasion of Taiwan's territorial space and a direct challenge to free air and sea navigation.

[ 126 ] Political fallout [ edit ] Main articles: China and the United Nations and United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 Lockheed U-2 wreckage (pilot Chang Liyi ) on display at the Museum in Beijing On 25 October 1971, the United Nations General Assembly admitted the PRC and expelled the ROC , which had been a founding member of the United Nations and was one of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Representatives of Chiang Kai-shek refused to recognise their accreditations as representatives of China and left the assembly. Recognition for the People's Republic of China soon followed from most other member nations, including the United States.

[ 127 ] By 1984, PRC and ROC began to de-escalate their hostilities through diplomatic relations with each other, and cross-straits trade and investment has been growing ever since. The state of war was officially declared over by the ROC in 1991.

[ 128 ] Despite the end of the hostilities, the two sides have never signed any agreement or treaty to officially end the war. According to Mao Zedong, there were three ways of "staving off imperialist intervention in the short term" during the continuation of the Chinese Communist Revolution . The first was through a rapid completion of the military takeover of the country, and through showing determination and strength against "foreign attempts at challenging the new regime along its borders". The second was by "formalising a comprehensive military alliance with the Soviet Union", which would dedicate Soviet power to directly defending China against its enemies; this aspect became extensively significant given the backdrop of the start of the Cold War. And finally, the regime had to "root out its domestic opponents: the heads of secret societies, religious sects, independent unions, or tribal and ethnic organisations". By destroying the basis of domestic reaction, Mao believed a safer world for the Chinese Communist Revolution to spread in would come into existence.

[ 129 ] Under the new ROC president Lee Teng-hui , the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion was renounced in May 1991, thus ending the chances of the Kuomintang's quest to retake the mainland. In July 1999, Lee announced a "special diplomatic relationship". China was furious again, but the military drills were stopped by the 921 earthquakes . It was the last tense moment of this civil war.

[ 130 ] With the election in 2000 of Democratic Progressive Party candidate Chen Shui-bian , a party other than the KMT gained the presidency for the first time in Taiwan. The new president did not share the Chinese nationalist ideology of the KMT and CCP. This led to tension between the two sides, although trade and other ties such as the 2005 Pan-Blue visit continued to increase.

With the election of pro-mainland President Ma Ying-jeou (KMT) in 2008, significant warming of relations resumed between Taipei and Beijing, with high-level exchanges between the semi-official diplomatic organizations of both states such as the Chen-Chiang summit series. Although the Taiwan Strait remains a potential flash point, regular direct air links were established in 2009.

[ 14 ] [ page needed ] Analysis [ edit ] The Communist victory over the Nationalists is regarded as one of the most impressive twentieth century insurgent victories.

[ 131 ] : 1 Historians and political scientists cite a number of factors, including the CCP's success at mobilizing mass support and the shortcomings of the Nationalist government.

[ 131 ] : 1 Poor governance by Nationalists [ edit ] See also: Chinese hyperinflation Almost all studies of the failure of the Nationalist government identify hyperinflation as a major factor in the government's collapse.

[ 85 ] : 5 The Nationalist military and the government's civilian employees were most impacted by hyperinflation which in turn prompted widespread corruption and pilfering.

[ 85 ] : 5 Little funding reached enlisted soldiers, who were typically malnourished and poorly equipped.

[ 85 ] : 9 Desertion was common.

[ 85 ] : 9 The historian Rana Mitter writes that a lack of trust in the Nationalist government developed, as it was increasingly seen as "corrupt, vindictive, and with no overall vision of what China under its rule should look like".

[ 132 ] Chiang wrote in his diary in June 1948: "After the fall of Kaifeng our conditions worsened and became more serious. I now realized that the main reason our nation has collapsed, time after time throughout our history, was not because of superior power used by our external enemies, but because of disintegration and rot from within." [ 133 ] Historian Odd Arne Westad says the Communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang Kai-shek and also because in his search for a powerful centralized government, Chiang antagonized too many interest groups in China. Furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against the Japanese. Meanwhile, the Communists targeted different groups, such as peasants, and brought them to their side.

[ 134 ] After 1945, the economy in the ROC areas collapsed because of hyperinflation and the failure of price controls by the ROC government and financial reforms; the Gold Yuan depreciated sharply in late 1948 [ 135 ] and resulted in the ROC government losing the support of the cities' middle classes .

United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson described the Nationalists as "corrupt, reactionary, and inefficient". He believed that the Nationalists had displayed both political inadequacy as well as "the grossest incompetence ever experienced by any military command," and that the Communists "did not create this condition", but skillfully exploited the opportunity it provided.

[ 136 ] Popular support for Communists and cohesion [ edit ] In the meantime, the Communists continued their land reform programs, winning the support of the population in the countryside. This was a decisive factor in the Communists' success.

[ 137 ] Millions of peasants who obtained land through the movement joined the People's Liberation Army or assisted in its logistical networks.

[ 137 ] According to historian Brian DeMare, land redistribution was a critical factor because it linked the interests of peasants in the north and northeast to the Communists' success.

[ 138 ] Ultimately, the Communists obtained the greatest popular support of any insurgency in modern history.

[ 131 ] : 3 An important advantage of the Communists was the "extraordinary cohesion" within its top leadership. This cohesion not only secured it from defections during difficult times but also facilitated "communications and top level debates over tactics". The charismatic style of leadership of Mao Zedong created a "unity of purpose" and a "unity of command" which the KMT lacked. Apart from that, the CCP had mastered the manipulation of local politics to their benefit; this was also derived from their propaganda skills that had also been decentralised successfully by portraying their opponents as "enemies of all groups of Chinese" and itself as "defenders of the nation" and people (given the backdrop of the war with Japan).

[ 139 ] International factors [ edit ] After the Second Sino-Japanese War ended, the United States government provided economic and military support exclusively to the Nationalists.

[ 64 ] : 53–54 As the United States increased aid to the Nationalists in 1947 and 1948, the Communists incorporated United States involvement into its political discourse and framed the conflict not as one between two Chinese sides, but between the Communists and "US imperialists and their puppets".

[ 64 ] : 55 Mao contended that the United States had provided US$5.9 billion to the Nationalists from 1945 to 1949 "to help Chiang Kai-shek slaughter several million Chinese".

[ 64 ] : 55 Strong American support for the Nationalists was hedged with the failure of the Marshall Mission , and then stopped completely mainly because of KMT corruption [ 140 ] (such as the notorious Yangtze Development Corporation controlled by H. H. Kung and T. V. Soong 's family) [ 141 ] [ 142 ] and KMT's military setback in Northeast China. Historians such as Jay Taylor, Robert Cowley, and Anne W. Carroll argue that the Nationalists' failure was largely caused by external reasons outside of the KMT's control, most notably the refusal of the Truman administration to support Chiang with the withdrawal of aid, the US armed embargo, the failed pursuit of a détente between the Nationalists and the communists, and the USSR's consistent support of the CCP in the Chinese Civil War.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] [ 146 ] The better-trained Communist army's support from the USSR helped counter the American aid that the Nationalists received.

[ 132 ] Chen Yun said: "They did their best to help us, we were backed by the Soviet Union and North Korea." [ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] Atrocities [ edit ] During the war, both the Nationalists and Communists carried out mass atrocities, with millions of non-combatants deliberately killed by both sides.

[ 151 ] Nationalist atrocities [ edit ] Over several years after the 1927 Shanghai massacre , the Kuomintang killed between 300,000 and one million people, primarily peasants, in anti-communist campaigns as part of the White Terror.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] During the White Terror, the Nationalists specifically targeted women with short hair who had not been subjected to foot binding , on the presumption that such "non-traditional" women were radicals.

[ 153 ] Nationalist forces cut off their breasts, shaved their heads, and displayed their mutilated bodies to intimidate the populace.

[ 153 ] Torture, rape, and collective punishment were common Nationalist practices during its counter-insurgency campaigns.

[ 131 ] : 91–92 The Nationalists uprooted and moved entire communities in an effort to more easily monitor Communist activities.

[ 131 ] : 92 From 1946 to 1949, the Nationalists arrested, tortured, and killed political dissidents via the Sino-American Cooperative Organization.

[ 154 ] Communist atrocities [ edit ] Main articles: Siege of Changchun and Chinese Land Reform § Mass killings of landlords During the December 1930 Futian incident , the communists executed 2,000 to 3,000 members of the Futian battalion after its leaders had mutinied against Mao Zedong.

[ 155 ] Between 1931 and 1934 in the Jiangxi–Fujian Soviet , the communist authorities engaged in a widespread campaign of violence against civilians to ensure compliance with its policies and to stop defection to the advancing KMT, including mass executions, land confiscation and forced labor.

[ 156 ] According to Li Weihan , a high-ranking communist in Jiangxi at the time, in response to mass flight of civilians to KMT held areas, the local authorities would "usually to send armed squads after those attempting to flee and kill them on the spot, producing numerous mass graves throughout the CSR [Chinese Soviet Republic in Jiangxi] that would later be uncovered by the KMT and its allies." Zhang Wentian , another high-ranking communist, reported that "the policy of annihilating landlords as an exploiting class had degenerated into a massacre".

[ 157 ] During the Siege of Changchun , the People's Liberation Army implemented a military blockade on the KMT-held city of Changchun and prevented civilians from leaving the city during the blockade; [ 158 ] this blockade caused the starvation of tens [ 158 ] to 150 [ 159 ] thousand civilians. The PLA continued to use siege tactics throughout Northeast China.

[ 160 ] At the outbreak of the Chinese Civil War in 1946, Mao Zedong began to push for a return to radical policies to mobilize China against the landlord class, but protected the rights of middle peasants and specified that rich peasants were not landlords.

[ 161 ] The 7 July Directive of 1946 set off eighteen months of fierce conflict in which all rich peasant and landlord property of all types was to be confiscated and redistributed to poor peasants. CCP work teams went quickly from village to village and divided the population into landlords, rich, middle, poor, and landless peasants. Because the work teams did not involve villagers in the process, however, rich and middle peasants quickly returned to power.

[ 162 ] The Outline Land Law of October 1947 increased the pressure.

[ 163 ] Those condemned as landlords were buried alive, dismembered, strangled and shot.

[ 164 ] In response to the aforementioned land reform campaign, the Kuomintang helped establish the "Huanxiang Tuan" ( 還鄉團 ), or Homecoming Legion, which was composed of landlords who sought the return of their redistributed land and property from peasants and CCP guerrillas, as well as forcibly conscripted peasants and communist POWs.

[ 165 ] The Homecoming legion conducted its guerrilla warfare campaign against CCP forces and purported collaborators up until the end of the civil war in 1949.

[ 165 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Taiwan portal Outline of the Chinese Civil War Timeline of the Chinese Civil War List of wars involving the People's Republic of China Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Eastern China Campaign to suppress bandits in northeast China Campaign to Suppress Bandits in southwestern China Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Wuping Notes [ edit ] ^ The terms called for, among other things, reducing the Red Army to 3,000 men and sending all of its senior officers into exile.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Li, Xiaobing (2012).

China at War: An Encyclopedia . Bloomsbury. p. 295.

ISBN 978-1-598-84415-3 – via Google Books.

^ Li, Xiaobing (2007).

A History of the Modern Chinese Army . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-813-17224-8 .

^ a b Hsiung, James C. (1992).

China's Bitter Victory: The War With Japan, 1937–1945 . M. E. Sharpe.

ISBN 1-563-24246-X .

^ a b Sarker, Sunil Kumar (1994).

The Rise and Fall of Communism . Atlantic.

ISBN 978-8-171-56515-3 .

^ Cao Qianfa (曹前发).

毛泽东的独创：＂兵民是胜利之本＂ .

People's Daily (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 October 2020 .

^ a b Ho.

Studies in the Population of China . p. 253.

^ White, Matthew (2011).

Atrocities . W. W. Norton. p. 381.

ISBN 978-0-393-08192-3 .

^ a b c Lynch, Michael (2010).

The Chinese Civil War 1945–49 . Osprey.

^ a b The History of the Chinese People's Liberation Army . Beijing: People's Liberation Army Press. 1983.

^ "Twentieth Century Atlas – Death Tolls" .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 July 2017 .

^ "Twentieth Century Atlas – Death Tolls" .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 July 2017 .

^ Lew, Christopher R.; Leung, Pak-Wah, eds. (2013).

Historical Dictionary of the Chinese Civil War . Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-810-87873-0 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 .

^ Lynch, Michael (9 October 2022).

"The Chinese Civil War: 1945–49" .

Osprey . Retrieved 4 April 2024 .

There is also a sense in which the Chinese Civil War has not ended; no formal peace treaty or agreement has ever been made.

^ a b So, Alvin Y.; Lin, Nan ; Poston, Dudley , eds. (2001).

The Chinese Triangle of Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong: Comparative Institutional Analyses . Contributions in Sociology. Vol. 133. Westport, CT: Greenwood.

ISBN 978-0-313-30869-7 .

ISSN 0084-9278 .

OCLC 45248282 .

^ a b c "Milestones: 1945–1952 – Office of the Historian" .

history.state.gov .

Archived from the original on 19 May 2017 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

^ a b c March, G. Patrick.

Eastern Destiny: Russia in Asia and the North Pacific . (1996). Greenwood.

ISBN 0-275-95566-4 . p. 205.

^ a b H. H. Chang, Chiang Kai Shek: Asia's Man of Destiny (Doubleday, 1944; reprint 2007 ISBN 1-4067-5818-3 ). p. 126.

^ Ho, Alfred Kuo-liang. (2004).

China's Reforms and Reformers . Greenwood.

ISBN 0-275-96080-3 . p. 7.

^ a b c Fairbank, John King. (1994).

China: A New History . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-11673-9 .

^ Kuhn, Robert (2005).

The man who changed China: the life and legacy of Jiang Zemin . Crown.

^ Zedong, Mao. Thompson, Roger R. (1990). Report from Xunwu. Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-2182-3 .

^ Brune, Lester H. Dean Burns, Richard Dean Burns. (2003). Chronological History of U.S. Foreign Relations. Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-93914-3 .

^ Zhao, Suisheng. (2004). A Nation-state by Construction: Dynamics of Modern Chinese Nationalism. Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-5001-7 .

^ Guo, Xuezhi. (2002). The Ideal Chinese Political Leader: A Historical and Cultural Perspective. Greenwood.

ISBN 0-275-97259-3 .

^ Theodore De Bary, William. Bloom, Irene. Chan, Wing-tsit. Adler, Joseph. Lufrano Richard. Lufrano, John. (1999). Sources of Chinese Tradition. Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-10938-5 . p. 328.

^ a b c Lee, Lai to. Trade Unions in China: 1949 To the Present. (1986). National University of Singapore Press.

ISBN 9971-69-093-4 .

^ Blasko, Dennis J. (2006).

The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-77003-3 .

^ Esherick, Joseph. (2000).

Remaking the Chinese City: Modernity and National Identity, 1900–1950 . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 0-8248-2518-7 .

^ Clark, Anne, Klein, Donald. eds. (1971).

Biographic Dictionary of Chinese Communism (Harvard University Press), p. 134.

^ Lynch, Michael. Clausen, Søren. (2003).

Mao . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-21577-3 .

^ a b Manwaring, Max G. Joes, Anthony James. (2000).

Beyond Declaring Victory and Coming Home: The Challenges of Peace and Stability operations . Greenwood.

ISBN 0-275-96768-9 . p. 58.

^ Karl, Rebecca E. (2010).

Mao Zedong and China in the twentieth-century world: a concise history . Durham, NC: Duke University Press . p. 46.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4 .

^ a b Zhang, Chunhou. Vaughan, C. Edwin. (2002).

Mao Zedong as Poet and Revolutionary Leader: Social and Historical Perspectives . Lexington books.

ISBN 0-7391-0406-3 . pp. 58, 65.

^ Bianco, Lucien . Bell, Muriel. (1971).

Origins of the Chinese Revolution, 1915–1949 . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-0827-4 . p. 68.

^ Lin, Hsiao-ting (2010).

Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Kourney to the West . Routledge studies in the modern history of Asia. Vol. 67 (Illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 52.

ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3 . Retrieved 27 December 2011 .

A force of about 300 soldiers was organized and augmented by recruiting local Khampa bandits into the army. The relationship between the Consolatory Commission and Liu Wenhui seriously deteriorated in early 1936, when the Norla Hutuktu ^ Yang 2020 , p. 62.

^ a b Yang 2020 , p. 63.

^ Itoh 2016 , pp. 124–125.

^ Pantsov 2023 , pp. 230–231.

^ a b c d van de Ven 2003 , p. 179.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFvan_de_Ven2003 ( help ) ^ Coble 1991 , pp. 224–225.

^ Itoh 2016 , p. 108.

^ Gillin 1967 , p. 232.

^ Yang 2020 , p. 64.

^ Barnouin & Yu 2006 , p. 65.

^ Sheng 1992 , p. 158.

^ Chen 2024 , pp. 161–162.

^ Yang 2020 , p. 65.

^ Watt 2014 , pp. 111–112.

^ Itoh 2016 , pp. 129–130.

^ Peng 2023 , p. 476.

^ Sheng 1992 , p. 163.

^ Chen 2024 , p. 161.

^ Dillon 2020 , p. 102.

^ Yang 1990 , p. 223.

^ Dillon 2020 , pp. 101–102.

^ Peng 2023 , pp. 476–477.

^ Pantsov 2023 , pp. 241–242.

^ Pantsov 2012 , p. 302.

^ a b Ye, Zhaoyan Ye; Berry, Michael (2003).

Nanjing 1937: A Love Story . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-12754-5 .

^ a b c Buss, Claude Albert. (1972). Stanford Alumni Association.

The People's Republic of China and Richard Nixon. United States .

^ a b Schoppa, R. Keith. (2000).

The Columbia Guide to Modern Chinese History . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-11276-9 .

^ Chen, Jian. (2001).

Mao's China and the Cold War . The University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-807-84932-4 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x Li, Xiaobing (2018).

The Cold War in East Asia . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-138-65179-1 .

^ Lary, Diana. (2007).

China's Republic . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-84256-5 .

^ Lovell, Julia (2019).

Maoism: A Global History . Knopf Doubleday. p.

31 .

ISBN 978-0-525-65605-0 .

Though it is also worth pointing out that, in practice, Mao's recipe for guerrilla manoeuvres played a limited role in Chinese revolutionary wars during the 1930s and '40s. Nationalist armies carried most of the resistance to the Japanese during the Second World War, and Chinese Communist victory in the final years of the civil war up to 1949 was won through field battles that the Soviets taught the CCP how to fight.

^ a b Zarrow, Peter Gue. (2005).

China in War and Revolution, 1895–1949 . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-36447-7 . p. 338.

^ Spector, Ronald H. (2007).

In the Ruins of Empire: The Japanese Surrender and the Battle for Postwar Asia . New York: Random House. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 978-0-375-50915-5 .

^ Spector 2007 .

^ a b Xu, Guangqiu. (2001).

War Wings: The United States and Chinese Military Aviation, 1929–1949 . Greenwood.

ISBN 0-313-32004-7 . p. 201.

^ Bright, Richard Carl. (2007).

Pain and Purpose in the Pacific: True Reports of War . Trafford Publishing.

ISBN 1-4251-2544-1 .

^ a b Lilley, James.

China hands: nine decades of adventure, espionage, and diplomacy in Asia . PublicAffairs, New York, 2004 ^ a b Jessup, John E. (1989).

A Chronology of Conflict and Resolution, 1945–1985 . New York: Greenwood.

ISBN 0-313-24308-5 .

^ Spector 2007 , p. 61.

^ Yang Kuisong (24 November 2011).

杨奎松《读史求实》: 苏联给了林彪东北野战军多少现代武器 .

Sina . Archived from the original on 26 September 2013 . Retrieved 17 May 2013 .

^ Hu, Jubin. (2003).

Projecting a Nation: Chinese National Cinema Before 1949 . Hong Kong University Press.

ISBN 962-209-610-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Nguyễn Anh Thái; Nguyễn Quốc Hùng; Vũ Ngọc Oanh; Trần Thị Vinh; Đặng Thanh Toán; Đỗ Thanh Bình (2002).

Lịch sử thế giới hiện đại (in Vietnamese). Ho Chi Minh City: Giáo Dục. pp.

320– 322. 8934980082317.

[ better source needed ] ^ Michael M Sheng, Battling Western Imperialism , Princeton University Press, 1997, pp. 132–135 ^ Liu, Shiao Tang (1978).

Min Kuo Ta Shih Jih Chih (in Chinese). Vol. 2. Taipei: Zhuan Chi Wen Shuan. p. 735.

^ The New York Times , 12 January 1947, p. 44.

^ Zeng Kelin, Zeng Kelin jianjun zishu (General Zeng Kelin Tells His Story), Liaoning renmin chubanshe, Shenyang, 1997. pp. 112–113 ^ Ray Huang , cong dalishi jiaodu du Jiang Jieshi riji (Reading Chiang Kai-shek's diary from a macro-history perspective), China Times Publishing Press, Taipei, 1994, pp. 441–443 ^ Lung Ying-tai , dajiang dahai 1949 , Commonwealth Publishing Press, Taipei, 2009, p. 184 ^ Harry S Truman, Memoirs , Vol. Two: "Years of Trial and Hope, 1946–1953" (Great Britain 1956), p. 66 ^ a b c d e f g h Coble, Parks M.

(2023).

The Collapse of Nationalist China: How Chiang Kai-shek Lost China's Civil War .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-009-29761-5 .

^ p. 23, U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, William Blum, Zed Books 2004 London.

^ Li, Hongshan (2024).

Fighting on the Cultural Front: U.S.–China Relations in the Cold War . New York: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-20705-8 .

^ Lilley, James R.

China Hands: Nine Decades of Adventure, Espionage, and Diplomacy in Asia .

ISBN 1-58648-136-3 .

^ a b c Westad, Odd Arne. (2003).

Decisive Encounters: The Chinese Civil War, 1946–1950 . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-4484-X . pp. 192–193.

^ a b Elleman, Bruce A. Modern Chinese Warfare, 1795–1989. Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-21473-4 .

^ a b c Finkelstein, David Michael. Ryan, Mark A. McDevitt, Michael. (2003).

Chinese Warfighting: The PLA Experience Since 1949 . M. E. Sharpe. China.

ISBN 0-7656-1088-4 . p. 63.

^ Donggil Kim, "Stalin and the Chinese Civil War." Cold War History 10.2 (2010): 185–202.

^ Forbes, Andrew D. W. (1986).

Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911–1949 . Cambridge University Press. pp. 215, 225.

ISBN 0-521-25514-7 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Lin 2010 , p. 117: "China's far northwest. A simultaneous proposal suggested that, with the support of the new Panchen Lama and his entourage, at least three army divisions of anti-Communist Khampa Tibetans could be mustered in southwest China." ^ Lin 2010 , p. xxi.

^ Cook, Chris Cook. Stevenson, John. (2005).

The Routledge Companion to World History Since 1914.

Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-34584-7 . p. 376.

^ Qi, Bangyuan. Wang, Dewei. Wang, David Der-wei. (2003).

The Last of the Whampoa Breed: Stories of the Chinese Diaspora . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-13002-3 . p. 2.

^ MacFarquhar, Roderick. Fairbank, John K. Twitchett, Denis C. (1991).

The Cambridge History of China . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-24337-8 . p. 820.

^ "Harry S Truman, 'Statement on Formosa', January 5, 1950" .

University of Southern California . Retrieved 7 May 2017 .

^ Xia, Yafeng (2006).

Negotiating with the Enemy: U.S.–China Talks during the Cold War, 1949–1972 . Indiana University Press. p. 38.

ISBN 978-0-253-11237-8 .

^ Bush, Richard C. (2005).

Untying the Knot: Making Peace in the Taiwan Strait . Brookings Institution Press.

ISBN 0-8157-1288-X ^ a b c d Tsang, Steve Yui-Sang Tsang.

The Cold War's Odd Couple: The Unintended Partnership Between the Republic of China and the UK , 1950–1958. (2006). I. B. Tauris.

ISBN 1-85043-842-0 . pp. 155, 115–120, 139–145 ^ Yang, Kuisong (March 2008). "Reconsidering the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries".

The China Quarterly (193): 102– 121.

JSTOR 20192166 .

^ Guo, Xuezhi (2012).

China's Security State: Philosophy, Evolution, and Politics . Cambridge University Press. p. 62.

ISBN 978-1-107-02323-9 . Retrieved 7 November 2022 .

Among them, 712.000 counterrevolutionaries were executed, 1.29 million were imprisoned, and 1.2 million were subject to control at various times.

^ Steven W. Mosher.

China Misperceived: American Illusions and Chinese Reality.

Basic Books , 1992.

ISBN 0-465-09813-4 p. 73 ^ Tucker 2011 , p. 199.

^ Tucker 2011 , p. 1242.

^ Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Lo, Jiu-Hwa; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008).

"Indochina War (First and Second)" .

Encyclopedia of World History . Vol. 6. Facts On File, Inc. p. 204.

ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 .

^ Reilly, Brett (2016). "The Sovereign States of Vietnam, 1945–1955".

Journal of Vietnamese Studies .

11 ( 3– 4): 126– 127.

doi : 10.1525/jvs.2016.11.3-4.103 .

^ Chen, Jian (1994).

China's Road to the Korean War: The Making of the Sino-American Confrontation . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0231100250 .

^ Chen 1994 , p. 22.

^ Chen 1994 , p. 41.

^ Chen 1994 , p. 21.

^ Chen 1994 , p. 19.

^ Chen 1994 , pp. 25–26, 93.

^ McCauley, Kevin (13 September 2016).

"PLA Yijiangshan Joint Amphibious Operation: Past is Prologue" .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ Kuhn, Anthony; Feng, Emily (2 August 2022).

"What 3 past Taiwan Strait crises can teach us about U.S.–China tensions today" .

Morning Edition .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ Pollard, Martin Quin (7 April 2022).

"China warns U.S. against House Speaker Pelosi visiting Taiwan" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ Chiacu, Doina (8 April 2022).

"U.S. House Speaker Pelosi is latest U.S. official to test positive for COVID" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ Mason, Jeff; Martina, Michael (1 August 2022).

"White House: U.S. will not be intimidated by China; Pelosi has right to visit Taiwan" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ "Nancy Pelosi's plan to visit Taiwan prompts outrage from China" . Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022.

^ Китай-Тайвань: на тлі можливого візиту Пелосі зростає напруження [China-Taiwan: Tensions rise amid possible Pelosi visit].

BBC News Україна (in Ukrainian).

Archived from the original on 2 August 2022 . Retrieved 2 August 2022 .

^ Ненсі Пелосі летить на Тайвань: що потрібно знати про кризу між США і Китаєм [Nancy Pelosi flies to Taiwan: what you need to know about the crisis between the USA and China].

unian.ua (in Ukrainian). August 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2022 . Retrieved 2 August 2022 .

^ Zheng, Sarah (2 August 2022).

"China Plans Four Days of Military Drills in Areas Encircling Taiwan" .

Bloomberg . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ Davidson, Helen; Ni, Vincent (3 August 2022).

"China to begin series of unprecedented live-fire drills off Taiwan coast" .

the Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 4 August 2022 .

^ Lee, Yimou (4 August 2022).

"China begins 'illegitimate, irresponsible' live-fire military drills – Taiwan" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 4 August 2022 .

^ "People's Republic of China In, Taiwan Out, at U.N." The Learning Network . 25 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 May 2018 .

^ "Taiwan flashpoint" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2017 . Retrieved 20 October 2017 .

^ Decisive Encounters [ permanent dead link ] By Westad, Odd Arne. Stanford University Press, 21 Mar pp. 292–297 2003 (Google Books).

^ 历次台海危机内幕及其背后大国之间的博弈(图) .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2022 .

^ a b c d e Opper, Marc (2020).

People's Wars in China, Malaya, and Vietnam . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

doi : 10.3998/mpub.11413902 .

ISBN 978-0-472-90125-8 .

S2CID 211359950 .

^ a b Mitter, Rana (2020).

China's good war: how World War II is shaping a new nationalism . Cambridge, MA: Belknap. p. 54.

ISBN 978-0-674-98426-4 .

OCLC 1141442704 .

^ Trei, Lisa (9 March 2005).

"Hoover's new archival acquisitions shed light on Chinese history" .

Stanford University .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2019 . Retrieved 11 July 2019 .

^ Odd Arne Westad, Restless Empire: China and the World Since 1750 (2012) p. 291.

^ 金圓券相關史料 – 財政部財政史料陳列室 (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 2 January 2015 . Retrieved 8 March 2014 .

^ Kissinger, Henry (2011).

On China . Penguin. pp.

117– 118.

ISBN 9781594202711 .

^ a b Lin, Chun (2006).

The Transformation of Chinese Socialism . Durham, NC: Duke University Press . p. 43.

doi : 10.1017/S1598240800003520 .

ISBN 978-0-8223-3785-0 .

S2CID 155992759 .

^ DeMare, Brian James (2019).

Land Wars: the Story of China's Agrarian Revolution .

Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-1-5036-0952-5 .

^ For quotes see Westad, Odd Arne (2003).

Decisive Encounters: The Chinese Civil War, 1946–1950 . Stanford University Press. pp.

9– 11.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4484-3 . Retrieved 6 October 2019 .

^ Sun, Tung-hsun (1982).

"Some Recent American Interpretations of Sino-American Relations of the Late 1940s: An Assessment" (PDF) .

Institute of European and American Studies, Academia Sinica .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ T. V. Soong – A Register of His Papers in the Hoover Institution Archives Archived 27 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine media.hoover.org ^ 轉載: 杜月笙的1931 (6) – 五湖煙景的日誌 – 倍可親 .

big5.backchina.com (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 27 February 2015 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 .

^ Taylor, Jay (2009).

The Generalissimo . Harvard University Press. pp.

102– 103.

ISBN 978-0-674-05471-4 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

^ "Chiang's China" .

Worldif.economist.com . 1 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2022 . Retrieved 20 July 2022 .

^ "China Without Tears: If Chiang Kai-Shek Hadn't Gambled in 1946" .

Uchronia.net .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 19 July 2022 .

^ "Who Lost China? | EWTN" .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2022 . Retrieved 23 July 2022 .

^ ГЛАВА 35 ГРАЖДАНСКАЯ ВОЙНА В КИТАЕ .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2020 .

^ 青, 山.

苏联出兵之后中共对东北的争夺 .

中国共产党新闻网 . 人民网. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ 吕, 明辉.

朝鲜支援中国东北解放战争纪实 .

通化师范学院 . 白山出版社.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ 金, 东吉.

中国人民解放军中的朝鲜师回朝鲜问题新探 .

香港中文大學 . 中國研究服務中心.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ Rummel, Rudolph (1994), Death by Government .

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Barnouin, Barbara and Yu Changgen.

Zhou Enlai: A Political Life Archived 25 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2006.

ISBN 962-996-280-2 . Retrieved 12 November 2022. p. 38 ^ a b c Karl, Rebecca E. (2010).

Mao Zedong and China in the twentieth-century world: a concise history . Durham, NC: Duke University Press . p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4 .

^ Mitter, Rana (2020).

China's good war: how World War II is shaping a new nationalism . Cambridge, MA: Belknap. p. 179.

ISBN 978-0-674-98426-4 .

^ Feigon, Lee (2002).

Mao: A Reinterpretation . Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. pp.

51– 53.

ISBN 978-1566634588 .

^ Opper, Marc (2018).

"Revolution Defeated: The Collapse of the Chinese Soviet Republic" .

Twentieth-Century China .

43 (1): 60.

doi : 10.1353/tcc.2018.0003 .

S2CID 148775889 .

^ Opper, Marc (2020). "The Chinese Soviet Republic, 1931–1934".

People's Wars in China, Malaya, and Vietnam . University of Michigan Press. p. 58.

doi : 10.3998/mpub.11413902 .

hdl : 20.500.12657/23824 .

ISBN 978-0-472-13184-6 .

S2CID 211359950 .

^ a b Koga, Yukiko (2016).

Inheritance of Loss: China, Japan, and the Political Economy of Redemption After Empire . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 022641213X .

[ page needed ] ^ "Pomfret, John (October 2, 2009). "Red Army Starved 150,000 Chinese Civilians, Books Says". Associated Press.

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on October 2, 2009. Retrieved October 2, 2009" .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2011.

^ Lary, Diana (2015).

China's Civil War . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 1107054672 .

[ page needed ] ^ DeMare, Brian James (2019).

Land Wars: The Story of China's Agrarian Revolution . Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-1503609525 .

[ page needed ] ^ Tanner (2015) , pp. 134–135.

^ Saich The Rise to Power of the Chinese Communist Party Outline Land Law of 1947 Archived 6 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Scheidel, Walter (2017).

The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century .

Princeton University Press . p. 225.

ISBN 978-0-691-16502-8 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

^ a b Liu, Zaiyu (2002).

第二次國共戰爭時期的還鄉團 (PDF) (in Chinese). Hong Kong: Twenty First Century Bimonthly.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2019 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

Sources [ edit ] Barnouin, Barbara; Yu, Changgen (2006).

Zhou Enlai: A Political Life . Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press .

ISBN 978-962-996-280-7 .

Chen, Jian (2024).

Zhou Enlai: A Life . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-29657-2 .

Coble, Parks M. (1991).

Facing Japan: Chinese Politics and Japanese Imperialism, 1931-1937 . Harvard East Asian monographs. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-77530-5 .

Dillon, Michael (2020).

Zhou Enlai: The Enigma Behind Chairman Mao . New York: I.B. Tauris .

ISBN 978-1-78672-666-7 .

Gillin, Donald (1967).

Warlord: Yen Hsi-shan in Shansi Province, 1911-1949 . Princeton: Princeton University Press .

LCCN 66014308 .

Itoh, Mayumi (2016).

The Making of China's War with Japan: Zhou Enlai and Zhang Xueliang . New York: Palgrave Macmillan US .

ISBN 978-981-10-0493-3 .

Pantsov, Alexander V. (2012).

Mao: The Real Story . Translated by Levine, Steven I. New York: Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-1-4516-5447-9 .

Pantsov, Alexander V. (2023).

Victorious in Defeat: The Life and Times of Chiang Kai-shek, 1887–1975 . Translated by Levine, Steven I. New Haven: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-26020-5 .

Peng, Lü (2023).

A History of China in the 20th Century . Translated by Doar, Bruce. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-981-99-0733-5 .

Sheng, Michael (1992). "Mao, Stalin, and the Formation of the Anti-Japanese United Front: 1935-1937".

The China Quarterly .

129 (129): 149– 170.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000041266 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

Tanner, Harold Miles (2015).

Where Chiang Kai-Shek lost China: the Liao-Shen campaign, 1948 . Twentieth-century battles. Bloomington: Indiana University Press .

ISBN 978-0-253-01692-8 .

Van de Ven, Hans J. (2003).

War and Nationalism in China, 1925-1945 . New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-14571-8 .

Tucker, Spencer C. (2011).

The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History . Vol.

I– IV (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-Clio .

ISBN 978-1-85109-960-3 .

Watt, John R. (2014). Dudbridge, Glen; Pieke, Frank (eds.).

Saving Lives in Wartime China: How Medical Reformers Built Modern Healthcare Systems Amid War and Epidemics, 1928–1945 . China Studies 26. Leiden, Belgium: Brill .

ISBN 978-90-04-25645-3 .

Yang, Benjamin (1990).

From Revolution to Politics: Chinese Communists on the Long March . Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0-8133-7672-1 .

Yang, Kuisong (2020). "Sino-Soviet Diplomacy Under the Threat of War". In Shen, Zhihua (ed.).

A Short History of Sino-Soviet Relations, 1917–1991 . China connections. Translated by Xia, Yafeng; Li, Hongshan; Liu, Xiaohong. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan and Social Sciences Academic Press .

ISBN 978-981-13-8641-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Chinese Civil War Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Cheng, Victor Shiu Chiang (January 2005). "Imagining China's Madrid in Manchuria: The Communist Military Strategy at the Onset of the Chinese Civil War, 1945–1946".

Modern China .

31 (1): 72– 114.

doi : 10.1177/0097700404270549 .

ISSN 0097-7004 .

Chi, Hsi-sheng (1982).

Nationalist China at war: military defeats and political collapse, 1937–45 . Michigan studies on China. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 978-0-472-10018-7 .

Dreyer, Edward L. (2014).

China at War 1901–1949 .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-317-89984-6 .

Gueniffey, Patrice (1969).

The military history of the Chinese Civil War . New York: Watts.

ISBN 978-0-531-01252-9 .

Eastman, Lloyd E. (December 1981). "Who Lost China? Chiang Kai-shek Testifies".

The China Quarterly .

88 : 658– 668.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000029416 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

Eastman, Lloyd E. (1991).

The Nationalist era in China: 1927–1949 .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-38591-6 .

Fenby, Jonathan (2003).

Generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the China he lost . London: Free Press .

ISBN 978-0-7432-3144-2 .

Ferlanti, Federica (2012).

"The New Life Movement at War: Wartime Mobilisation and State Control in Chongqing and Chengdu, 1938–1942" (PDF) .

European Journal of East Asian Studies .

11 (2): 187– 212.

doi : 10.1163/15700615-20121104 .

ISSN 1568-0584 .

Jian, Chen (January 1997). "The Myth of America's 'Lost Chance' in China: A Chinese Persopective in Light of New Evidence".

Diplomatic History .

21 (1): 77– 86.

doi : 10.1111/1467-7709.00052 .

ISSN 0145-2096 .

Lary, Diana (2015).

China's Civil War: A Social History, 1945-1949 . New approaches to Asian history.

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05467-7 .

Levine, Steven I. (October 1979). "A New Look at American Mediation in the Chinese Civil War: The Marshall Mission and Manchuria".

Diplomatic History .

3 (4): 349– 376.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.1979.tb00322.x .

ISSN 0145-2096 .

Lew, Christopher R. (2009).

The Third Chinese Revolutionary Civil War, 1945–49: an analysis of communist strategy and leadership . Asian states and empires. London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-77730-8 .

Li, Xiaobing, ed. (2012).

China at war: an encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-1-59884-415-3 .

Lynch, Michael (2014).

The Chinese Civil War 1945–49 . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-4728-1025-0 .

Mitter, Rana (January 2010). "Research Note Changed by War: The Changing Historiography Of Wartime China and New Interpretations Of Modern Chinese History".

The Chinese Historical Review .

17 (1): 85– 95.

doi : 10.1179/tcr.2010.17.1.85 .

ISSN 1547-402X .

Nasca, David S. (19 April 2013).

Western Influence on the Chinese National Revolutionary Army from 1925 to 1937 (PDF) (Master's thesis). Quantico, VA: Marine Corps Command and Staff College.

Pepper, Suzanne (1999).

Civil war in China: the political struggle, 1945–1949 (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-0-8476-9133-3 .

Reilly, Thomas P. (21 May 1998).

Mao Tse-Tung and Operational Art During the Chinese Civll War (PDF) (Thesis).

School of Advanced Military Studies .

Shen, Zhi hua; Xia, Yafeng (2015).

Mao and the Sino-Soviet partnership, 1945–1959: a new history . The Harvard Cold War studies book series. Lanham, MD: Lexington.

ISBN 978-1-4985-1169-8 .

Taylor, Jeremy E.; Huang, Grace C. (January 2012). " "Deep changes in interpretive currents"? Chiang Kai-shek studies in the post-cold war era".

International Journal of Asian Studies .

9 (1): 99– 121.

doi : 10.1017/S1479591411000209 .

ISSN 1479-5914 .

Taylor, Jay (2009).

The generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the struggle for modern China . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-03338-2 .

Van de Ven, Hans J. (2017).

China at war: triumph and tragedy in the emergence of the new China . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-98350-2 .

Westad, Odd Arne (2003).

Decisive encounters: the Chinese civil war, 1946–1950 . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4478-2 .

Yick, Joseph K. S. (2015).

Making Urban Revolution in China: The CCP-GMD Struggle for Beiping-Tianjin, 1945–49: The CCP-GMD Struggle for Beiping-Tianjin, 1945–49 .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-317-46568-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chinese Civil War .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Chinese Civil War .

Summary of Chinese Civil War 1946–1949 Archived 17 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine Topographic maps of China Series L500, U.S. Army Map Service, 1954– Operational Art in the Chinese PLA's Huai Hai Campaign Postal Stamps of the Chinese Post-Civil War Era v t e China articles History Overviews History Timeline Historiography Military history Language Economic before 1912 1912–1949 1949–present Ethnic groups Foreign relations Dynasties Monarchs Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic Yellow River Yangtze Liao Ancient Xia Shang Late Zhou Western Zhou Spring and Autumn Warring States Imperial Qin Han Three Kingdoms Wei Han Wu Jin (266–420) Sixteen Kingdoms Northern and Southern dynasties Sui Tang Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Liao Song Jin (1115–1234) Yuan Ming Qing High Qing Century of humiliation Taiping Rebellion Eunuch Modern 1911 Revolution Republic of China Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China Cultural Revolution Reform and opening up Tiananmen Square COVID-19 persecution of Uyghurs List of massacres in China Geography Borders Extreme points Geology Natural disasters Regions East Northeast North South Central Central South Western Northwestern Southwestern Terrain Bays Canyons Caves Deserts Grasslands Hills Islands Mountains ranges passes Peninsulas Northeast / North / Central Plains Valleys Volcanoes Water Canals Lakes Rivers Waterfalls Wetlands Water resources Seas Bohai Yellow East China South China Environment Climate change Climate policy Environmental issues Environmental policy Protected areas National parks Nature reserves UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Wildlife Fauna Flora Subdivisions Baseline islands Border crossings Cities Province-level subdivisions Politics Law Judicial system Human rights LGBT in Tibet Law enforcement Penal system Naming laws Nationality law Terrorism Government Civil service Constitution Democracy Pro-democratisation Elections Environmental policy Foreign relations Laogai National People's Congress Standing Committee National security Political parties and movements Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Politburo Democratic parties (China) United front Political Consultative Conference System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Socialism with Chinese characteristics Primary stage of socialism President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premier Whole-process people's democracy One country, two systems Military Outline of military history Central Military Commission Cyberwarfare and China Ministry of National Defense People's Liberation Army Ground Navy Air Rocket Strategic Support People's Armed Police Coast Guard Militia Maritime Militia Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Banking Central bank Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) Currency Economic history Reform and opening up Special economic zones E-commerce Online advertising Economic inequality in China Energy Coal Petroleum Renewable Forced evictions Foreign aid received Foreign aid program Historical GDP Housing Income inequality in China Industry Chemical Gold mining Semiconductors Steel Textiles Labor relations Poverty Real estate Standard of living Taxation Tourism Trade Underoccupied developments Unemployment Infrastructure Architecture Housing Telecommunications Internet Water supply and sanitation Transport Automotive industry Civil aviation Rail Shipping industry Space program Society Abortion Censorship Chinese Dream Chinese language Standard Chinese Written Chinese Crime Corruption Prostitution Sex trafficking Education Literacy Freedom of the press Harmonious Society Health Food safety incidents HIV/AIDS Intellectualism Internment camps Martyrdom Surveillance Propaganda Protest ”Mass incidents” Public holidays Rural society Science and technology history Sexuality Social issues Patriarchy Racism Regional discrimination Suicide Social relations Structure Tang ping Time Urban society Welfare Culture Archaeology Archives Art Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Dance Libraries Literature Poetry Martial arts Mass media Music Names Philosophy Smoking Sport Tea culture Variety art Major Historical and Cultural Sites World Heritage Sites Fours of China Four Treasures of the Study Four Great Inventions Four Gentlemen Flowers of the Four Seasons Four Beauties Four Classic Novels Four arts Four Symbols Four Holy Beasts Four Pillars of Destiny Four Paragons of the Early Tang Four Masters of the Ming dynasty Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty Four Wangs Gang of Four Four Olds Four Pests campaign Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Eunuchs Internal migration Languages Life expectancy Statistics Population history " Post-80s " " Post-90s " Urbanization Women Religion Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Confucianism Folk religion Christianity Catholic Church in China Protestantism Freedom of religion History of religion Irreligion Islam Taoism Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Outline Index Category Portal v t e Chinese Civil War Principal belligerents and campaigns Nationalist Party / National Government ( National Revolutionary Army ) → Constitutional ROC Government ( ROC Armed Forces ) → Republic of China on Taiwan Communist Party / Soviet Republic ( Red Army ) → Liberated Area ( 8th Route Army , New Fourth Army , etc.

→ People's Liberation Army ) → People's Republic of China Pre-1945 Post-1945 1923 Sun–Joffe Manifesto 1924 First United Front 1926 Canton Coup 1927–1949 Chinese Communist Revolution 1927 Nanking incident Shanghai Commune Shanghai massacre Nanjing–Wuhan split 715 Incident Little Long March Nanchang uprising Autumn Harvest Uprising Guangzhou Uprising 1930–1934 Li Lisan line Encirclement campaigns 1931–1934 Chinese Soviet Republic 1933–1934 Fujian People's Government 1934–1936 Long March 1936 Xi'an Incident 1937–1946 Second United Front ( Wartime perception of the Chinese Communists ) 1941 New Fourth Army incident 1944 Dixie Mission 1945 Chongqing Negotiations Double Tenth Agreement Retrocession of Taiwan 1946 Jiaochangkou Incident Peiping rape case 1945–1947 Marshall Mission 1945–1949 Operation Beleaguer 1947 Yu Zisan Incident 1948 SS Kiangya incident Liaoshen campaign 1948–1949 Huaihai campaign Pingjin campaign 1949 Taiping Steamer Incident Yangtze River Crossing campaign Amethyst Incident ROC Government retreat to Taiwan PRC incorporation of Xinjiang 1949–1953 Bombing of Shanghai 1950 Hainan Island campaign Wanshan Archipelago Campaign 1950–1958 Kuomintang Islamic insurgency 1961–1972 Project National Glory v t e Cross-strait relations Diplomatic posts Hong Kong Economic, Trade and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Hong Kong Macau Economic and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Macau Diplomacy Opening of the South-North route Restoration of Taiwan strait shipping Kinmen Agreement Wang–Koo summit Cross-strait charter 2004 Taiwanese cross-strait relations referendum May 17 Statement 2005 Pan–Blue visits to mainland China Cross-strait high-level talks First Chen–Chiang summit Second Chen–Chiang summit Fourth Chen–Chiang summit Fifth Chen–Chiang summit Sixth Chen–Chiang summit Seventh Chen–Chiang summit Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait CEO Summit Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Jinjiang–Kinmen Pipeline 2014 Wang–Zhang meetings 2015 Xi–Chu meeting First Ma–Xi meeting Straits Forum Shanghai-Taipei City Forum Second Ma–Xi meeting Conflicts Chinese Civil War Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan Guanbi policy First Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Battle of Dong-Yin Battle of Dongshan Battle of East Chongwu Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Senkaku Islands Dispute Incidents Capture of the Tuapse Kashmir Princess United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations CAAC Flight 296 China Airlines Flight 334 1987 Lieyu massacre Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Min Ping Yu No. 5202 1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions Qiandao Lake incident China Airlines Flight 611 Sunflower Student Movement Braga incident Anti-Black Box Curriculum Movement Wang Liqiang Freedom pineapples 2021 Solomon Islands unrest Chinese military exercises around Taiwan 2022 2023 2024 2025 Taiwan Exercise 2024 Kinmen Chinese motorboat capsizing incident Legislation Cross-Strait Act Proposed National Unification Promotion Law Anti-Secession Law Anti-Infiltration Act Organizations All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots Alumni Association of Huangpu Military Academy Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Association for Tourism Exchange Across the Taiwan Straits Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification Cross-Straits Common Market Foundation Cross-Strait Economic, Trade and Culture Forum Cross-Strait Peace Forum Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Institute of Taiwan Studies Lienchiang Cross-Strait Matters Forum Mainland Affairs Council National Unification Council Straits Exchange Foundation Taiwan Affairs Office Taiwan.cn Taiwan Competitiveness Forum Taiwan Strait Tourism Association Concepts 1992 Consensus Both sides of the Taiwan Strait are one family China Circle Chinese unification Chinese nationalism Chinese irredentism Chinese Taipei Cross-Strait Economic Zone Dang Guo Deng's Six Conceptions Four Noes and One Without Fujian Demonstration Zone Greater China Han chauvinism Hu's Four Points Hu's Six Points Jiang's Eight Points Message to Compatriots in Taiwan Never promise to renounce the use of force One China One China framework One China principle One-China policy One Country on Each Side One country, two systems Propaganda in China Cross-strait propaganda Qian's Seven Points Republic of China on Taiwan Self-determination Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Socialism with Chinese characteristics Special non-state-to-state relations Six Assurances Taiwan, China Two Chinas Three Noes Three Links Taiwan consensus Taiwan independence movement Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan United front in Taiwan Under the Roof of One China Xi Jinping Thought Xi's Five Points Ye's Nine Points White Paper on the Taiwan Question Zhonghua minzu Related Fujian–Taiwan relationship Hong Kong–Taiwan relations Hong Kong–Taiwan Economic and Cultural Co-operation and Promotion Council Taiwan–Hong Kong Economic and Cultural Co-operation Council Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Pro-ROC camp Macau–Taiwan relations Chinese Travel Document Taiwan Entry Permit Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Resident Cross-strait language database ECFA Debate Geostrategy in Taiwan HMS Aurora (12) China and the United Nations China and the World Bank Chinese intelligence activity abroad Chinese information operations and information warfare Chinese Soviet Republic Freedom of religion in China Foreign relations of China Timeline of diplomatic relations with China Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity Political status of Taiwan Foreign relations of Taiwan Timeline of diplomatic relations of Taiwan Anti-Communist Hero Milk Tea Alliance Taishang G3 Beijing–Taipei Expressway G99 Taiwan Ring Expressway China National Highway 228 (Taiwan) Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission Tibet Religious Foundation of His Holiness the Dalai Lama The World Turned Upside Down Go and Reclaim the Mainland Pro–Republic of China sentiment 2045 Reversed Front Zero Day Attack Category:Cross-strait relations v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e China–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy of China, Washington, D.C.

Ambassadors of China to the United States Embassy of the United States, Beijing Ambassadors of the United States to China Chinese Consulate-Generals New York Los Angeles Houston American Consulate-Generals Chengdu Guangzhou Hong Kong and Macau Shanghai Shenyang Wuhan Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs Office of China Coordination Diplomacy Treaty of Wanghia Treaty of Tientsin Burlingame Treaty Gresham-Yang Treaty Shanghai International Settlement American Concession (Shanghai) United States Court for China Treaty between the United States and China for the Relinquishment of Extraterritorial Rights in China Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the United States of America and the Republic of China Marshall Mission Loss of China China White Paper PRC-US Ambassadorial Talks 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China Shanghai Communiqué Three Communiqués One-China policy Nixon goes to China Nixon's China Game Harvey Feldman Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Goldwater v. Carter State visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States Presidential Rule of Law Initiative Beijing–Washington hotline State visit by Xi Jinping to the United States 2015 United States–China Cybersecurity Agreement Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action United States–China talks in Alaska United States–China Working Group Conflicts Boxer Rebellion Eight-Nation Alliance China Relief Expedition Chinese Civil War Korean War Allegations of biological warfare in the Korean War Cross-Strait conflict First Taiwan Strait Crisis Operation King Kong Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Third Taiwan Strait Crisis CIA Tibetan program Quadrilateral Security Dialogue Incidents Rover incident Chy Lung v. Freeman Cheong Ah Moy v. United States Chae Chan Ping v. United States Twain–Ament indemnities controversy 1905 Chinese boycott USS Monocacy incident Red Scare Qian Xuesen 1946 United States Air Force C-47 Crash at Yan'an Shen Chong case Lamont v. Postmaster General Hu Na Project Sabre II Yinhe incident 1996 United States campaign finance controversy Johnny Chung Liu Chaoying United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade Hainan Island incident Operation Shady RAT Operation Aurora United States diplomatic cables leak 2012 China anti-Japanese demonstrations Murder of Shao Tong Disappearance of David Louis Sneddon Trump–Tsai call Havana syndrome Animal Science Products v. Hebei Welcome Pharmaceuticals China Initiative Trial of Anming Hu Concerns over Chinese involvement in 5G wireless networks Meng Wanzhou Extradition TikTok v. Trump U.S. WeChat Users Alliance v. Trump COVID-19 misinformation United States Department of Defense China Task Force 2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan Chinese espionage in the United States Cyberwarfare and China Alleged Chinese spy cases persecuted in the United States Cox Report Timeline of the Cox Report controversy American espionage in China Cyberwarfare and the United States Hugh Francis Redmond Uyghur detainees at Guantanamo Bay 2023 balloon incident Chinese interference in the 2024 United States elections Military relations Yangtze Patrol Alice Dollar incident Second Sino-Japanese War American Volunteer Group Black Cat Squadron Development of Chinese Nationalist air force (1937–1945) China Air Task Force China Marines Dixie Mission Flying Tigers Operation Beleaguer Sino-American Cooperative Organization RIMPAC Legislation United States sanctions against China U.S. immigration policy Chinese Exclusion Repeal Act Taiwan Relations Act Executive Order 12711 Chinese Student Protection Act of 1992 United States-Hong Kong Policy Act United States–Hong Kong Agreement for the Surrender of Fugitive Offenders Forced Abortion Condemnation Act Taiwan Security Enhancement Act United States–China Relations Act of 2000 Wolf Amendment Taiwan Travel Act EQUITABLE Act Hong Kong Be Water Act Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act Tibet Policy and Support Act Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative Act Proclamation 10043 Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act Hong Kong Autonomy Act Executive Order 13936 Executive Order 13959 Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act Executive Order 14032 United States Innovation and Competition Act Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act Economic relations Old China Trade United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission Group of Two Strategic Economic Dialogue Summer Palace Dialogue U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue Senior Dialogue China–United States trade war Trump tariffs first second Permanent normal trade relations Related History of China–United States relations Hong Kong–United States relations Macau–United States relations Taiwan–United States relations Americans in China Chinese Americans Anti-American sentiment in China Ruguanxue Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States Chimerica China Lobby Asia First Chinese Century China Hands China watcher Cold War in Asia Second Cold War Artificial Intelligence Cold War Ping-pong diplomacy Triangular diplomacy Peaceful Evolution theory Linkage (policy) String of Pearls (Indian Ocean) Thucydides Trap Hong (business) Air route authority between the United States and China Blue Team TPE (cable system) Protestant missions in China Elijah Coleman Bridgman Divie Bethune McCartee The 1990 Institute Boxer Indemnity Scholarship China Aid Society China–United States Exchange Foundation Chinese Educational Mission Committee for a Democratic Far Eastern Policy Congressional-Executive Commission on China Hua Yuan Science and Technology Association Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China United States House Select Committee on Strategic Competition between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party Kissinger Institute on China and the United States National Committee on United States–China Relations Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction US-China Business Council US–China Education Trust US–China Peoples Friendship Association Massachusetts International Academy Harvard Summit for Young Leaders in China International School of Beijing SARS conspiracy theory Yixian glazed pottery luohans Harvard Bixi William H. Hinton Human Rights Record of the United States USA pavilion at Expo 2010 New Federal State of China China Human Rights Biweekly Far East Reporter Duke-UNC China Leadership Summit The Coming Conflict with China A Great Wall: Six Presidents and China The New Chinese Empire The Art of Investing in America Death by China On China Peaceful War The Transpacific Experiment Stealth War: How China Took Over While America's Elite Slept Red Chinese Battle Plan The China Hustle Category:China–United States relations v t e Taiwan–United States relations Diplomatic posts Former Embassy of Taiwan, Washington, D.C.

Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Atlanta Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Boston Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Honolulu Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Houston Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Miami Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Los Angeles Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in San Francisco Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Seattle Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States Twin Oaks Former Ambassador of the United States to China American Institute in Taiwan American Institute in Taiwan Kaohsiung Branch Office Former Embassy of the United States in Taipei U.S. Commercial Service in Taiwan Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs Diplomacy Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Republic of China Formosa Resolution of 1955 July 2002 state visit to the United States Trump–Tsai call 2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan Congressional Taiwan Caucus Senate Taiwan Caucus Six Assurances Transit diplomacy Incidents Rover incident Raid on Taipei Capture of the Tuapse May 24 incident Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Goldwater v. Carter One-China policy United States beef imports in Taiwan 2022 Laguna Woods shooting Military relations Chinese Civil War First Taiwan Strait Crisis Operation King Kong Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Third Taiwan Strait Crisis United States Taiwan Defense Command Yangmingshan American Military Housing American arms sales to Taiwan Major non-NATO ally Legislation Taiwan Relations Act Taiwan Security Enhancement Act Taiwan Relations Act Affirmation and Naval Vessel Transfer Act of 2014 Taiwan Travel Act Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative Act Related American Chamber of Commerce in Taipei Formosan Association for Public Affairs International Community Radio Taipei China–United States relations Category:Taiwan–United States relations v t e Taiwan articles History 1945–present Retreat to Taiwan Guanbi policy White Terror Martial law Mandarin policy Dang Guo Taiwan Miracle Archaeological sites Cultural history Dance history Dutch Formosa Early Chinese contact Economic history Educational history Historiography Kingdom of Middag Kingdom of Tungning LGBTQ history Military history Prehistory Spanish Formosa Republic of Formosa Taiwan under Qing rule Taiwan under Japanese rule Taiwanese television history Timeline Geography Overviews Beaches Cities Climate Deforestation Earthquakes Endemic species / Protected species Hot springs Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers Scenic areas Superlatives Urban planning Volcanoes Government Politics Economy Government and politics Cabinet Premier Censorship Civil defense Constitution Additional Articles Elections Human rights LGBT Freedom of religion Intelligence Law Law enforcement Military Parliament President Office of the President Secretary-General Vice President Political parties Propaganda Regions of Taiwan Administrative divisions Special municipalities Counties Cities List of administrative divisions Metropolitan areas Political issues Conscription Cross-Strait relations Chinese nationalism Chinese Taipei De-Sinicization Foreign relations North–South divide Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity Political status of Taiwan Chinese unification One Country on Each Side Special non-state-to-state relations Two Chinas Taiwan independence movement Taiwanese nationalism Economy Aerospace industry Agriculture Aquaculture Floriculture Automotive industry Banking List of banks Central bank Companies Largest State-owned enterprises Construction industry Defense industry Dollar (currency) Energy Exports Forestry FTAs Labor movement Maritime industries Mining Pharmaceutical industry Semiconductor industry Steel Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Textile Tourism Transportation Uniform Invoice lottery Water supply and sanitation National Symbols People Society Culture National symbols Anthems national flag Emblem Flags current proposed Olympic Flower Seals People Demographics Overseas Taiwanese Taiwanese people Taiwanese indigenous peoples List Hans Hoklos Hakkas Waishengren Languages Formosan languages Amis Atayal Bunun Kanakanavu Kavalan Paiwan Puyuma Rukai Saaroa Saisiyat Sakizaya Seediq Thao Tsou Yami Sinitic Mandarin Taiwanese Hokkien Hakka Matsu dialect Sign Language Braille Notable individuals Actresses Artists Footballers Magistrates and mayors Olympic flagbearers Singers Taiwanese Americans Wealthiest Writers Society Architecture Crime Organized crime Sex trafficking Education Healthcare International rankings Inventions and discoveries Prostitution Public holidays Public housing Squatting Superlatives Taiwan studies Waste management Women Culture Animation Art Cinema Cuisine Beer Dessert Wine Whisky Dance Drama 2000 to 2010 2011 to 2020 2021 to present Fashion Festivals Film Music Folk beliefs Gambling Glove puppetry Literature Media Music Best-selling albums Opera Night markets Performing arts Philosophy Photography Religion Baháʼí Buddhism Christianity Islam Judaism Secularism Shinto Smoking Sports Superstitions Kuai Kuai culture T-Beauty Taiwanese wave Television Golden Bell Awards Tea tea culture Tourist attractions Theater Category Portal Outline Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_Civil_War&oldid=1306211904 " Categories : Chinese Civil War 20th-century conflicts Aftermath of World War II Civil wars in China Cross-strait conflict Interwar period Military history of the Republic of China (1912–1949) Proxy wars Revolutions in China Revolution-based civil wars Wars involving the Republic of China Wars involving the People's Republic of China Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2025 CS1 uses Ukrainian-language script (uk) CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2021 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Chinese-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2025 Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2024 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 14:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chinese Civil War 81 languages Add topic

