Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Before the First World War 1.1.1 Political involvement 1.2 From the First World War to the end of the 1930s 1.3 Vichy regime, arrest and death 2 Maurras' work Toggle Maurras' work subsection 2.1 Maurras and Félibrige 2.2 Maurras' political thought 2.3 Legacy 3 Works 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles Maurras 40 languages العربية Asturianu Башҡортса Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska Українська 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French author, politician, poet, and critic (1868–1952) Charles Maurras Maurras in 1937 Born Charles-Marie-Photius Maurras ( 1868-04-20 ) 20 April 1868 Martigues , Bouches-du-Rhône , Second French Empire Died 16 November 1952 (1952-11-16) (aged 84) Tours , Fourth French Republic Awards Order of the Francisque Philosophical work Era 20th century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Maurrassisme Positivism Royalism Integral nationalism Reactionism Main interests Political philosophy Notable works Enquête sur la monarchie L'Avenir de l'intelligence Kiel et Tanger Devant l'Allemagne éternelle Notable ideas Maurrassisme Signature Charles-Marie-Photius Maurras ( / m ɔː ˈ r ɑː s / ; [ 1 ] French: [ʃaʁl moʁas] ; 20 April 1868 – 16 November 1952) was a French author, politician, poet and critic. He was an organiser and principal philosopher of Action Française , a political movement that was monarchist , corporatist and counter-revolutionary . Maurras also held anti-capitalist , anti-communist , anti-liberal , anti-Masonic , anti-Nazi , anti-Protestant and antisemitic views. His ideas greatly influenced National Catholicism and integral nationalism , [ 2 ] and led to the political doctrine of Maurrassisme .

Raised Roman Catholic , Maurras went deaf and became an agnostic in his youth, but remained anti-secularist and politically supportive of the Catholic Church. An Orléanist , he began his career by writing literary criticism and became politically active as a leading anti-Dreyfusard . In 1926 Pope Pius XI issued a controversial papal condemnation of Action Française , which was swiftly repealed by Pope Pius XII in 1939. Maurras was elected to the Académie Française in 1938, and later expelled in 1945.

In 1936, after voicing death threats against the socialist politician Léon Blum , Maurras was sentenced to eight months in La Santé . While imprisoned he received the support of Marie-Pauline Martin , Henry Bordeaux , Pius XI and up to 60,000 sympathetic citizens.

[ 3 ] During the Second World War Maurras opposed Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy , but supported Vichy France , believing that Free France was a puppet state of the Soviet Union .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He explained his support for Vichy, writing: "As a royalist I never lost sight of the necessity of monarchy. But to enthrone the royal heir, the heritage had to be saved." [ 6 ] After Vichy's collapse he was arrested and accused of complicity with the enemy.

[ 6 ] Following a political trial he was convicted of incitement to murder, and received Indignité nationale and a life sentence. In 1951, after falling ill, he was transferred to a hospital and subsequently received a medical pardon. In his final days he reverted to Catholicism and received the last rites shortly before his death.

As a political theorist and major right-wing intellectual of 20th-century Europe, Maurras significantly influenced right-wing and far-right ideologies, anticipating some of the ideas of fascism .

[ 7 ] He has been described as the most important French conservative intellectual, [ 8 ] and has directly influenced a large number of politicians, theorists, and writers on both the left and right, including Louis Althusser , Steve Bannon , Georges Bernanos , Louis Billot , Antoine Blondin , Juan Carulla , Charles Coughlin , Léon Degrelle , Pedro Descoqs , Michel Déon , C. H. Douglas , Georges Dumézil , Maurice Duplessis , T. S. Eliot , Julius Evola , Christopher Ferrara , Fransisco Franco , Charles de Gaulle , Martin Heidegger , Henri, Count of Paris , T. E. Hulme , Rodolfo Irazusta , Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , Jacques Lacan , Jacques Laurent , Emmanuel Macron , Jacques Maritain , Thierry Maulnier , Antonio Maura , François Mauriac , Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira , José de la Riva-Agüero y Osma , Carlos Pereyra , Juan Perón , Philippe Pétain , Raymond Poincaré , Victor Pradera Larumbe , António de Oliveira Salazar , António Sardinha , Carl Schmitt , Georges Sorel , Gustave Thibon , Laureano Vallenilla Lanz , and Éric Zemmour .

Maurras' legacy has remained controversial to this day. Critics have derided him as a "fascist icon", while supporters, including Georges Pompidou , have praised him as a prophet. Others, including Macron, have taken a nuanced approach, with Macron stating: "I fight all the antisemitic ideas of Maurras, but I find it absurd to say that Maurras must no longer exist." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e Biography [ edit ] Before the First World War [ edit ] A young Maurras in 1877.

Maurras was born into a Provençal family, brought up by his mother and grandmother in a Catholic and monarchist environment. In his early teens, he became deaf.

[ 11 ] Like many other French politicians, he was affected greatly by France's defeat in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War .

[ 12 ] After the 1871 Commune of Paris and the 1879 defeat of Patrice de MacMahon 's Moral Order government , French society slowly found a consensus for the French Third Republic , symbolised by the rallying of the monarchist Orleanists to the Republic. Maurras published his first article at the age of 17 years in the review Annales de philosophie chrétienne .

[ 11 ] He then collaborated on various reviews, including L'Événement , La Revue bleue , La Gazette de France and La Revue encyclopédique , in which he praised Classicism and attacked Romanticism .

[ 11 ] At some point during his youth Maurras lost his Catholic faith and became an agnostic . In 1887, at the age of seventeen, he came to Paris and began writing literary criticism in the Catholic and Orleanist Observateur .

[ 12 ] At this time Maurras was influenced by Orleanism, as well as German philosophy reviewed by Catholic thinker Léon Ollé-Laprune , an influence of Henri Bergson , and by the philosopher Maurice Blondel , one of the inspirations of Christian "modernists", who would later become his greatest opponents.

[ 12 ] He became acquainted with the Provençal poet Frédéric Mistral in 1888 and shared the federalist thesis of Mistral's Félibrige movement (see Maurras and Félibrige ).

[ 12 ] The same year he met the nationalist writer Maurice Barrès .

[ 13 ] In 1890 Maurras approved Cardinal Lavigerie 's call for the rallying of Catholics to the Republic, thus making his opposition not to the Republic in itself, but to "sectarian Republicanism".

[ 12 ] Beside this Orleanist affiliation, Maurras shared some traits with Bonapartism . In December 1887 he demonstrated to the cry of "Down with the robbers!" during the military decorations trafficking scandal , which had involved Daniel Wilson , the son-in-law of President Jules Grévy .

[ 12 ] Despite this, he initially opposed the nationalist-populist Boulangist philosophy.

[ 12 ] But in 1889, after a visit to Maurice Barrès, Barrès voted for the Boulangist candidate; despite his " anti-Semitism of the heart" (" anti-sémitisme de coeur "), he decided to vote for a Jew .

[ 12 ] During 1894–1895, Maurras briefly worked for Barrès' newspaper La Cocarde (The Cockade ), although he sometimes opposed Barrès' opinions concerning the French Revolution.

[ 12 ] La Cocarde supported General Georges Ernest Boulanger , who had become a threat to the parliamentary Republic in the late 1880s.

During a trip to Athens for the first modern Olympic Games in 1896, Maurras came to criticise the Greek democratic system of the polis , which he considered doomed because of its internal divisions and its openness towards métèques (foreigners).

[ 12 ] Political involvement [ edit ] Maurras became involved in politics at the time of the Dreyfus affair , becoming an anti-Dreyfusard. He endorsed Hubert-Joseph Henry 's forgery, blaming Alfred Dreyfus , as he considered that defending Dreyfus weakened the Army and the justice system. According to Maurras, Dreyfus was to be sacrificed on the altar of national interest .

[ 12 ] But while the Republican nationalist thinker Barrès accused Dreyfus of being guilty because of his Jewishness, Maurras went a step further, vilifying the "Jewish Republic".

[ 12 ] While Barrès' anti-Semitism originated both in pseudo-scientific racist contemporary theories and Biblical exegesis , Maurras decried "scientific racism" in favor of a more radical " state anti-Semitism ." [ 12 ] Maurras assisted with the foundation of the nationalist and anti-Dreyfusard Ligue de la patrie française at the end of 1898, along with Maurice Barrès, the geographer Marcel Dubois , the poet François Coppée and the critic and literature professor Jules Lemaître .

[ 14 ] In 1899 Maurras founded the review Action Française (AF), an offshoot of the newspaper created by Maurice Pujo and Henri Vaugeois the year preceding.

[ 11 ] Maurras quickly became influential in the movement, and converted Pujo and Vaugeois to monarchism, which became the movement's principal cause. With Léon Daudet , he edited the movement's review, La Revue de l'Action Française , which during 1908 became a daily newspaper with the shorter title L'Action Française . The AF mixed integral nationalism with reactionary themes, shifting the nationalist ideology , previously supported by left-wing Republicans, to the political right.

[ 15 ] It had a wide readership during the implementation of the 1905 law on the separation of Church and State . In 1899 he wrote a short notice in favour of monarchy, "Dictateur et roi" ("Dictator and King"), and then in 1900 his Enquête sur la monarchie ( Investigations on Monarchy ), published in the Legitimist mouthpiece La Gazette de France , which made him famous. Maurras also published thirteen articles in the newspaper Le Figaro during 1901 and 1902, as well as six articles between November 1902 and January 1903 in Edouard Drumont 's anti-Semitic newspaper, La Libre Parole .

[ 13 ] Between 1905 and 1908, when the Camelots du Roi monarchist league was initiated, Maurras introduced the concept of political activism through extra-parliamentary leagues , theorising the possibility of a coup d'état .

[ 12 ] Maurras also founded the Ligue d'Action Française in 1905, whose mission was to recruit members for the Action Française. 
Members pledged to fight the republican regime and to support restoration of the monarchy under Prince Philippe, Duke of Orléans (1869–1926) .

[ 16 ] Many early members of the Action Française were practising Catholics, including Bernard de Vésins , the art historian Louis Dimier and the essayist Léon de Montesquiou . They helped Maurras develop the royalist league's pro-Catholic policies.

[ 17 ] Maurras entered in a conflict with Paul Granier de Cassagnac editor of L'Autorite, and his brother Guy. The affair ended with a sword duel between Paul de Cassagnac and Charles Maurras which took place in Neuilly on 26 February 1912. Maurras was struck in the forearm. His arm was seriously injured. This brought the combat to a close.

From the First World War to the end of the 1930s [ edit ] Maurras then endorsed France's entry into the First World War (even to the extent of supporting the thoroughly republican Georges Clemenceau ) against the German Empire . During the war the Jewish businessman Emile Ullman was forced to resign from the board of directors of the Comptoir d'Escompte bank after Maurras accused him of being a German agent. He then criticised the Treaty of Versailles for not being harsh enough on the Germans and condemned Aristide Briand 's policy of cooperation with Germany.

[ 11 ] In 1923 Germaine Berton carried out the assassination of his fellow Action Française member Marius Plateau . Berton had planned to also assassinate Léon Daudet and Maurras but was unsuccessful.

[ 18 ] Maurras in 1925 In 1925 he called for the murder of Abraham Schrameck , the Interior Minister of Paul Painlevé 's Cartel des Gauches 's (left-wing coalition) government, who had ordered the disarming of the far-right leagues .

[ 13 ] For this death threat, he was sentenced to a fine and a year in jail (suspended).

[ 13 ] In 1929 Pope Pius XI condemned the Action Française , which until then was supported by a large number of Catholics, clergy, and laity alike. Several of the works of the movement's founder Charles Maurras were placed into the Index Librorum Prohibitorum , [ 19 ] alongside the movement's official newspaper.

[ 20 ] This was a devastating blow to the movement. On 8 March 1927, AF members were prohibited from receiving the sacraments . Many of its members left (two Catholics who were forced to look for a different path in politics and life were the writers François Mauriac and Georges Bernanos ) and it entered a period of decline.

[ 21 ] Maurras again voiced death threats against the President of the Council (prime minister) Léon Blum , organiser of the Popular Front , in the Action Française of 15 May 1936, emphasising his Jewish origins (he once called him an "old semitic camel").

[ 13 ] This other death threat earned him eight months in prison, from 29 October 1936 to 6 July 1937.

[ 13 ] Fearing communism, he joined the pacifists and praised the Munich Agreement of 1938, which the President of the Council Édouard Daladier had signed without any illusions. He also wrote in Action Française : There are certain conservatives in France who fill us with disgust. Why? Because of their stupidity. What kind of stupidity?

Hitlerism . These French "conservatives" crawl on their bellies before Hitler . These former nationalists cringe before him. A few zealots wallow in dirt, in their own dirt, with endless Heils . The wealthier they are, the more they own, the more important it is to make them understand that if Hitler invaded us he would skin them much more thoroughly than Blum, Thorez and Stalin combined. This "conservative" error is suicidal. We must appeal to our friends not to let themselves be befogged. We must tell them: Be on your guard! What is now at stake is not anti-democracy or anti-Semitism. France above all!

[ 22 ] During the 1930s – especially after the 6 February 1934 crisis [ 23 ] —many of Action Française members turned to fascism, including Robert Brasillach , Lucien Rebatet , Abel Bonnard , Paul Chack and Claude Jeantet . Most of them belonged to the staff of the fascist newspaper Je suis partout ( I am everywhere ).

Influencing António de Oliveira Salazar 's Estado Novo regime in Portugal, Maurras also supported Francisco Franco and, until spring 1939, Benito Mussolini 's Fascist regime . Opposing Adolf Hitler because he was anti-German, Maurras himself criticised the racist policies of Nazism in 1936, and requested a complete translation of Mein Kampf – some passages had been censored in the French edition.

After his failure against Charles Jonnart in 1924 to be elected to the Académie française, he succeeded in entering the ranks of the "Immortals" on 9 June 1938, replacing Henri-Robert , winning by 20 votes against 12 to Fernand Gregh . He was received into the Academy on 8 June 1939 by the Catholic writer Henry Bordeaux . In the same year, Pope Pius XII repealed his predecessor's condemnation of the Action Française .

[ 21 ] Vichy regime, arrest and death [ edit ] Maurras on trial in 1945.

In June 1940, articles in Action Française signed by Maurras, Léon Daudet , and Maurice Pujo praised General Charles de Gaulle .

[ 24 ] While Maurras described Marshal Philippe Pétain as a "divine surprise", [ 25 ] the statement is usually quoted without context; Maurras was referring specifically to Pétain having political talent as well as being a symbol of France, and there is no evidence of the remark until February 1941.

[ 26 ] Vichy France 's reactionary program of a Révolution Nationale (National Revolution) was fully approved of by Maurras, who inspired large parts of it.

[ 11 ] The monarchist newspaper was forbidden in the Occupied Zone and under Vichy censorship in the Southern Zone from November 1942.

[ 27 ] In La Seule France (1941) Maurras argued for a policy of France d'abord ("France First"), whereby France would restore itself politically and morally under Pétain, resolving what Maurras saw as the causes of France's defeat in 1940, before dealing with the issue of the foreign occupation. This position was contrasted to the attitude of the Gaullists, who fled France and continued the military struggle. Maurras savaged the pre-war French governments for taking an increasingly bellicose position vis-à-vis Germany at precisely the same time that these governments were weakening France, militarily, socially and politically, thereby making France's defeat during 1940 all but inevitable. Maurras also criticised the 1940 Law on the status of Jews for being too moderate.

[ 12 ] At the same time, he continued to express elements of his longstanding antipathy towards Germany by arguing in La Seule France that Frenchmen must not be drawn to that country's model and by hosting anti-German conferences, [ 28 ] and he opposed both the " dissidents " in London and the collaborators in Paris and Vichy (such as Lucien Rebatet , [ 29 ] Robert Brasillach , Pierre Laval or Marcel Déat ).

[ 30 ] In 1943 the Germans planned to arrest Maurras.

[ 31 ] A pre-war admirer of de Gaulle, who himself had been influenced by Maurras' integralism , Maurras then harshly criticised the General in exile. He later claimed he believed that Pétain was playing a "double game", working for an Allied victory in secret.

[ citation needed ] After the liberation of France Maurras was arrested in September 1944 together with his right-hand man Maurice Pujo , and indicted before the High Court of Lyon for "complicity with the enemy" on the basis of the articles he had published since the beginning of the war. At the end of the trial, during which there were many irregularities such as false dating or truncated quotations, [ 32 ] Maurras was sentenced to life imprisonment and deprivation of civil liberties. He was automatically dismissed from the Académie française (a measure included in the ordinance of 26 December 1944 [ 11 ] ). His response to his conviction was to exclaim C'est la revanche de Dreyfus!

("It's Dreyfus's revenge!") [ 12 ] According to the historian Eugen Weber the trial against Maurras was political and was rigged against him. Weber writes that the jurors who were chosen for Maurras' case were taken from a list drawn up by his political enemies.

[ 33 ] Meanwhile, the Académie française declared his seat vacant, as it had for Pétain's, instead of expelling him as it did for Abel Hermant and Abel Bonnard .

[ 11 ] (The academy waited until his death to elect his successor, and chose Antoine de Lévis-Mirepoix , who was himself influenced by Action Française and collaborated with Pierre Boutang 's monarchist review La Nation Française .) After being imprisoned in Riom and then Clairvaux , Maurras was released in March 1952 to be hospitalised. He was supported by Henry Bordeaux, who repeatedly asked the President of the Republic, Vincent Auriol , to pardon Maurras. Although weakened, Maurras collaborated with Aspects de la France , which had replaced the outlawed review Action Française in 1947. He was transferred to a clinic in Tours , where he died soon afterwards. In his last days, he readopted the Catholic faith of his childhood and received the last rites .

[ 34 ] Maurras' work [ edit ] Main article: Maurassisme Maurras and Félibrige [ edit ] Main article: Félibrige A Provence -born author, Maurras joined Félibrige , a literary and cultural association founded by Frédéric Mistral and other Provençal writers to defend and promote Occitan languages and literature. The name of the association was derived from félibre , a Provençal word meaning pupil or follower.

Maurras' political thought [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Maurras with Action Française in 1927.

Maurras with Henri of Orléans in 1934.

Maurras' political ideas were based on intense nationalism (what he described as " integral nationalism ") and a belief in an ordered society based on strong government. These were the bases of his endorsement for both the French monarchy and the Roman Catholic Church.

He formulated an aggressive political strategy, which contrasted with the Legitimists ' apathy for political action.

[ 12 ] He managed to combine the paradox of a reactionary thought which would actively change history, a form of Counter-revolution opposed to simple conservatism.

[ 12 ] His "integral nationalism" rejected all democratic principles which he judged contrary to "natural inequality", criticising all evolution since the 1789 French Revolution , and advocated the return to a hereditary monarchy.

[ 11 ] Like many people in Europe at the time, he was haunted by the idea of " decadence ", partly inspired by his reading of the publications of Hippolyte Taine and Ernest Renan , and admired classicism . He felt that France had lost its grandeur during the French Revolution in 1789, a grandeur inherited from its origins as a province of the Roman Empire and forged by, as he put it, "forty kings who in a thousand years made France." The French Revolution, he wrote in the Observateur Français , was negative and destructive.

He traced this decline further back, to the Enlightenment and the Reformation ; he described the source of the evil as "Swiss ideas", a reference to the adopted nation of John Calvin and the birth nation of Jean-Jacques Rousseau . Maurras further blamed France's decline on "Anti-France", which he defined as the "four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners" (his actual word for the latter being the xenophobic term métèques ). Indeed, to him the first three were all "internal foreigners." [ 35 ] Antisemitism and anti-Protestantism were common themes in his writings. He believed that the Reformation , the Enlightenment and the eventual outcome of the French Revolution had all contributed to individuals valuing themselves more than the nation, with consequent negative effects on the latter, and that democracy and liberalism were only making matters worse.

Although Maurras advocated the revival of monarchy, in many ways, Maurras did not typify the French monarchist tradition. His endorsement of the monarchy and Catholicism was explicitly pragmatic, as he alleged that a state religion was the only way of maintaining public order. By contrast with Maurice Barrès , a theorist of a kind of Romantic nationalism based on the Ego, Maurras claimed to base his opinions on reason rather than on sentiment, loyalty, and faith.

Paradoxically, he admired the positivist philosopher Auguste Comte , like many of the Third Republic politicians he detested, with which he opposed German idealism . Whereas the Legitimist monarchists refused to engage in political action, retreating into an intransigently conservative Catholicism and a relative indifference to a modern world they believed was irredeemably wicked and apostate, Maurras was prepared to engage in political action, both orthodox and unorthodox (the Action Française's Camelots du Roi league frequently engaged in street violence with left-wing opponents, as well as Marc Sangnier 's socialist Catholic Le Sillon ). Maurras was twice convicted of inciting violence against Jewish politicians, and Léon Blum , the first Jewish French prime minister, nearly died from the injuries inflicted by associates of Maurras.

[ 36 ] His slogan was the phrase "La politique d'abord!" ("Politics first!"). Other influences included Frédéric Le Play , British empiricism , which allowed him to reconcile Cartesian rationalism with empiricism, [ 12 ] and René de La Tour du Pin .

Maurras' religious views were likewise less than orthodox. He supported the political Catholic Church both because it was intimately involved with French history and because its hierarchical structure and clerical elite mirrored his image of an ideal society. He considered the Church to be the mortar which held France together, and the association linking all Frenchmen together. However, he distrusted the Gospels, written, as he put it, "by four obscure Jews", [ 37 ] but admired the Catholic Church for having allegedly concealed much of the Bible 's "dangerous teachings". Maurras' interpretation of the Gospels and his integralist teachings were fiercely criticised by many Catholic clergy. However, towards the end of his life, Maurras eventually converted from agnosticism to Catholicism.

Notwithstanding his religious unorthodoxy, Maurras gained a large following among French monarchists and Catholics, including the Assumptionists and the Orleanist pretender to the French throne, the comte de Paris, Philippe . Nonetheless, his agnosticism worried parts of the Catholic hierarchy, and in 1926 Pope Pius XI placed some of Maurras's writings on the Index of Forbidden Books [ 19 ] and condemned the Action Française philosophy as a whole. Seven of Maurras' books had already been placed on this list in 1914 and a dossier on Maurras had been submitted to Pius X.

It was not just his agnosticism which worried the Catholic hierarchy, but that by insisting upon politiques d'abord he questioned the primacy of the spiritual and thus the teaching authority of the Church and the authority of the Pope himself. That this was the basis of the matter is shown by Jacques Maritain 's book Primauté du Spirituel . Maritain was associated with L'Action Française and knew Maurras. While his unease with the movement pre-dates the 1926 crisis, it was this which occasioned his alienation from Maurras and L'Action Française. This papal condemnation was a great surprise to many of his devotees, who included a considerable number of French clergy, and caused great damage to the movement. The papal ban was later ended by Pope Pius XII in 1939, a year after Maurras was elected to the Académie française .

[ 38 ] Legacy [ edit ] Bust of Maurras' head in Martigues Maurras was a major intellectual influence of national Catholicism , far-right movements, Latin conservatism , and integral nationalism .

[ 2 ] He and the Action Française influenced many people and movements including General Francisco Franco , José Antonio Primo de Rivera , António Sardinha , Leon Degrelle , the historian and journalist Álvaro Alcalá-Galiano y Osma and autonomist movements in Europe. The Christian Democrat Jacques Maritain was also close to Maurras before the papal condemnation of the AF in 1927, [ 2 ] and criticised democracy in one of his early writings, Une opinion sur Charles Maurras ou le devoir des catholiques .

[ 2 ] Furthermore, Maurrassism also influenced many writings from members of the Organisation armée secrète who theorised " counter-revolutionary warfare ".

[ 2 ] In Spain the Acción Española adopted not only its far right monarchism but also its name from Maurras's movement.

[ 39 ] The influence extended to Latin America , as in Mexico where Jesús Guiza y Acevedo [ 2 ] was nicknamed "the little Maurras", as well as the historian Carlos Pereyra or the Venezuelan author Laureano Vallenilla Lanz , who wrote a book titled Cesarismo democrático (Democratic Caesarism ).

[ 2 ] . Maurras' thought also influenced Catholic fundamentalist supporters of the Brazilian dictatorship [ 2 ] (1964–85) as well as the Cursillos de la Cristiandad (Christendom Courses), similar to the Cité Catholique group, which were initiated during 1950 by the bishop of Ciudad Real , Mgr. Hervé.

[ 2 ] The Argentine militarist Juan Carlos Onganía , who overthrew Arturo Illia in a military putsch in 1966, as well as Alejandro Agustín Lanusse , who succeeded Onganía after another coup, had participated in the Cursillos de la Cristiandad , [ 2 ] as did also the Dominican militarists Antonio Imbert Barrera and Elías Wessin y Wessin , chief of staff of the military and an opponent of the restoration of the 1963 Constitution after Rafael Trujillo was deposed.

[ 2 ] In Argentina he also influenced the nationalist writers of the 1920s and 1930s such as Rodolfo Irazusta and Juan Carulla .

[ 40 ] In 2017 Michael Crowley wrote that Steve Bannon , then chief strategist to Donald Trump , the president of the United States , "has also expressed admiration for the reactionary French philosopher Charles Maurras, according to French media reports confirmed by Politico ." [ 41 ] Works [ edit ] 1889 : Théodore Aubanel 1891 : Jean Moréas 1894 : Le Chemin du Paradis, mythes et fabliaux 1896–1899 : Le voyage d'Athènes 1898 : L'Idée de la décentralisation 1899 : Trois idées politiques : Chateaubriand, Michelet, Sainte-Beuve 1900 : Enquête sur la monarchie 1901 : Anthinéa : d'Athènes à Florence (with Lettres des Jeux olympiques ) 1902 : Les Amants de Venise, George Sand et Musset 1905 : L'Avenir de l'intelligence 1906 : Le Dilemme de Marc Sangnier 1910 : Si le coup de force est possible 1910 : Kiel et Tanger 1912 : La Politique religieuse 1914 : L'Action Française et la Religion Catholique 1915 : L'Étang de Berre 1916 : Quand les Français ne s'aimaient pas 1916–1918 : Les Conditions de la victoire , 4 volumes 1921 : Tombeaux 1922 : Inscriptions 1923 : Poètes 1924 : L'Allée des philosophes 1925 : La Musique intérieure 1925 : Barbarie et poésie 1927 : L'Action française et le Vatican 1927 : Lorsque Hugo eut les cent ans 1928 : Le prince des nuées 1928 : Un débat sur le romantisme 1928 : Vers un art intellectuel 1928 : L'Anglais qui a connu la France 1929 : Corps glorieux ou Vertu de la perfection 1929 : Promenade italienne 1929 : Napoléon pour ou contre la France 1930 : De Démos à César 1930 : Corse et Provence 1930 : Quatre nuits de Provence 1931 : Triptyque de Paul Bourget 1931 : Le Quadrilatère 1931 : Au signe de Flore 1932 : Heures immortelles 1932–1933 : Dictionnaire politique et critique , 5 volumes 1935 : Prologue d'un essai sur la critique 1937 : Quatre poèmes d'Eurydice 1937 : L'amitié de Platon 1937 : Jacques Bainville et Paul Bourget 1937 : Les vergers sur la mer 1937 : Jeanne d'Arc, Louis XIV, Napoléon 1937 : Devant l'Allemagne éternelle 1937 : Mes idées politiques 1937 : La Dentelle du Rempart 1940 : Pages africaines 1941 : Sous la muraille des cyprès 1941 : Mistral 1941 : La Seule France 1942 : De la colère à la justice 1943 : Pour un réveil français 1944 : Poésie et vérité 1944 : Paysages mistraliens 1944 : Le Pain et le Vin 1945 : Au-devant de la nuit 1945 : L'Allemagne et nous 1947 : Les Deux Justices ou Notre J'accuse 1948 : L'Ordre et le Désordre 1948 : Maurice Barrès 1948 : Une promotion de Judas 1948 : Réponse à André Gide 1949 : Au Grand Juge de France 1949 : Le Cintre de Riom 1950 : Mon jardin qui s'est souvenu 1950 : Le Mont de Saturne 1951 : Tragi-comédie de ma surdité 1951 : Vérité, justice, patrie (with Maurice Pujo ) 1952 : À mes vieux oliviers 1952 : La Balance intérieure 1952 : Le Beau Jeu des reviviscences 1952 : Le Bienheureux Pie X , sauveur de la France 1953 : Pascal puni (published posthumously) 1958: Lettres de prison (1944–1952) (published posthumously) 1966: Lettres passe-murailles, correspondance échangée avec Xavier Vallat (1950–1952) (published posthumously) English translations 2016: The Future of the Intelligentsia & For a French Awakening , Arktos Media .

ISBN 978-1910524985 References [ edit ] ^ French Resistance 1940 - WW2 on YouTube ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Miguel Rojas-Mix, " Maurras en Amérique latine ", Le Monde diplomatique , November 1980 (republished in Manières de voir n°95, " Les droites au pouvoir ", October–November 2007) ^ Stéphane Giocanti (2006).

Charles Maurras : le chaos et l'ordre (in French). pp.

392– 393.

^ Giocanti, p. 444-447 ^ Octave Martin (alias Charles Maurras), "In the service of Hitler", Aspects of the France , 3 February 1949.

^ a b Tucker, William R. (November 1955).

The Legacy of Charles Maurras . Vol. 17. University of Chicago Press, Southern Political Science Association. pp.

570– 589.

doi : 10.2307/2126615 .

JSTOR 2126615 .

S2CID 154447641 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ "Charles Maurras | French writer and political theorist" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 19 July 2018 .

^ Alain de Benoist (20 March 2007).

"A Celebration of Conservative Politics in France" .

Kirkcenter.org .

^ Pinkoski, Nathan (November 2019).

"The Revenge of Maurras" .

First Things .

^ "Macron criticized over comments on antisemitic figure Philippe Pétain" .

The Jerusalem Post . 30 December 2020.

^ a b c d e f g h i Biographical notice on Maurras on the Académie française 's website (in French) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Alain-Gérard Slama, "Maurras (1858 (sic)-1952): ou le mythe d'une droite révolutionnaire" Archived 26 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine , article first published in L'Histoire in 2002 (in French) ^ a b c d e f Biographical notice Archived 9 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine on Maurras on the Action Française ' s website (in French) ^ Pierrard, Pierre (1998), Les Chrétiens et l'affaire Dreyfus , Editions de l'Atelier, p. 180, ISBN 978-2-7082-3390-4 , retrieved 7 March 2016 ^ Winock, Michel (dir.), Histoire de l'extrême droite en France (1993) ^ Joly, Laurent (2006), "Les débuts de l'Action française (1899-1914) ou l'élaboration d'un nationalisme antisémite", Revue Historique , 308 (3 (639)): 695– 718, doi : 10.3917/rhis.063.0695 , JSTOR 40957800 ^ Arnal, Oscar L. (15 April 1985), Ambivalent Alliance: The Catholic Church and the Action Française, 1899–1939 , University of Pittsburgh Pre, p. 17, ISBN 978-0-8229-7705-6 , retrieved 27 July 2017 ^ " "Ce n'est pas rien de tuer un homme" ou le crime politique de Germaine Berton" .

Radio France (in French). 29 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 June 2022 .

^ a b Duffy, Eamon (2014).

Saints and Sinners : A History of the Popes . Yale University Press. p. 337.

^ "Holy See Bans French Paper".

Salt Lake Tribune . 10 January 1927. p. 1.

^ a b Arnal, Oscar L., Ambivalent Alliance: The Catholic Church and the Action Française, 1899-1939 , pp.174-75 (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press , 1985).

^ Action Française , 25 March 1938. Quoted in Leopold Schwarzschild, World in Trance (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1943), p. 268.

^ Bruno Goyet, Charles Maurras , Presses de Sciences Po , 1999, p.73 ^ François-Marin Fleutot, Des Royalistes dans la Résistance (Flammarion, 2000) ^ Le Petit Marseillais , 9 February 1941. Quoted by Bruno Goyet, op.cit.

, p. 84 ^ Paxton, Robert O. (1972).

Vichy France: Old Guard and New Order, 1940-1944 . New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 187.

ISBN 978-0-8041-5410-9 .

See footnote 10.

^ Jean Sévillia , Historiquement correct , Tempus, 2006, p. 365 ^ Jean Madiran, Maurras toujours là , Consep, 2004, p.71–72 ^ In 1942, Rebatet published "Les Décombres" ("The Ruins"), a pamphlet in which he strongly opposed the "en-jewed" Action Française.

^ See for example Henri Amouroux , La Vie des Français sous l'Occupation. T2: Les Années noires , Livre de Poche, 1961, p. 342; Bruno Goyet, op.cit.

, p. 82; Jean Sévillia, op.cit.

, p. 365 ^ Robert Paxton , La France de Vichy , Seuil, 1973, p. 246 ^ Robert Aron , Histoire de l'épuration (second volume), Fayard, 1969, p. 365, 366, 367.

Listing these irregularities, Robert Aron describes Maurras' trial as "one of the most pathetic and most characteristic of the épuration " (p. 362).

^ Giocanti, p. 466 ^ Lettre de l'abbé Giraud à Charles Forot, 4 July 1958, archives départementales de Privas, dossier 24J25 ^ See, for example, this extract from his Dictionnaire politique et critique .

^ McAuley, James.

"Two Parisian bookstores, side by side, are waging a culture war" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 14 June 2019 .

^ Le Chemin du Paradis , 1894 ^ Friedländer, Saul.

Nazi Germany and the Jews: The Years of Persecution , 1997, New York: HarperCollins, p. 223 ^ Stanley G. Payne , Spain's First Democracy: The Second Republic, 1931–1936 , 1993, p. 171 ^ Sandra McGee Deutsch, Las Derechas , 1999, p. 197 ^ Michael, Crowley (March 2017).

"The Man Who Wants to Unmake the West" . Politico . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Curtis, Michael (2010).

Three Against the Third Republic: Sorel, Barrès and Maurras , Transaction Publishers.

Kojecky, Roger (1972). "Charles Maurras and the Action Française," in T.S. Eliot's Social Criticism . New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, pp. 58–69.

Molnar, Thomas (1999).

"Charles Maurras, Shaper of an Age," Modern Age 41 (4), pp. 337–342.

Serina, Elena (2020).

Nuovi elementi sul rapporto fra Action Française e Santa Sede: il ruolo di Louis Dimier nella difesa di Maurras , "Rivista di Storia del Cristianesimo" (2), pp. 497–518.

External links [ edit ] Maurras.net online library : works of Charles Maurras (in French).

Dreyfus Rehabilitated Archived 29 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine Newspaper clippings about Charles Maurras in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Charles Maurras Main concepts Antisémitisme d'État Compromis nationaliste Divine surprise Écologie intégrale Empirisme organisateur France seule Integral nationalism Maurrassisme Pays réel Pays légal Politique d'abord Politique naturelle Political texts L'Idée de la décentralisation (1898) Trois idées politiques (1898) Enquête sur la monarchie (1900) Auguste Comte (1905) L'Avenir de l'intelligence (1905) Le Dilemme de Marc Sangnier (1906) Kiel et Tanger (1910) Si le coup de force est possible (1910) La Politique religieuse (1912) L'Action française et la Religion catholique (1913) Mademoiselle Monk (1923) L'Action française et le Vatican (1927) La Lettre à Schrameck (1929) Napoléon, avec la France ou contre la France ?

(1929) Méditation sur la politique de Jeanne d'Arc (1931) Devant l'Allemagne éternelle (1937) Mes idées politiques (1937) La Seule France (1941) Vers l'Espagne de Franco (1943) L'Allemagne et nous (1945) Votre bel aujourd'hui (1953) Novels, collections and travelogues Le Chemin de Paradis (1895) Lettres des Jeux olympiques (1896) Anthinéa (1901) Les Amants de Venise (1902) La Musique intérieure (1925) Quatre Nuits de Provence (1930) Le Mont de Saturne (1950) La Balance intérieure (1952) Iconic places Maison du chemin de Paradis Martigues Monument de la Victoire Maurrassians Pierre Boutang Pierre Debray Gérard Leclerc Victor Nguyen See also Cahiers Charles Maurras (1960-1978) Action Française, Royalism and Reaction in Twentieth-Century France (1962) Mao ou Maurras ?

(1970) L'Âge d'or du maurrassisme (1971) Études maurrassiennes (1972-1986) Charles Maurras, l'Action française et la question sociale (1983) Maurras, la destinée et l’œuvre (1984) Aux origines de l'Action française (1991) Charles Maurras : le chaos et l'ordre (2006) L'Action française : culture, société, politique (2008-2012) Links to related articles v t e Académie française seat 16 Jean Sirmond (1634) Jean de Montereul (1649) François Tallemant l'Aîné (1651) Simon de la Loubère (1693) Claude Sallier (1729) Jean-Gilles du Coëtlosquet (1761) Anne-Pierre, marquis de Montesquiou-Fézensac (1784) Antoine-Vincent Arnault (1803) Armand-Emmanuel de Vignerot du Plessis, duc de Richelieu (1816) Bon-Joseph Dacier (1822) Pierre François Tissot (1833) Félix Dupanloup (1854) Gaston Audiffret-Pasquier (1878) Alexandre Ribot (1906) Henri-Robert (1923) Charles Maurras (1938) Antoine de Lévis-Mirepoix (1953) Léopold Sédar Senghor (1983) Valéry Giscard d'Estaing (2003) v t e Action Française Key people Before 1945 Jacques Bainville Léon Daudet Louis Dimier Charles Maurras Lucien Moreau Marius Plateau Maurice Pujo Georges Valois Henri Vaugeois George de Villebois-Mareuil After 1945 Pierre Boutang Pierre Pujo Organisations Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Related Acción Española Hussards Je suis partout Maurrassisme La Nation française Philippe Daudet affair Post war Nouvelle Action Royaliste L'Action française 2000 Restauration Nationale v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Far-right politics in France Precursors Bonald Boulanger de Gobineau de Maistre Drumont de Lapouge Pre-1945 groups Action Française Antisemitic League of France Breton National Party Camelots du Roi Croix-de-Feu Le Faisceau French National-Collectivist Party French Popular Party Greenshirts Jeunesses Patriotes La Cagoule Ligue des Patriotes Milice Mouvement Franciste National Popular Rally Revolutionary Social Movement Service d'ordre légionnaire Solidarité Française Pre-1945 people Barrès Bainville Benoist-Méchin Bonnard Brasillach Bucard Clémenti Coston Darnard Daudet Déat Deloncle Déroulède Dorgères Doriot Drieu La Rochelle Laval Maulnier Maurras Maxence Mitterrand Ousset Pétain Plateau Pujo Rebatet Vallat Vaugeois Defunct post-1945 groups Action Française (post 1945) Charles Martel Group Europe-Action European Rally for Liberty Fédération d'action nationale et européenne Federation of Nationalist Students French and European Nationalist Party French Algerian Front Groupe Union Défense Jeune Nation L'Œuvre Française Nouvelle Résistance Occident UNIR Tixier-Vignancour Committees Ordre Nouveau Organisation armée secrète Party of New Forces Phalange Française Radical Network Rassemblement National Français Revolutionary Nationalist Groups Third Way Unité Radicale Active groups Action Française Adsav AGRIF Alsace First Association for the Defence of the Memory of Marshal Pétain Cité catholique Civitas Carrefour de l'Horloge Debout la France Equality and Reconciliation Europe-Jeunesse The Nationalists French Renewal Generation Identity GRECE League of the South National Council of European Resistance National Republican Movement Party of France National Rally Reconquête Sovereignty, Identity and Freedoms Terre et Peuple The Patriots Post-1945 people Aliot Antony Ayoub Bardèche Bardella Bay Benedetti Binet Bompard Bouchet Bousquet Blot Brigneau Briois Camus Coston de Benoist de Lesquen Dior Duprat Faye Fredriksen Gollnisch Holeindre Jalkh Lang Le Gallou Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Luce Maribe Malliarakis Maréchal Mégret Ménard Messiha Philippot de Poncins Pujo Rachline Ravier Reynouard Saint-Loup Sidos Soral Stirbois Susini Tixier-Vignancour Venner Vial Zemmour Ideologies and movements Boulangisme Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Pétainism Révolution nationale Active publications and media Boulevard Voltaire Éléments Minute National-Hebdo Nouvelle École Présent Radio Courtoisie Rivarol TV Libertés Notable events Dreyfus affair Franco-Prussian War ( Revanchism ) 6 February 1934 crisis Vichy France Algerian War ( Algiers putsch of 1961 ) v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Action Française Key people Before 1945 Jacques Bainville Léon Daudet Louis Dimier Charles Maurras Lucien Moreau Marius Plateau Maurice Pujo Georges Valois Henri Vaugeois George de Villebois-Mareuil After 1945 Pierre Boutang Pierre Pujo Organisations Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Related Acción Española Hussards Je suis partout Maurrassisme La Nation française Philippe Daudet affair Post war Nouvelle Action Royaliste L'Action française 2000 Restauration Nationale Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n6nkf
Cached time: 20250817044210
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.096 seconds
Real time usage: 1.357 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7596/1000000
Revision size: 46070/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 417339/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 116071/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 169671/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.590/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19886054/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  940.663      1 -total
 19.34%  181.892      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 16.31%  153.432      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.09%  132.496      1 Template:Reflist
 11.89%  111.800      1 Template:IPA
  9.57%   90.058      1 Template:Integralism
  8.66%   81.418      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.14%   67.181      1 Template:Conservatism_in_France
  6.48%   60.931      1 Template:Short_description
  5.50%   51.737      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:219709:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044210 and revision id 1305609215. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Maurras&oldid=1305609215 " Categories : Charles Maurras 1868 births 1952 deaths French agnostics People from Martigues People affiliated with Action Française Catholicism and far-right politics Conservatism in France Far-right politics in France Politicians of the French Third Republic Antidreyfusards French Roman Catholic writers French political writers Writers from Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Expelled members of the Académie Française Order of the Francisque recipients French political philosophers French anti-communists French prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment French male non-fiction writers French medievalists People convicted of indignité nationale Prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment by France Members of the Ligue de la patrie française Deaf writers Anti-Marxism Anti-Masonry in France Antisemitism in France Deaf politicians French deaf people French writers with disabilities Counter-revolutionaries National syndicalists French politicians with disabilities Anti-German sentiment Activists from Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Occitan-speaking people Critics of Freemasonry Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 02:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles Maurras 40 languages Add topic

