Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 WWII embargo on US pulp imports 3 Growth in Australian Science Fiction 1960s onward Toggle Growth in Australian Science Fiction 1960s onward subsection 3.1 1960s 3.2 1970s 3.3 1980s 4 Critical contributions 5 Writers 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Australian science fiction 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Australian science fiction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Australia, unlike Europe, does not have a long history in the genre of science fiction.

Nevil Shute's On the Beach , published in 1957, and filmed in 1959 , was perhaps the first notable international success. Though not born in Australia, Shute spent his latter years there, and the book was set in Australia. It might have been worse had the imports of American pulp magazines not been restricted during World War II , forcing local writers into the field. Various compilation magazines began appearing in the 1960s and the field has continued to expand into some significance. Today Australia has a thriving SF/Fantasy genre with names recognised around the world. In 2013 a trilogy by Sydney-born Ben Peek was sold at auction to a UK publisher for a six-figure deal .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Early (pre- Second World War ) Australian science fiction was often what today one could consider racist and xenophobic , fueled by contemporary worries about invasion and foreigners (see White Australia policy ). But by the 1950s, Australian sf had incorporated the core tenets of US sf and turned away from local issues.

[ 2 ] 1952 marked the year of the first regular Australian science fiction conventions .

[ 3 ] WWII embargo on US pulp imports [ edit ] The origins of Australia's local science fiction industry sprang from a wartime embargo on the import of various non-essential goods from outside Australia, particularly from America. The Pulp Fiction Exhibition at the University of Otago noted: "In 1939, the Australian government placed an embargo on American pulp magazines. This decision was prompted by the moral majority, who claimed comics and other 'objectionable' material were undermining societal mores, and an importation crisis due to World War II." [ 4 ] In World War II, Darwin had received a heavier air raid than Pearl Harbor .

Broome , Katherine and Cairns had also been bombed. Japanese submarines were attacking Sydney, and Spitfires and Zeroes were fighting it out above Australia's northern coasts and towns. The only American science fiction that arrived in Australia were in British editions. The only authentic American SF magazines to reach Australia in this period arrived as ballast in ships. Imported science fiction was an unthinkable luxury in Australia under these circumstances, yet thanks to government inertia the embargo was not lifted until thirteen years after the war ended, in 1958. The unrestricted return of non-Australian science fiction marked an end to one period of growth in Australian homegrown science fiction writing and publication.

Australia's first science fiction magazine was Thrills, Incorporated (1950–52), published by Transport Publishing Co, and imprint of Horwitz Publishing House . Many reprints from Thrills, Incorporated were later used in British science fiction magazine Amazing Science Stories .

Growth in Australian Science Fiction 1960s onward [ edit ] Australian science fiction grew tremendously in the 1960s and became a notable field around the 1980s. Most Australian science-fiction writers today are writing for the international market.

1960s [ edit ] Australian science-fiction became a notable field of world science-fiction literature around the 1960s. In 1966, the monthly Australian Science-Fiction Review was first published; in 1969 it was joined by SF Commentary . That year also the Ditmar Awards were established, awarded in multiple categories.

The first Australian World Science Fiction Convention Aussiecon was held in 1975 in Melbourne ; that year also Paul Collins began publishing the science fiction magazine Void . Collins went on to publish numerous science fiction titles under his Void book and Collins imprint, including books by such writers as David Lake , Russell Blackford , Trevor Donahue, Wynne Whiteford , and Keith Taylor .

John Baxter edited a number of early collections of Australian science fiction for Angus and Robertson publishers.

As an adjunct of the science fiction field in Australia, there were various publications which may be regarded as horror or dark fantasy. The main producer of such material in the 1960s was Horwitz Publishing House .

1970s [ edit ] In the 1970s Van Ikin established the important critical journal Science Fiction co-edited by Terry Dowling . Ikin has edited a number of seminal anthologies including Glass Reptile Breakout , Australian Science Fiction and Mortal Fire (the latter with Terry Dowling).

Damien Broderick also edited numerous anthologies in additionto his work as a writer. Jenny and Russell Blackford edited the long-running critical magazine Australian SF Review . Two book-length selections of essays from this journal have been published.

[ 5 ] 1980s [ edit ] The number of authors and publications grew, particularly with the field of short fiction becoming established by the mid-1980s, with the first professional Australian science fiction magazine being published that decade ( Omega Science Digest ); in the 1990s it was joined by Aurealis: The Australian Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction and Eidolon: The Journal of Australian Science Fiction & Fantasy .

Jonathan Strahan , co-editor of the latter, has gone on to become Australia's most prolific science fiction editor.

David G. Hartwell noted that while there is perhaps "nothing essentially Australian about Australian science-fiction", many Australian science-fiction (and fantasy and horror ) writers are in fact international English language writers, and their work is commonly published worldwide. This is further explainable by the fact that the Australian inner market is small (with Australian population being only 24 million), and sales abroad are crucial to most Australian writers.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] A. Bertram Chandler , while not born in Australia but having emigrated there as an adult, did all his science fiction writing while living in Australia. The future history leading up to the time of his main space-faring character John Grimes is a history in which Australia became a major world power on Earth and a leading center of space exploration and colonization. Several of Grimes' galactic adventures take place on planets settled by Australians whose inhabitants still have recognizable Australian cultural traits.

[ 8 ] In the 1980s Australian horror came to the fore as a subgenre within the speculative fiction, with the publication of The Australian Horror and Fantasy Magazine and its successor Terror Australis .

Critical contributions [ edit ] Donald H. Tuck , an amateur scholar from Tasmania , wrote the first major encyclopedia of science fiction, The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy , in three parts (1974, 1978, 1983), receiving the 1984 Hugo Award for his contribution.

[ 9 ] Another Australian, Peter Nicholls , was awarded a Hugo in 1980 [ 10 ] and shared one with John Clute in 1994 [ 11 ] (for a revised version) of a similar critical review of the world's sf, The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction .

Apart from Peek's novels – Immolation, Innocence and Incarnation, Tor also bought two novels by Rjurik Davidson in 2013.

The Guardian reports that: "Peek and Davidson join a host of names who readers of speculative fiction all over the English-reading world will 
recognise: Garth Nix, Trudi Canavan, Margo Lanagan, Sara Douglass, Damien Broderick, Cecila Dart-Thornton, Greg Egan, Alison Goodman, Sean McMullen, Glenda Larke, Sean Williams and Justine Larbalestier." [ 12 ] Writers [ edit ] Notable Australian science fiction and fantasy writers and editors include: Lee Battersby K. A. Bedford Deborah Biancotti Damien Broderick John Brosnan Simon Brown Trudi Canavan Peter Carey Isobelle Carmody A. Bertram Chandler Robbie Coburn Paul Collins D. M. Cornish Cecilia Dart-Thornton Marianne de Pierres Sara Douglass Terry Dowling Greg Egan Jennifer Fallon Kate Forsyth Leanne Frahm Alison Goodman Lee Harding Traci Harding Richard Harland Simon Haynes Van Ikin Ian Irvine Kathleen Jennings Victor Kelleher Margo Lanagan Rosaleen Love Fiona McIntosh Sean McMullen Caiseal Mor Garth Nix Steven Paulsen Ben Peek David Rome Joel Shepherd Nevil Shute Angela Slatter Catriona Sparks Jonathan Strahan Bill Strutton Nike Sulway Lucy Sussex George Turner Kaaron Warren Janeen Webb Sean Williams Patricia Wrightson See also [ edit ] Australian National Science Fiction Convention Australian science fiction television Category:Australian science fiction writers Category:Australian science fiction awards References [ edit ] ^ "TOR UK ACQUIRES NEW FANTASY TRILOGY -- BY AUSTRALIAN BEN PEEK April 22, 2013 By Julie Crisp" . Archived from the original on 10 January 2017 . Retrieved 9 January 2017 .

^ " "Australia" " . The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . Retrieved 29 May 2024 .

^ Edmonds, Leigh (2024).

Proud and Lonely: A History of Science Fiction Fandom in Australia Part One: 1936 to 1961 . Norstrilia Press. p. 76.

ISBN 978-0-6453696-8-7 .

^ "Cabinet 1: US Pulps" .

www.library.otago.ac.nz . The Pulp Fiction Exhibition, University of Otago, New Zealand . Retrieved 2016-02-07 .

^ Damien Broderick et al (eds) Skiffy and Mimesis: More Best of ASFR: Australian SF Review (Second Series) . Borgo Press, 2010; Chained to the Alien: The Best of Australian Science Fiction Review (Second Series) , Borgo Press, 2009 ^ David G. Hartwell, Damien Broderick (ed.), Centaurus: The Best of Australian Science Fiction , Damien Broderick, Introduction , pp. 10-21 Tor Books, 1999m ISBN 0-312-86556-2 ^ David G. Hartwell, Damien Broderick (ed.), Centaurus: The Best of Australian Science Fiction , David. G. Hartwell, The other editor's introduction , pp. 22-25 Tor Books, 1999m ISBN 0-312-86556-2 ^ " "Chandler, A Bertram" " . The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . Retrieved 29 May 2024 .

^ 1984 Hugo Awards ^ 1980 Hugo awards ^ 1994 Hugo Awards ^ Barnett, David (6 June 2013).

"Science fiction and fantasy: the wonderful wizards of Oz" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 January 2017 .

Russell Blackford , Van Ikin & Sean McMullen (eds).

Strange Constellations: A History of Australian Science Fiction . (Greenwood Press, 1999).

David Seed and Russell Blackford.

A Companion To Science Fiction Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2005.

ISBN 978-1-4051-1218-5 Paul Collins (ed).

The MUP Encyclopedia of Australian Science Fiction & Fantasy . (Assistant Editors Steven Paulsen & Sean McMullen ). Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1998.

External links [ edit ] A list of SF bookshops, publishers, authors, writers and artists The Australian Science Fiction Foundation The Best Australian Science Fiction writing - review of Australian Science Fiction Information (archival version of the site, now offline) Aurealis , Australia's major SF/fantasy magazine v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Science fiction in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_science_fiction&oldid=1269685462 " Category : Australian science fiction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2008 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 21:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian science fiction 1 language Add topic

