Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Specific practice areas 2 Construction contracts 3 Country-specific contract practice Toggle Country-specific contract practice subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 Canada 3.3 South Africa 3.4 United Kingdom 3.5 United States 3.5.1 Deviation 4 Construction law organizations Toggle Construction law organizations subsection 4.1 United States 4.2 United Kingdom and other 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Construction law 13 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Қазақша Nederlands Português Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Laws about building, engineering, etc Construction law is a branch of law that deals with matters relating to building construction , engineering , and related fields. It is in essence an amalgam of contract law , commercial law , planning law , employment law and tort . Construction law covers a wide range of legal issues including contract, negligence, bonds and bonding , guarantees and sureties , liens and other security interests, tendering, construction claims, and related consultancy contracts. Construction law affects many participants in the construction industry, including financial institutions , surveyors , quantity surveyors , architects , carpenters , engineers , construction workers , and planners .

Specific practice areas [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Construction law builds upon general legal principles and methodologies and incorporates the regulatory framework (including security of payment, planning, environmental and building regulations); contract methodologies and selection (including traditional and alternative forms of contracting); subcontract issues; causes of action , and liability, arising in contract, negligence and on other grounds; insurance and performance security; dispute resolution and avoidance.

[ 1 ] Construction law has evolved into a practice discipline in its own right, distinct from its traditional locations as a subpractice of project finance , real estate or corporate law. There are often strong links between construction law and energy law and oil and gas law .

Some of the major areas a construction lawyer covers are: Alternative Dispute Resolution Arbitration Dispute review boards (or other third party reviews) Mediation Structured negotiations Bankruptcy issues for contractors, owners, suppliers, etc.

Bidding (tendering) disputes Building and other permits Building information modeling Contract law Change Orders (Variations) Construction claims Construction liens Wage requirements ( Davis-Bacon Act of 1931 , etc.) Payment and Prompt payments acts Extensions of time Drafting construction contracts Industry-standard construction contracts Negotiating construction contracts Negotiating a termination claim, whether for convenience or for default Defective design or construction Delays and acceleration Employment Law including Immigration Environmental matters in construction False Claims Act (s) Fire codes and regulations Fulfilling regulations for non-discrimination or other social impact legislation Insurances issues Damage, liability Indemnification Surety Law (Payment and Performance Bonds) Labor issues and strikes Licensing construction professionals OSHA , and other federal agencies Overinspection Project delivery systems, such as design-bid-build, Design-Build , Construction Manager (CM) at Risk or Agency CM Provide defense to businesses facing administrative actions such as delisting (loss of bid listing) Provide legal counsel Public construction Federal construction under FAR or other regulated procurements State contracting procedures State and local building codes Sustainable construction, e.g.

LEED Litigation: trying construction cases in court Violations, safety or other regulatory Construction contracts [ edit ] Although no special contract formalities are required, it is normal practice to use standard-form contracts such as, in the UK, the Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT) form.

[ 2 ] In order to expedite dispute resolution, standard forms have often provided for arbitration by a "board of arbitration" or professional arbitrator, [ 3 ] although many now offer a choice between arbitration and litigation. Construction law has been affected by the requirements in public contracts, which include surety bonds and other procedures. In private contracts, the requirements are negotiated between the parties. As of 1998, the principles of construction law were "well established".

[ 4 ] Remedies for breach of contract are the same as in the ordinary law, and include damages , repudiation , rescission , and specific performance .

[ 5 ] Country-specific contract practice [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: Australian Construction Contracts The standard form construction contracts used in Australia include the Australian Building Industry Contracts (ABIC), the Standards Australia contracts, the Australian Defence Contracting Suite of Tendering and Contracting (AUSDEFCON) and the GC21 government contracts form.

Canada [ edit ] In Canada, the law requires money for work done to be paid in trust .

[ 6 ] South Africa [ edit ] The standard form construction contracts in use in South Africa include FIDIC , the New Engineering Contract (NEC), the General Conditions of Contract for Construction Works (GCC) and Joint Building Contracts Committee (JBCC) agreements.

[ 7 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] The JCT works on the most popular type of standard construction contracts and the latest suite of contracts from the JCT are the 2024 editions.

[ 8 ] The form of contract most favoured by public bodies is the NEC contract suite.

[ 9 ] In the UK, specific requirements relating to payments and adjudication provisions were introduced by the Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996 , [ 10 ] and were subsequently amended in Part 8 of the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 .

[ 11 ] These requirements are generally known as the Construction Act requirements. The requirements set out certain minimum provisions which must be included in any construction contract (as defined within the Act) and failure to comply with these requirements will cause the relevant provisions to be deleted and compliant provisions to be inserted in their place, which can lead to unexpected consequences for unsuspecting parties to a construction contract.

Although some see construction law as another form of general contract law, it is a very specialised area and most people requiring advice on construction law in the UK would seek advice from construction law specialists.

United States [ edit ] Standard form contracts promulgated by the American Institute of Architects have been the standard in the industry (insofar as building construction); the organization first published a form in 1888, and has over 200 forms, with revisions to selected forms happening typically every ten years.

[ 12 ] However, these forms have been criticized as unfair to contractors in favor of owners and architects, which led to the publication of ConsensusDocs standard contracts in September 2007. The ConsensusDocs Coalition includes 41 trade associations representing design professionals, owners, contractors, subcontractors and sureties in the design and construction industry. ConsensusDocs publishes more than 100 contract documents, addressing all methods of project delivery, and are written in the project's best interest versus one particular party.

[ 13 ] Engineering lead projects such as horizontal infrastructure use other standard form contracts [ 14 ] such as those developed by the Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee (EJCDC). Recently several other organizations have developed contracts for use such as the CMAA (for projects using agency construction management ) [ 15 ] and the Design-Build Institute of America for projects using Design–build .

[ 16 ] Deviation [ edit ] When a plan has been adopted for a building, and in the progress of the work a change is made from the original plan, the change is called a "deviation".

[ 17 ] When the contract is to build a house according to the original plan, and a deviation takes place, the contract shall be traced as far as possible, and the additions, if any have been made, shall be paid for according to the usual rate of charging.

[ 18 ] Construction law organizations [ edit ] United States [ edit ] The Forum on Construction Law of the American Bar Association established in 1973 is the largest organization of construction lawyers in the United States.

[ 19 ] The group includes law firms of every size, solo practitioners, in-house and government counsel, non-lawyers such as, construction professionals and the public sector representatives. Forum members include those of owners, developers, design professionals, contractors, subcontractors, suppliers, construction managers, lenders, insurers and sureties.

United Kingdom and other [ edit ] In the United Kingdom, there has been an active Society of Construction Law since 1983, and there is now a European Society of Construction Law, and Societies of Construction Law in Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore, and the UAE.

See also [ edit ] Mechanic's lien Construction management Planning permission References [ edit ] ^ Silva, Pramod Malaka; Domingo, Niluka; Ameer Ali, Noushad Ali Naseem (2023-01-01). "Causes of disputes in the construction industry – a systematic literature review".

Journal of Financial Management of Property and Construction .

29 (2): 193– 210.

doi : 10.1108/JFMPC-03-2023-0012 .

ISSN 1366-4387 .

^ "Standard form contracts: JCT" . Out-law.com . Retrieved 2015-02-18 .

^ Bruner, Philip L.; Haley, Tracey L. (2007-01-01).

Managing and Litigating the Complex Surety Case - Google Books . American Bar Association.

ISBN 978-1-59031-884-3 . Retrieved 2015-02-18 .

^ Levin, Paul (1998-01-01).

Construction Contract Claims, Changes and Dispute Resolution - Paul Levin - Google Books . ASCE Press.

ISBN 978-0-7844-0276-4 . Retrieved 2015-02-18 .

^ "Construction Contract Terms - Contract Terms - The Lien Zone" .

thelienzone.com . 30 January 2014.

^ "Construction law: Breach of trust in the construction industry" . IFLR.com. 1997-09-01 . Retrieved 2015-02-18 .

^ Markram Incorporated Attorneys.

"Construction Law in South Africa" . Retrieved 2014-06-04 .

^ "Contract families" .

www.jctltd.co.uk . Retrieved 2015-10-15 .

^ "NEC3 Contracts - Products - NEC Contracts" .

www.neccontract.com . Retrieved 2015-10-15 .

^ "Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Retrieved 2015-10-15 .

^ "Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Retrieved 2015-10-15 .

^ Klinger M. (2007).

A New Era in Standard Form Construction Documents: a Rivalry Between the Old Guard American Institute of Architects And An Upstart Consortium Led by the Associated General Contractors of America [ permanent dead link ] . Sedgwick, Detert, Moran & Arnold LLP.

^ "The Government Contracts Law Report Government Contractor Articles" . Attny.com. 2001-01-07 . Retrieved 2015-02-18 .

^ "Products Archive - EJCDC - Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee" .

EJCDC - Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee . 12 December 2019.

^ "CMAA Publications | CMAA" . Archived from the original on 2018-04-28 . Retrieved 2018-04-28 .

^ "Books & Contracts" .

www.dbia.org . Archived from the original on 2018-05-03 . Retrieved 2018-04-28 .

^ " Deviation " is a concept borrowed from both Insurance law and the Law of Carriage of Goods by Sea , and cases such as Glynn v Margetson and Leduc v Ward .

^ See also St Paul Fire and Marine v McConnell [1995] 2 LLR 116 CA, where contractors failed to inform insurers of a signification change to the specified foundations; (the builders failed to install piles, as the plans had required).

^ "About Us - Forum on the Construction Industry" .

www.americanbar.org .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Construction law at Wikimedia Commons v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Construction Types Home construction Offshore construction Underground construction Tunnel construction History Architecture Construction Industrialization Infrastructure Structural engineering Timeline of architecture Water supply and sanitation World's tallest buildings Professions Architect Building engineer Building estimator Building officials Chartered Building Surveyor Civil engineer Civil estimator Clerk of works Project manager Quantity surveyor Site manager Structural engineer Superintendent Trades workers ( List ) Banksman Boilermaker Bricklayer Carpenter Concrete finisher Construction foreman Construction worker Electrician Glazier Ironworker Millwright Plasterer Plumber Roofer Steel fixer Welder Organizations American Institute of Constructors (AIC) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC) Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC) Build UK Construction History Society Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES) Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE) Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) The Concrete Society Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) FIDIC Home Builders Federation (HBF) Lighting Association National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA) National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC) National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA) Railway Tie Association (RTA) Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) Scottish Building Federation (SBF) Society of Construction Arbitrators By country India Iran Japan Romania Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Regulation Building code Construction law Site safety Zoning Architecture Style List Industrial architecture British Indigenous architecture Interior architecture Landscape architecture Vernacular architecture Engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Coastal engineering Construction engineering Structural engineering Earthquake engineering Environmental engineering Geotechnical engineering Methods List Earthbag construction Modern methods of construction Monocrete construction Slip forming Other topics Building material List of building materials Millwork Builder's signature Builders' rites Construction bidding Construction delay Construction equipment theft Cornerstone Floor loan Construction management Construction waste Demolition Design–build Design–bid–build DFMA Heavy equipment Interior design Illegal construction Lists of buildings and structures Megaproject Megastructure Plasterwork Damp Proofing Parge coat Roughcast Harling Real estate development Real-estate bubble Stonemasonry Sustainability Topping out Unfinished building Urban design Urban planning Outline Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Construction_law&oldid=1305709222 " Category : Construction law Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Construction law 13 languages Add topic

