Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Legacy 4 Publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abraham Gotthelf Kästner 23 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar مصرى Nederlands Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1719–1800) Abraham Gotthelf Kästner Born ( 1719-09-27 ) 27 September 1719 Leipzig , Electorate of Saxony Died 20 June 1800 (1800-06-20) (aged 80) Göttingen , Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg Education University of Leipzig (Dr. phil. hab., 1739) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Leipzig University of Göttingen Thesis Theoria radicum in aequationibus (1739) Doctoral advisor Christian August Hausen Doctoral students Johann Friedrich Pfaff Georg Christoph Lichtenberg Johann Tobias Mayer Heinrich Wilhelm Brandes Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben Other notable students Farkas Bolyai Johann Christian Martin Bartels Abraham Gotthelf Kästner (27 September 1719 – 20 June 1800) was a German mathematician and epigrammatist .

He was known in his professional life for writing textbooks and compiling encyclopedias rather than for original research.

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg was one of his doctoral students, and admired the man greatly. He became most well-known for his epigrammatic poems. The crater Kästner on the Moon is named after him.

Life [ edit ] Kästner was the son of law professor Abraham Kästner. He married Anna Rosina Baumann in 1757 after a 12-year engagement. She died on 4 March 1758, less than a year later, of lung disease. Later Kästner had a daughter Catharine with his cleaning lady.

Kästner studied law, philosophy, physics, mathematics and metaphysics in Leipzig from 1731, and was appointed a Notary in 1733. He gained his habilitation from the University of Leipzig in 1739, [ 1 ] and lectured there in mathematics, philosophy, logic and law, becoming an associate professor in 1746. In 1751 he was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences . In 1756 he took up a position as a full professor of natural philosophy and geometry at the University of Göttingen . In 1763, succeeding Tobias Mayer , he became director of the observatory as well. One of his doctoral students was the physicist and aphorist Georg Christoph Lichtenberg , who became a colleague of his at Göttingen . Other notable doctoral students were Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben , Johann Pfaff (doctoral advisor of Carl Friedrich Gauss ), Johann Tobias Mayer , Heinrich Wilhelm Brandes , Farkas Bolyai (father of János Bolyai ), and Georg Klügel . Kästner died in 1800 in Göttingen.

Work [ edit ] De habitu matheseos et physicae ad religionem , 1752 Kästner became most well known for his poems, which appeared first in print without his consent in 1781 and were notable for their biting humour and sharp irony on different contemporary personalities. They were published in Vermischten Schriften 1 und 2 (Altenburg 1783, 2 volumes), and further poems were published in Gesammelten poetischen und prosaischen schönwissenschaftlichen Werken (Berlin 1841, 4 volumes) and later in Joseph Kürschner 's Deutscher Nationalliteratur , volume 73 (hrsg. von Minor; Stuttgart 1883).

His numerous mathematical writings include Anfangsgründe der Mathematik ("Foundations of Mathematics") (Göttingen 1758-69, 4 volumes; 6th edition 1800) and Geschichte der Mathematik ("History of Mathematics") (Göttingen 1796-1800, 4 volumes).

Geschichte der Mathematik is considered an astute work, but lacks a comprehensive overview of all subsections of mathematics.

He also translated many of the Proceedings of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences into German, including all volumes of the Proceedings ( Handlingar ) between 1749 and 1781 and some of New Proceedings ( Nya handlingar ) from 1784 to 1792.

He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in April 1789.

[ 2 ] Legacy [ edit ] [Abraham Gotthelf Kästner is] the best mathematician among poets and the best poet among mathematicians.

— Carl Friedrich Gauss , quoted in Morris Kline, Mathematics and the Physical World (1959) Ch. 26: Non-Euclidean Geometries, p. 444. Gauss meant it as a sarcastic remark, after he presented his construction of the 17-gon, and Kästner failed to notice its significance.

Publications [ edit ] De habitu matheseos et physicae ad religionem (in Latin). Leipzig: Johann Christian Langenheim. 1752.

References [ edit ] ^ Abraham Kästner – MacTutor MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive ^ "Library and Archive Catalogue" . Royal Society . Retrieved 7 November 2010 .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] Media related to Abraham Gotthelf Kästner at Wikimedia Commons O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abraham Gotthelf Kästner" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Abraham Gotthelf Kästner at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Theoria radicum in aequationibus – Europeana Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy 2 Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abraham_Gotthelf_Kästner&oldid=1303029542 " Categories : 1719 births 1800 deaths 18th-century German mathematicians German Lutherans German encyclopedists German historians of mathematics Writers from Leipzig People from the Electorate of Saxony Leipzig University alumni Academic staff of Leipzig University Academic staff of the University of Göttingen Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Fellows of the Royal Society German male non-fiction writers 18th-century German male writers Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 18:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abraham Gotthelf Kästner 23 languages Add topic

