Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Contemporary Indigenous Australian art 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Dreaming (Australian Aboriginal art) 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Dreaming (story)" redirects here. For other uses, see Dreaming (disambiguation) .

In Australian Aboriginal art , a Dreaming is  a totemistic design or artwork, which can be owned by a tribal group or individual. 
This usage of anthropologist W. E. H. Stanner 's term was popularised by Geoffrey Bardon in the context of the Papunya Tula artist collective he established in the 1970s.

Terminology [ edit ] Main article: The Dreaming " The Dreaming " or "Dreamtime" is commonly used as a term  for the animist creation narrative of Aboriginal Australians for a personal, or group, creation and for what may be understood as the "timeless time" of formative creation and perpetual creating. In addition, the term applies to places and localities on indigenous Australian traditional land (and throughout non-traditional Australia) where the uncreated creation spirits and totemic ancestors, or genii loci , reside.

[ 1 ] The term was coined by W. E. H. Stanner in 1956, and popularized from the 1960s.

[ 2 ] based on the description of indigenous Australian mythology by Lucien Levy-Bruhl ( La Mythologie Primitive , 1935).

[ 3 ] The term "Dreaming" is based on the root of the term altjira ( alcheringa ) used by the Aranda people , although it has since been pointed out that the rendition is based on a mistranslation.

[ 4 ] Stanner introduced the derived term of " dreamtime " in the 1970s.

Contemporary Indigenous Australian art [ edit ] Main article: Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Further information: Papunya Tula This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Dreaming" Australian Aboriginal art – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "A Dreaming" is a story owned by different tribes and their members that explains the creation of life, people and animals. A Dreaming story is passed on protectively as it is owned and is a form of intellectual property . In the modern context, an Aboriginal person cannot relate or paint someone else's dreaming or creation story without prior permission of the Dreaming's owner.

[ citation needed ] Someone's dreaming story must be respected, as the individual holds the knowledge to that Dreaming story.  Certain behavioural constraints are associated with dreaming ownership; for instance, if a Dreaming is painted without authorisation, such action can meet with accusations of "stealing" someone else's Dreaming.

Geoffrey Bardon 's three books on Papunya (1971, 1976, 1978) specifically mention conflict related to possession of a dreaming story.  He uses as an example the Honey Ant Dreaming painted in contemporary times on the school walls of Papunya.  Before the mural could be painted, all tribes in Papunya: the Pintupi , Warlpiri , Arrernte , and Anmatyerre , had to agree that the honey ant was an acceptable mural, since Papunya is the meeting place for all tribes.  After the mural was painted, one of the senior elders , Long Tom Onion, reminded Bardon that he, the elder, had suggested the mural be painted.  Later, Bardon realised Long Tom Onion owned that Dreaming.  He comprehended the importance of Dreaming ownership among Aboriginal Australians, especially those who retain tribal and traditional connections.

Among the Central Desert tribes of Australia, the passing on of the Dreaming story is for the most part gender -related.  For example, the late artist from the Papunya movement, Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri , painted ceremonial dreamings relating to circumcision and love stories, and lessons for "naughty boys".  His daughters Gabriella Possum and Michelle Possum have tended to paint the "Seven Sisters" Dreaming or the Pleiades , as they inherited that Dreaming through the maternal line.  Consequently, they have painted their "Grandmother's Country", which is an expression of their inherited ownership of the land through knowledge of the dreamings.  Clifford and his daughters have not painted the same subjects; Clifford has never painted the "Seven Sisters Dreaming".  By tribal law, his daughters are not allowed to see male tribal ceremonies, let alone paint them.

Dreamings as "property" have also been used by a few Aboriginal tribes to argue before the High Court of Australia their title over traditional tribal land.  Paintings of Dreamings, travelling journeys, and ceremonies tend to depict the locations where they occur.

See also [ edit ] Anangu Embodied imagination References [ edit ] ^ Kimber, R. G., Man from Arltunga , Hesperian Press, Carlisle, Western Australia, 1986, chapter 12 ^ W.E.H Stanner, "The dreaming" in T.A.G. Hungerford (ed.), Australian Signpost , (1956); W.E.H Stanner, The Australian Aboriginal Dreaming as an Ideological System (1963) ^ "the religious symbol system at the primitive level is characterized by Lévy-Bruhl as " le monde mythique ", and Stanner directly translates the Australians' own word for it as 'the Dreaming'." R. N. Bellah, "Religious Evolution" in:  S. N. Eisenstadt (ed.), Readings in Social Evolution and Development , Elsevier, 2013 p. 220 .

^ B. Kilborne, "On classifying dreams", in: Barbara Tedlock (ed.) Dreaming: Anthropological and Psychological Interpretations , 1987, p. 249 .
Tony Swain, Place for Strangers: Towards a History of Australian Aboriginal Being ,  Cambridge University Press, 1993, p. 21 .

Bardon, G. and Bardon, J. (2005), Papunya: The Story After the Place , Melbourne: University of Melbourne, Miegunyah Press v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Time in religion and mythology Aeon Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Aevum Heortology Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐rwc84
Cached time: 20250812020511
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.208 seconds
Real time usage: 0.257 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 830/1000000
Revision size: 6033/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 52724/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1249/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23154/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.119/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2421853/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  209.710      1 -total
 31.28%   65.596      3 Template:Navbox
 30.47%   63.905      1 Template:Indigenous_Australians
 27.62%   57.913      1 Template:No_sources
 26.33%   55.217      1 Template:Ambox
 12.43%   26.075      1 Template:Redirect
  6.56%   13.755      1 Template:Citation_needed
  5.82%   12.213      1 Template:Use_dmy_dates
  5.58%   11.698      1 Template:Fix
  5.50%   11.543      1 Template:Reflist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15562544:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020511 and revision id 1244750276. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dreaming_(Australian_Aboriginal_art)&oldid=1244750276 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal mythology Creation myths Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2014 Use Australian English from October 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 This page was last edited on 8 September 2024, at 23:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dreaming (Australian Aboriginal art) 1 language Add topic

