Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Principles Toggle Principles subsection 2.1 Russell's principles 2.2 Wittgenstein's principles 2.3 Differences between Russell's and Wittgenstein's atomism 3 Influence and decline 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Logical atomism 21 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Polski Português Română Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Analytical philosophical view expounded by Bertrand Russell This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Logical atomism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series about Bertrand Russell Views on philosophy Views on society ( Peace Foundation ) Professorship of Philosophy Appointment court case Russell's paradox Peano–Russell notation Copleston–Russell debate Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Logical atomism v t e Logical atomism is a philosophical view that originated in the early 20th century with the development of analytic philosophy . It holds that the world consists of ultimate logical "facts" (or "atoms") that cannot be broken down any further, each of which can be understood independently of other facts.

Its principal exponent was the British philosopher Bertrand Russell . It is also widely held that the early works [ a ] of his Austrian-born pupil and colleague, Ludwig Wittgenstein , defend a version of logical atomism, though he went on to reject it in his later Philosophical Investigations .

[ b ] Some philosophers in the Vienna Circle were also influenced by logical atomism (particularly Rudolf Carnap , who was deeply sympathetic to some of its philosophical aims, especially in his earlier works).

[ 2 ] Gustav Bergmann also developed a form of logical atomism that focused on an ideal phenomenalistic language, particularly in his discussions of J.O. Urmson 's work on analysis.

[ 3 ] The name for this kind of theory was coined in March 1911 by Russell, in a work published in French titled "Le Réalisme analytique" (published in translation as "Analytic Realism" in Volume 6 of The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell ).

[ 4 ] Russell was developing and responding to what he called " logical holism "—i.e., the belief that the world operates in such a way that no part can be known without the whole being known first.

[ 5 ] This belief is related to monism , and is associated with the absolute idealism which was dominant in Britain at the time. The criticism of monism seen in the works of Russell and his colleague G. E. Moore can therefore be seen as an extension of their criticism of absolute idealism, particularly as it appeared in the  works of F. H. Bradley and J. M. E. McTaggart .

[ 5 ] Logical atomism can thus be understood as a developed alternative to logical holism, or the "monistic logic" of the absolute idealists.

Origin [ edit ] As mentioned above, the term "logical atomism" was first coined by Russell in 1911. However, since the paper in which it was first introduced was published only in French during Russell's lifetime, the view was not widely associated with Russell in the English-speaking world until Russell gave a series of lectures in early 1918 under the title "The Philosophy of Logical Atomism". These lectures were subsequently published in 1918 and 1919 in The Monist (Volumes 28 and 29), which at the time was edited by Phillip Jourdain .

[ 6 ] Russell's ideas as presented in 1918 were also influenced by Wittgenstein, as he explicitly acknowledges in his introductory note. This has partly contributed to the widely-held view that Wittgenstein was also a logical atomist, as has Wittgenstein's atomistic metaphysics developed in the Tractatus .

However, logical atomism has older roots. Russell and Moore broke themselves free from British Idealism in the 1890s. And Russell's break developed along its own logical and mathematical path. His views on philosophy and its methods were heavily influenced by revolutionary nineteenth-century mathematics by figures like Cantor , Dedekind , Peano , and Weierstrass . As he says in his 1901 essay, republished in his 1917 collection Mysticism and Logic, and Other Essays under the title "Mathematics and the Metaphysicians": What is now required is to give the greatest possible development to mathematical logic, to allow to the full the importance of relations , and then to found upon this secure basis a new philosophical logic, which may hope to borrow some of the exactitude and certainty of its mathematical foundation. If this can be successfully accomplished, there is every reason to hope that the near future will be as great an epoch in pure philosophy as the immediate past has been in the principles of mathematics. Great triumphs inspire great hopes; and pure thought may achieve, within our generation, such results as will place our time, in this respect, on a level with the greatest age of Greece. (pg. 96) [ 7 ] With the operations of the calculus of relations as atoms or indefinables ( primitive notions ), Russell described logicism , or mathematics as logic, in The  Principles of Mathematics (1903). Russell thought the revolutionary mathematical work could, through the development of relations, produce a similar revolution in philosophy. This ambition overlays the character of Russell's work from 1900 onward. Russell believes in fact that logical atomism, fully carried out and implemented throughout philosophy, is the realization of his 1901 ambition. As he says in the 1911 piece where he coins the phrase "logical atomism": The true method, in philosophy as in science, should be inductive, meticulous, respectful of detail, and should reject the belief that it is the duty of each philosophy to solve all problems by himself. It is this method which has inspired analytic realism [a.k.a. logical atomism], and it is the only method, if I am not mistaken, with which philosophy will succeed in obtaining results as solid as those obtained in science. (pg. 139) [ 4 ] Logical atomism rightly makes logic central to philosophy. In doing so, it makes philosophy scientific, at least in Russell's view. As he says in his 1924 "Logical Atomism": [ 8 ] The technical methods of mathematical logic, as developed in this book [ Principia Mathematica ], seem to me very powerful, and capable of providing a new instrument for the discussion of many problems that have hitherto remained subject to philosophical vagueness.

In summary, Russell thought that a moral of the revolutionary work in mathematics was this: equally revolutionary work in philosophy could occur, if we only make logic the essence of philosophizing.

[ 9 ] This aspiration lies at the origin, and motivates and runs through, logical atomism.

Principles [ edit ] Russell referred to his atomistic doctrine as contrary to the tier "of the people who more or less follow Hegel" (PLA 178).

The first principle of logical atomism is that the World contains "facts". The facts are complex structures consisting of objects ("particulars"). A fact may be that an object has a property or that it stands in some relation to other objects. In addition, there are judgments ("beliefs"), which are in a relationship to the facts, and by this relationship either true or false.

According to this theory, even ordinary objects of daily life "are apparently complex entities". According to Russell, words like "this" and "that" are used to denote particulars. In contrast, ordinary names such as "Socrates" actually are definitive descriptions. In the analysis of "Plato talks with his pupils", "Plato" needs to be replaced with something like "the man who was the teacher of Aristotle".

In 1905, Russell had already criticized Alexius Meinong , whose theories led to the paradox of the simultaneous existence and non-existence of fictional objects. This theory of descriptions was crucial to logical atomism, as Russell believed that language mirrored reality.

Russell's principles [ edit ] Bertrand Russell's theory of logical atomism consists of three interworking parts: the atomic proposition, the atomic fact , and the atomic complex. An atomic proposition, also known as an elemental judgement, is a fundamental statement describing a single entity. Russell refers to this entity as an atomic fact, and recognizes a range of elements within each fact that he refers to as particulars and universals . A particular denotes a signifier such as a name, many of which may apply to a single atomic fact, while a universal lends quality to these particulars, e.g. color, shape, disposition. In Russell's Theory of Acquaintance , awareness and thereby knowledge of these particulars and universals comes through sense data . Every system consists of many atomic propositions and their corresponding atomic facts, known together as an atomic complex. In respect to the nomenclature that Russell used for his theory, these complexes are also known as molecular facts in that they possess multiple atoms. Rather than decoding the complex in a top-down manner, logical atomism analyzes its propositions individually before considering their collective effect. According to Russell, the atomic complex is a product of human thought and ideation that combines the various atomic facts in a logical manner.

Russell's perspective on belief proved a point of contention between him and Wittgenstein, causing it to shift throughout his career. In logical atomism, belief is a complex that possesses both true and untrue propositions. Initially, Russell plotted belief as the special relationship between a subject and a complex proposition. Later, he amended this to say that belief lacks a proposition, and instead associates with universals and particulars directly. Here, the link between psychological experience – sense data – and components of logical atomism – universals and particulars – causes a breach in the typical logic of the theory; Russell's logical atomism is in some respects defined by the crossover of metaphysics and analytical philosophy, which characterizes the field of naturalized epistemology .

[ 10 ] In his theory of Logical Atomism, Russell posited the highly controversial idea that for every positive fact exists a parallel negative fact: a fact that is untrue. The correspondence theory maintains that every atomic proposition coordinates with exactly one atomic fact, and that all atomic facts exist. The Theory of Acquaintance says that for any given statement taking the form of an atomic proposition, we must be familiar with the assertion it makes. For example, in the positive statement, "the leaf is green," we must be acquainted with the atomic fact that the leaf is green, and we know that this statement corresponds to exactly this one fact. Along this same line, the complementary negative statement, "the leaf is not green," is clearly false given what we know about the color of the leaf, but our ability to form a statement of this nature means that a corresponding fact must exist. Regardless of whether the second statement is or isn't true, the connection between its proposition and a fact must itself be true. One central doctrine of Logical Atomism, known as the Logically Perfect Language Principle, enables this conclusion. This principle establishes that everything exists as atomic proposition and fact, and that all language signifies reality.  In Russell's viewpoint, this necessitates the negative fact, whereas Wittgenstein maintained the more conventional Principle of Bivalence , in which the states "P" and "Not (P)" cannot coexist.

Wittgenstein's principles [ edit ] In his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , Ludwig Wittgenstein explains his version of logical atomism as the relationship between proposition, state of affairs, object, and complex, often referred to as "Picture theory".

[ 11 ] In view of Russell's version, the propositions are congruent in that they are both clear statements about an atomic entity. Every atomic proposition is constructed from "names" that correspond to "objects", and the interaction of these objects generates "states of affairs," which are analogous to what Russell called atomic facts. Where Russell identifies both particulars and universals, Wittgenstein amalgamates these into objects for the sake of protecting the truth-independence of his propositions; a self-contained state of affairs defines each proposition, and the truth of a proposition cannot be proven by the sharing or exclusion of objects between propositions. In Russell's work, his concept of universals and particulars denies truth-independence, as each universal accounts for a specific set of particulars, and the exact matching of any two sets implies equality, difference implies inequality, and this acts as a qualifier of truth. In Wittgenstein's theory, an atomic complex is a layered proposition subsuming many atomic propositions, each representing its own state of affairs.

Wittgenstein's handling of belief was dismissive and reflects his abstention from the epistemology that concerned Russell. Because his theory dealt with understanding the nature of reality, and because any item or process of the mind barring positive fact, i.e. something absolute and without interpretation, may become altered and thus divorced from reality, belief exists as a sign of reality but not reality itself. Wittgenstein was decidedly skeptical of epistemology , which tends to value unifying metaphysical ideas while depreciating the casewise and methodological inspection of philosophy that dominates his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.

[ 12 ] Furthermore, Wittgenstein concerned himself with defining the exact correspondence between language and reality wherein any explanation of reality that defies or overburdens these semantic structures, namely metaphysics, becomes unhinged. Wittgenstein's work bears the exact philosophical determinants that he openly dismissed, hence his later abandonment of this theory altogether.

Differences between Russell's and Wittgenstein's atomism [ edit ] At the time Russell delivered his lectures on logical atomism, he had lost contact with Wittgenstein.  After World War I , Russell met with Wittgenstein again and helped him publish the Tractatus Logico Philosophicus , Wittgenstein's own version of Logical Atomism.

Although Wittgenstein did not use the expression Logical Atomism , the book espouses most of Russell's logical atomism except for Russell's Theory of Knowledge (T 5.4 and 5.5541). By 1918 Russell had moved away from this position. Nevertheless, the Tractatus differed so fundamentally from the philosophy of Russell that Wittgenstein always believed that Russell misunderstood the work.

[ citation needed ] The differences relate to many details, but the crucial difference is in a fundamentally different understanding of the task of philosophy. Wittgenstein believed that the task of philosophy was to clean up linguistic mistakes. Russell was ultimately concerned with establishing sound epistemological foundations. Epistemological questions such as how practical knowledge is possible did not interest Wittgenstein.  Wittgenstein investigated the "limits of the world" and later on meaning. For Wittgenstein, metaphysics and ethics were nonsensical - as they did not "speak of facts" - though he did not mean to devalue their importance in life by describing them in this way.

[ 13 ] Russell, on the other hand, believed that these subjects, particularly ethics, though belonging not to philosophy nor science and possessing an inferior epistemological foundation, were not only of certain interest, but also meaningful.

Influence and decline [ edit ] The immediate effect of the Tractatus was enormous, particularly by the reception it received by the Vienna Circle . However, it is now claimed by many contemporary analytic philosophers , that the Vienna Circle misunderstood certain sections of the Tractatus . The indirect effect of the method, however, was perhaps even greater long-term, especially on logical positivism . Wittgenstein eventually rejected the "atomism" of logical atomism in his posthumously published book, Philosophical Investigations , and it is still debated whether or not he ever held the wide-ranging version that Russell expounded in his 1918 logical atomism lectures.

[ 1 ] Russell, on the other hand, never abandoned logical atomism. In his 1959 My Philosophical Development , Russell said that his philosophy evolved and changed many times in his life, but he described all these changes as an "evolution" stemming from his original "revolution" into logical atomism in 1899-1900: [ 14 ] There is one major division in my philosophical work: in the years 1899-1900, I adopted the philosophy of logical atomism and the technique of Peano in mathematical logic. This was so great a revolution as to make my previous work, except such as was purely mathematical, irrelevant to everything that I did later. The change in these years was a revolution; subsequent changes have been of the nature of an evolution. (Chapter 1: "Introductory Outline") Even into the 1960s, Russell claimed that he "rather avoided labels" in describing his views—with the exception of "logical atomism." [ 15 ] Philosophers such as Willard Van Orman Quine , Hubert Dreyfus and Richard Rorty went on to adopt logical holism .

See also [ edit ] Logical positivism Philosophy of language Logic Ordinary language philosophy Theory of descriptions " On Denoting " Definitions of philosophy Notes [ edit ] ^ This includes both the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus and Wittgenstein's pre-Tractarian writings.

^ See especially Philosophical Investigations §§46–49, §81, §91).

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1953). G.E.M. Anscombe; Rush Rhees (eds.).

Philosophical Investigations . Oxford: Blackwell.

^ Carnap, R. (1934), "On the Character of Philosophic Problems (Über den Charakter der philosophischen Probleme)," translation by W. M. Malisoff, Philosophy of Science , 1, pp. 5–19.

^ Bergmann, Gustav (1957). "The Revolt Against Logical Atomism--I".

The Philosophical Quarterly .

7 (29): 323– 339.

doi : 10.2307/2217296 .

JSTOR 2217296 .

^ a b Russell, Bertrand; Slater, John Greer; Frohmann, Bernd (1992).

Logical and Philosophical Papers, 1909-13 . Psychology Press.

ISBN 9780415084468 .

^ a b Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Russell's Logical Atomism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1918-10-01).

THE PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL ATOMISM [with Discussion] . JSTOR. The Monist.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1918).

Mysticism and logic, and other essays . Cornell University Library. New York, Longmans, Green and co.

^ Russell, Bertrand; Slater, John Greer; Frohmann, Bernd (1988).

Essays on language, mind, and matter, 1919-26 . Unwin Hyman.

ISBN 9780049200753 .

^ BERTRAND RUSSELL.

OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD . Universal Digital Library. GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.

^ Kitchener, Richard F. (2004). "Bertrand Russell's Flirtation with Behaviorism".

Behaviorism and Philosophy .

^ "Wittgenstein, Ludwig | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.iep.utm.edu . Retrieved 2015-12-14 .

^ Temelini, Michael (2015). "Wittgenstein's Method of Perspicuous Representation".

Wittgenstein and The Study of Politics . Toronto/Buffalo/London: University of Toronto Press. pp.

68– 94.

ISBN 978-1-4426-4633-9 .

^ L. Wittgenstein Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , proposition 6.52.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1995).

My Philosophical Development . Psychology Press.

ISBN 9780415136013 .

^ U.G. Krishnamurti (2013-12-24), Bertrand Russell - Mankind's Future & Philosophy , archived from the original on 2021-12-21 , retrieved 2018-09-27 External links [ edit ] Logical atomism at PhilPapers Logical atomism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project "Russell's Metaphysics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Peter Schulte: Bertrand Russell: Philosophie des Logischen Atomismus Kevin Klement: Russell's Logical Atomism Ian Proops: Wittgenstein's Logical Atomism Jeff Speaks: Russell on logical constructions and logical atomism , McGill University 2004 Logical Atomism Overview: [1] Lecture on Bertrand Russell at Wheaton College: [2] Lecture on Ludwig Wittgenstein at Wheaton College: [3] Links to related articles v t e Bertrand Russell British philosopher, logician, and social critic Philosophy Views on philosophy Copleston–Russell debate Logical atomism Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Views on society Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Mathematics Peano–Russell notation Russell's paradox Works The Principles of Mathematics (1903) " On Denoting " (1905) Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) The Problems of Philosophy (1912) Why Men Fight (1916) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) " Free Thought and Official Propaganda " (1922) " Why I Am Not a Christian " (1927) Marriage and Morals (1929) In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays (1935) Power: A New Social Analysis (1938) A History of Western Philosophy (1945) My Philosophical Development (1959) Family Alys Pearsall Smith (wife, 1894–1921) Dora Russell (wife, 1921–1935) Patricia Russell (wife, 1936–1951) Edith Finch Russell (wife, 1952–1970) John Russell, 4th Earl Russell (son) Conrad Russell, 5th Earl Russell (son) Frank Russell, 2nd Earl Russell (brother) John Russell, Viscount Amberley (father) Katharine Russell, Viscountess Amberley (mother) John Stuart Mill (godfather) John Russell, 1st Earl Russell (paternal grandfather) Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley (maternal grandmother) Related Appointment court case Earl Russell Peace Foundation Professorship of Philosophy Category: Works by Bertrand Russell v t e Ludwig Wittgenstein Family Margaret Stonborough-Wittgenstein Karl Wittgenstein Paul Wittgenstein Works associated with Paul Wittgenstein Early work Picture theory of language Truth tables Truth conditions Truth functions State of affairs Logical necessity Wittgenstein's ladder Late work Meaning as use Language-game Private language argument Family resemblance Ideal language analysis Rule-following Form of life Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics Therapeutic approach Anti-skepticism Publications Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus " Some Remarks on Logical Form " Blue and Brown Books Philosophical Remarks Philosophical Investigations On Certainty Culture and Value Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics Zettel Remarks on Colour Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology Movements Analytic philosophy Linguistic turn Ideal language philosophy Logical atomism Logical positivism Pyrrhonian skepticism Ordinary language philosophy Wittgensteinian fideism Quietism Therapeutic approach Postanalytic philosophy Friends G. E. M. Anscombe R. B. Braithwaite Rudolf Carnap Paul Engelmann John Maynard Keynes Peter Geach Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore David Pinsent Frank P. Ramsey Rush Rhees Bertrand Russell Moritz Schlick Francis Skinner Piero Sraffa Vienna Circle Friedrich Waismann Peter Winch G. H. von Wright Biographers David Edmonds Ray Monk William Warren Bartley Secondary sources A. J. Ayer Gordon Baker Jacques Bouveresse Stanley Cavell James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Terry Eagleton Juliet Floyd Warren Goldfarb A. C. Grayling Peter Hacker Oswald Hanfling Cressida Heyes Jaakko Hintikka Dale Jacquette Anthony Kenny Fergus Kerr Saul Kripke Sandra Laugier Elisabeth Leinfellner Werner Leinfellner Sabina Lovibond Norman Malcolm John McDowell Colin McGinn Marie McGinn Stephen Mulhall D. Z. Phillips Rupert Read Constantine Sandis Hans Sluga Barry Stroud Stephen Toulmin Michael Williams Crispin Wright John Wisdom Related Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society Cambridge Apostles Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club International Wittgenstein Symposium Haidbauer incident Haus Wittgenstein New Wittgenstein Fritz Mauthner Wittgenstein's Poker Film Wittgenstein (film) Wittgenstein Tractatus v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐v5dst
Cached time: 20250812020814
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.607 seconds
Real time usage: 0.741 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2899/1000000
Revision size: 22377/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 227584/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 66144/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 110334/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.342/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7548071/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  577.242      1 -total
 29.81%  172.094      2 Template:Reflist
 20.36%  117.536      8 Template:Cite_book
 19.28%  111.307     12 Template:Navbox
 19.21%  110.868      1 Template:Navboxes
 17.56%  101.371      1 Template:Bertrand_Russell
 17.11%   98.769      1 Template:Sidebar_person
 11.22%   64.771      1 Template:Short_description
  9.93%   57.348      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.83%   56.742      1 Template:Bertrand_Russell_(Navigational_box) Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:622529:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020814 and revision id 1295339104. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Logical_atomism&oldid=1295339104 " Categories : Bertrand Russell Theories of language Theories of deduction Reductionism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 05:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Logical atomism 21 languages Add topic

