Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 19th century 1.2 20th century 1.3 21st century 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard–Yenching Library 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′38.85″N 71°06′51.32″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3774583°N 71.1142556°W ﻿ / 42.3774583; -71.1142556 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Harvard-Yenching Library ) Library at Harvard University Harvard-Yenching Library Harvard-Yenching Library exterior Location 2 Divinity Ave., Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States Type Academic Established 1928 Branch of Harvard Library Collection Items collected Materials in East Asian studies Size 1.5 million volumes Access and use Access requirements Harvard ID required Other information Website Harvard-Yenching Library Harvard–Yenching Library Chinese name Traditional Chinese 哈佛燕京圖書館 Simplified Chinese 哈佛燕京图书馆 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Bopomofo ㄏㄚ   ㄈㄛˊ   ㄧㄢ   ㄐㄧㄥ ㄊㄨˊ   ㄕㄨ   ㄍㄨㄢˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Hafor Ianjing Twushugoan Wade–Giles Ha 1 -fo 2 Yen 1 -ching 1 Tʻu 2 -shu 1 -kuan 3 Yale Romanization Hāfwó Yānjīng Túshūgwǎn IPA [xá.fwǒ jɛ́n.tɕíŋ tʰǔ.ʂú.kwàn] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Hā-faht Yingīng Tòuhsyūgún or Hā-faht Yīngīng Tòuhsyūgún Jyutping Haa1fat6 Jin3ging1 Tou4syu1gun2 or Haa1fat6 Jin1ging1 Tou4syu1gun2 Japanese name Kanji ハーバード燕京図書館 Transcriptions Romanization Hābādo-Yenchin toshokan The Harvard–Yenching Library is the primary location for East Asia-related collections at Harvard Library at Harvard University . In addition to East Asian languages ( Chinese , Japanese , Korean , Tibetan , Manchu , and Mongolian ), it houses collections in European languages and Southeast Asian language ( Vietnamese ). Totaling more than 1.5 million volumes, the Harvard–Yenching Library has one of the largest collections in East Asian studies outside of Asia.

[ 1 ] The library has been located at 2 Divinity Avenue on the Cambridge campus of Harvard University since around 1957. The building was originally built in 1929 for Harvard's Institute of Geographical Exploration, and currently houses part of the Harvard-Yenching Institute and the Department of East Asian Languages and Civilizations, in addition to the Harvard–Yenching Library.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] 19th century [ edit ] In 1879, Ko K'un-hua ( Chinese : 戈鯤化 ), a scholar from China , was engaged to teach the first course in the Chinese language offered at Harvard University. The small collection of books that was purchased for this course became Harvard College Library's first acquisitions in any East Asian language .

20th century [ edit ] In 1914, two Japanese professors ( Masaharu Anesaki and Unokichi Hattori from om Tokyo Imperial University to lecture at Harvard. They donated several important sets of Japanese publications on Sinology and Buddhism to the Harvard College Library, thus launching Harvard's Japanese collection. In 1927, Archibald Cary Coolidge , head of Harvard's libraries, asked Alfred Kaiming Chiu, [ 3 ] then a graduate student at Harvard, to organize and catalog these collections.

[ 4 ] The library was formally founded in 1928, as the Chinese-Japanese Library of the Harvard-Yenching Institute .

Following World War II , the library began collecting more social science publications. The once predominantly humanistic collection evolved into a research library that encompasses East Asian materials in all academic disciplines. A. Kaiming Chiu served as head librarian of the library until his retirement in 1964, after which he was succeeded by Eugene W. Wu .

In 1951, a Korean collection was added. In 1965, the Chinese-Japanese Library of the Harvard-Yenching Institute was renamed the Harvard–Yenching Library to reflect the expanded nature of the library's collections. The Library eventually added Tibetan, Mongolian and Manchu publications, and Western language monographs and journals.

In 1973, a Vietnamese collection was added. In 1976, management of the library shifted from the independent Harvard-Yenching Institute to the Harvard College Library.

[ 5 ] In 1998, Eugene Wu retired and was succeeded by James Cheng.

[ 6 ] 21st century [ edit ] In 2003, the library celebrated its 75th anniversary with a symposium and the publication of a volume of scholarly articles on the history of the Library and its collections.

[ 7 ] In 2009, the library announced a  six-year, multimillion-dollar project to digitize major sections of its rare books collection in cooperation with the National Library of China .

[ 8 ] In 2020, James Cheng retired. During his time as head librarian, he oversaw large-scale digitization of the library's rare and special collections.

[ 9 ] James Cheng was succeeded by Jidong Yang in August 2022.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Harvard-Yenching Library Collections ^ "Institute of Geographical Exploration: 1929-1952", Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments, Harvard University [1] ^ Nappo, Christian A.

Pioneers in Librarianship : Sixty Notable Leaders Who Shaped the Field.

2022. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.(Alfred Kaiming Chiu-1898-1977).

^ Eugene W. Wu, "The Founding of the Harvard-Yenching Library," Journal of East Asian Libraries 101.1  (1993):  65-69.

[2] ^ Harvard-Yenching Library History ^ Ken Gewurtz, "Yenching: The Singular History of A Singular Library," Harvard Gazette "Harvard Gazette: Yenching" . Archived from the original on December 11, 2006 . Retrieved December 8, 2006 .

^ Patrick Hanan, ed., Treasures of the Yenching: Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the Harvard-Yenching Library (Cambridge, MA; Hong Kong: Harvard-Yenching Library Distributed by the Chinese University Press, 2003 ISBN 9629961024 ).

^ Rare Chinese Books " New York Times October 11, 2009 ^ "An Interview with James Cheng, former Director of the Harvard-Yenching Library" .

^ "Harvard University Asia Center" .

External links [ edit ] Official website Publications Facebook v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons 42°22′38.85″N 71°06′51.32″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3774583°N 71.1142556°W ﻿ / 42.3774583; -71.1142556 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard–Yenching_Library&oldid=1287567488 " Categories : Harvard Library Harvard University buildings 1928 establishments in Massachusetts Libraries in Middlesex County, Massachusetts Libraries established in 1928 Sinology Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 27 April 2025, at 02:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard–Yenching Library 1 language Add topic

