Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities 3 Regional Chapters 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Kosciuszko Foundation 3 languages Deutsch Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Charitable foundation in New York, United States Kosciuszko Foundation Founder Stephen Mizwa Established 1925 Mission Promotion of cultural and educational exchanges between the United States and Poland President Marek Skulimowski Slogan An American Center for Polish Culture Formerly called Polish American Scholarship Committee Address 15 E 65th St New York, NY 10065 Location New York City Coordinates 40°46′04″N 73°58′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.767762°N 73.9712577°W ﻿ / 40.767762; -73.9712577 Website www .thekf .org The Kosciuszko Foundation is a charitable foundation based in New York City . It was created by Stephen Mizwa to fund programs that promote Polish -American intellectual and artistic exchange.

History [ edit ] The Polish American Scholarship Committee was established in 1923 by Dr.

Stephen Mizwa to bring students to universities in the United States. Mizwa worked with the president of Vassar College , Henry Noble MacCracken, who had visited Poland. The two expanded the Scholarship Committee's mission to promote cultural and educational exchanges between the United States and Poland. In December 1925, the Scholarship Committee changed into the new Kosciuszko Foundation.

[ 1 ] US Ambassador to Poland Lee A. Feinstein at the opening ceremony of the exhibition The Kosciuszko Foundation − the American Center of Polish Culture in the Polish Senate (2011) The Foundation is named in honour of Tadeusz Kościuszko , a Polish general and patriot, who after unsuccessful battles in uprising for Polish freedom, migrated to North America and fought in the American Revolutionary War . The organization was founded in 1925, on the eve of the 150th anniversary of Kosciuszko's enlistment in the American liberation cause.

The headquarters are in a limestone neo-Renaissance three-story mansion built in 1917. The building was designed by Harry Allan Jacobs for James J. Van Alen, whose in-laws, the Astors , lived down the block.

[ 2 ] The second-story ballroom functions as a gallery, as well as a lecture and concert hall for chamber-music and solo recitals.

Activities [ edit ] The foundation provides scholarships and fellowships to Polish students, scholars, and artists. They were invited for research or educational stay by an institution of higher education in the United States. Several programs are also targeted at Polish musicians. Grants for U.S. citizens include research and study opportunities in Poland.

The foundation organizes cultural events for the Polish community. It is the largest public institution in North America dedicated solely to Polish art. Exhibitions are held that draw from the permanent collection of oils, watercolors, prints, drawings, ceramics, sculpture, tapestries and photographs. An annual Chopin Piano Competition showcases young talent.

[ 3 ] The foundation sponsors and publishes the biggest Polish-American and American-Polish dictionary, known as Kosciuszko Foundation Dictionary and published in a book and CD-ROM format. The recent version, titled New Kosciuszko Foundation Dictionary , was issued in 2003. Its editor-in-chief was a renowned Polish professor of the English language.

Opening of "Henryk Stazewski: Constructing Reliefs" exhibition at the Kosciuszko Foundation in New York (October 14, 2021) The foundation's Washington office provides a venue for local Polish-American events through a wide range of activities, including films, concerts, exhibitions, educational programs, publications, and seminars. It uses its website to provide information on events, collections and topics of interest to those who interested in Poland.

Regional Chapters [ edit ] The Kosciuszko Foundation has regional chapters in: Buffalo (Western New York State) Chicago , Illinois Denver , Colorado (Rocky Mountain) Houston (Texas) Ohio Philadelphia , Pennsylvania Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania Springfield , Massachusetts (New England) Warsaw , Poland Washington, D.C.

References [ edit ] ^ "New York Architecture Images" . Retrieved December 2, 2007 .

^ "Postings: Kosciuszko Foundation House; An Inside Job" .

The New York Times . July 12, 1992 . Retrieved December 2, 2007 .

^ "NYC Arts, Culture Guide and Calendar" . Archived from the original on October 22, 2007 . Retrieved December 2, 2007 .

External links [ edit ] The Kosciuszko Foundation website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kosciuszko_Foundation&oldid=1289804482 " Categories : Non-profit organizations based in New York City Educational foundations based in the United States Polish-American culture in New York City Scholarships in the United States Polish-American organizations Polish diaspora organizations Arts foundations based in the United States Organizations established in 1923 1923 establishments in New York City Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kosciuszko Foundation 3 languages Add topic

