Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 2.1 Scope 3 Hazards and risk Toggle Hazards and risk subsection 3.1 Depth 3.2 Inability to ascend directly 3.2.1 Decompression stops 3.2.2 Physical ceiling 3.3 Extremely limited visibility 4 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 4.1 Equipment configuration 4.2 Gas mixes 4.2.1 Deep air/extended range diving 4.2.2 Mixtures to reduce decompression time 4.2.3 Mixtures to reduce nitrogen narcosis 4.2.4 Mixtures to reduce oxygen toxicity 5 Safety Toggle Safety subsection 5.1 Accident modes 5.2 Accident statistics 5.3 Operations 6 Training Toggle Training subsection 6.1 Certification 7 See also 8 References 9 Footnotes 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Technical diving 14 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diving beyond the scope of recreational diving Diver Trevor Jackson returning from a 178 m (584 ft) wreck dive Diver equipped for decompression dive Technical diving (also referred to as tec diving or tech diving ) is scuba diving that exceeds the agency -specified limits of recreational diving for non- professional purposes. Technical diving may expose the diver to hazards beyond those normally associated with recreational diving, and to a greater risk of serious injury or death. Risk may be reduced by using suitable equipment and procedures, which require appropriate knowledge and skills. The required knowledge and skills are preferably developed through specialised training, adequate practice, and experience. The equipment involves breathing gases other than air or standard nitrox mixtures, and multiple gas sources.

[ 1 ] Most technical diving is done within the limits of training and previous experience, but by its nature, technical diving includes diving which pushes the boundaries of recognised safe practice, and new equipment and procedures are developed and honed by technical divers in the field. Where these divers are sufficiently knowledgeable, skilled, prepared and lucky, they survive and eventually their experience is integrated into the body of recognised practice.

[ 2 ] The popularisation of the term technical diving has been credited to Michael Menduno, who was editor of the (now defunct) diving magazine aquaCorps Journal , [ 3 ] but the concept and term, technical diving , go back at least as far as 1977, [ note 1 ] and divers have been engaging in what is now commonly referred to as technical diving for decades.

Origin [ edit ] The popular use of the term technical diving can be traced back to the cover story of the first issue of aquaCorps magazine (1990–1996), in early 1990, titled Call it "High-Tech" Diving by Bill Hamilton , describing the current state of recreational diving beyond the generally accepted limits, such as deep, decompression and mixed gas diving. By mid-1991, the magazine was using the term technical diving , as an analogy to the established term technical (rock) climbing .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] : 43 More recently, recognizing that the term was already in use by the Royal Navy for rebreather diving, Hamilton redefined technical diving as diving with more than one breathing gas or with a rebreather.

[ 5 ] Richard Pyle (1999) defined a technical diver as "anyone who routinely conducts dives with staged stops during an ascent as suggested by a given decompression algorithm".

The term technical diving was also used in the US as far back as 1977 by the California Advisory Committee on Scientific and Technical Diving (CACSTD), to distinguish more complex modes of recreational diving from scientific diving for regulatory purposes.

[ 5 ] : 43 In the US the Occupational Safety and Health Administration categorises diving which is not occupational as recreational diving for purposes of exemption from regulation.

[ 6 ] [ 5 ] : 43 This is also the case in some other countries, including South Africa.

[ 7 ] The use of the term technical diving by the CACSTD appears to refer to dives done for technical support of scientific work by occupational divers, and is no longer used for this meaning.

[ 8 ] Technical diving emerged between the mid-1980s and the mid-to-late-1990s, and much of the history of its development was recorded in aquaCorps, started by Michael Menduno to provide a forum for these aspects of diving that most recreational diving magazines of the time refused to cover.

[ 9 ] At the time, amateur scuba divers were exploring the physiological limits of diving using air. Technical divers looked for ways to extend the limits of air dives, and for ways to extend breathing gas supplies as they went deeper and stayed down longer.

[ 9 ] The military and commercial diving communities had large budgets, extensive infrastructure, and controlled diving operations, but the amateur diving community had a more trial-and-error approach to the use of mixed gas and rebreathers. Consequently, a relatively large number of fatal incidents occurred during the early years, before a reasonably reliable set of operating procedures and standards began to emerge, making the movement somewhat controversial, both within the mainstream diving establishment and between sectors of the technical diving community.

[ 9 ] While the motivation to extend the depth and duration range by military and commercial divers was mainly driven by operational needs to get the job done, the motivation to exceed recreational diving depths and endurance ranges was more driven by the urge to explore otherwise inaccessible places, which could not at the time be reached by any other means.

[ 9 ] There are places that no one has been to since the dawn of time. We can’t see what’s there.

We can see what’s on the dark side of the moon or what’s on Mars, but you can’t see what’s in the back of a cave unless you go there.

Sheck Exley, Exley on Mix , aquaCorps #4, Jan 1992 [ 9 ] The urge to go where no one has gone before has always been a driving force for explorers, and the 1980s was a time of intense exploration by the cave-diving community, some of whom were doing relatively long air dives in the 60–125 m depth range, and doing decompression on oxygen. The details of many of these dives were not disclosed by the divers as these dives were considered experimental and dangerous. The divers who conducted these dives did not consider them suitable for the ordinary person, but necessary to extend the frontiers of exploration, and there were no consensus guidelines for scuba diving beyond 40 m.

[ 9 ] This section needs expansion with: Write some more history content based on [ 10 ] . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2021 ) Definition [ edit ] Technical diver during a decompression stop There is no clear consensus on the definition of technical diving.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] It is an arbitrary distinction, and the line has been drawn in different places by different organisations, and has shifted on a few occasions. Nitrox diving, rebreather diving and sidemount diving were originally considered technical, but this is no longer the case and most certification agencies now offer these as recreational courses.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Some training agencies classify penetration diving in wrecks and caves as technical diving.

[ 20 ] Even those who agree on the broad definitions of technical diving may disagree on the precise boundaries between technical and recreational diving: The International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) has proposed: "Technical diving is a range of knowledge, skills and suitable equipment, which when combined correctly, allow recreational divers to increase their safety while underwater. This information (sic) may be employed in either shallow or deep water, may be used to safely extend the divers submerged duration well into the realms of extended decompressions and is often used as a tool for exploration." in their Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia [ 21 ] The National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) defines technical diving as: "Technical diving is a form of scuba diving that exceeds the typical recreational limits imposed on depth and immersion time (bottom time). Tec diving involves accelerated decompression and/or the use of variable gas mixtures during a dive." [ 22 ] The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) defines technical diving as: "all diving methods that exceed the limits imposed on depth and/or immersion time for recreational scuba diving. Technical diving often involves the use of special gas mixtures (other than compressed air) for breathing. The type of gas mixture used is determined either by the maximum depth planned for the dive, or by the length of time that the diver intends to spend underwater. While the recommended maximum depth for conventional scuba diving is 40 metres (130 ft), technical divers may work in the range of 50 metres (160 ft) to 100 metres (330 ft), sometimes even deeper. Technical diving almost always requires one or more mandatory decompression 'stops' upon ascent, during which the diver may change breathing gas mixes at least once." [ 23 ] NOAA does not address issues relating to overhead environments or specify the recreational diving limits in its definition, and the use of single mixture nitrox is well established in mainstream recreational diving.

The Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) defines technical diving as: "diving other than conventional commercial or recreational diving that takes divers beyond the recreational diving limits of 40 metres/130 feet. It is further defined as an activity that includes one or more of the following: diving beyond 40 metres/130 feet, required stage decompression, diving in an overhead environment beyond 130 linear feet from the surface, accelerated stage decompression and/or the use of multiple gas mixtures in a single dive." [ 24 ] Technical Diving International (TDI) defines a technical diving as: any dive involving decompression, additional cylinders, alternative breathing gases, rebreathers, or overhead environments such as wrecks, caves or mines. This definition does not make a strong distinction between “recreational” and “technical” as both styles of diving are recreational and require similar equipment.

[ 25 ] The Queensland government, Australia, defines recreational technical diving as: recreational diving using nitrox or other mixed gas, or any diving requiring decompression.

[ 26 ] The British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) defines technical diving as: any diving that involves specialist equipment such as closed circuit rebreathers (CCR), using multiple gas mixes on open circuit, or that uses helium-based gas mixtures termed mixed gas .

[ 27 ] varies from many agencies in including some staged decompression within recreational diving.

Other European diving agencies tend to consider technical diving as dives deeper than 50 metres (160 ft) and many, as noted for BSAC above, teach staged decompression diving as an integral part of recreational training, rather than as a fundamental change of scope. The Bühlmann tables used by the Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) and other European agencies make staged decompression dives available, [ 28 ] : 2–3 and the SAA teaches modest staged decompression as part of its advanced training programme.

[ 29 ] : A1-9–10 Scope [ edit ] The following table gives an overview of the activities that various agencies suggest to differentiate between technical and recreational diving: Differences between recreational and technical diving Activity Recreational Technical Deep diving Maximum depth of 40 metres (130 ft) or 50 metres (160 ft) [ note 2 ] [ 30 ] Beyond 40 metres (130 ft) or 50 metres (160 ft) [ 31 ] [ 28 ] Decompression diving [ note 3 ] Some agencies define recreational diving as "No decompression" diving; others consider all dives to be decompression dives.

Some agencies define technical diving as "Decompression diving"; others consider all dives to be decompression dives.

[ 28 ] Mixed gas diving diving Air and nitrox Nitrox , trimix , heliox and heliair .

[ 32 ] Gas switching Single gas used May switch between gases to accelerate decompression and/or "travel mixes" to permit descent carrying hypoxic gas mixes Rebreather diving Some agencies regard use of semi-closed rebreathers as recreational diving; [ 33 ] PADI TecRec, TDI, GUE, IANTD, SSI XR, IART, ISE, NAUI TEC, PSAI, UTD regard as technical diving.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Wreck diving Penetration limited to "light zone" or 30 metres (100 ft) depth + penetration Deeper penetration Cave diving Penetration limited to "light zone" or 30 metres (100 ft) depth + penetration [ note 4 ] Deeper penetration, may involve complex navigation and decompression [ 36 ] Ice diving Some recreational agencies regard ice diving as recreational diving [ 33 ] Others regard it as technical diving.

[ citation needed ] An example of wreck diving; A technical diver diving the Nasello wreck in Sardinia at 34m depth.

Hazards and risk [ edit ] One of the perceived differences between technical and other forms of recreational diving is the associated hazards, of which there are more associated with technical diving, and risk, which is often, but not always greater in technical diving. Hazards are the circumstances that may cause harm, and risk is the likelihood of the harm actually occurring. The hazards are partly due to the extended scope of technical diving, and partly associated with the equipment used. In some cases, the equipment used presents a secondary risk while mitigating a primary risk, such as the complexity of gas management needed to reduce the risk of a fatal gas supply failure, or the use of gases potentially unbreathable for some parts of a dive profile to reduce the risk of harm caused by oxygen toxicity, nitrogen narcosis or decompression sickness for the whole operation. Reduction of secondary risks may also affect equipment choice, but is largely skill-based. Training of technical divers includes procedures that are known from experience to be effective in handling the most common contingencies. Divers proficient in these emergency drills are less likely to be overwhelmed by the circumstances when things do not go according to plan, and are less likely to panic.

[ citation needed ] Depth [ edit ] Technical dives may be defined as being dives deeper than about 130 feet (40 m) or dives in an overhead environment with no direct access to the surface or natural light.

[ 31 ] Such environments may include fresh and saltwater caves and the interiors of shipwrecks. In many cases, technical dives also include planned decompression carried out over a number of stages during a controlled ascent to the surface at the end of the dive. The depth-based definition is based on risk caused by the progressive impairment of mental competence with the increasing partial pressure of respired nitrogen. Breathing air under pressure causes nitrogen narcosis that usually starts to become a problem at depths of 100 feet (30 m) or greater, but this differs between divers. Increased depth also increases the partial pressure of oxygen and so increases the risk of oxygen toxicity. Technical diving often includes the use of breathing mixtures other than air to reduce these risks, and the additional complexity of managing a variety of breathing mixtures introduces other risks and is managed by equipment configuration and procedural training. To reduce nitrogen narcosis , it is common to use trimix which uses helium to replace some of the nitrogen in the diver's breathing mixture, or heliox , in which there is no nitrogen.

[ 37 ] Inability to ascend directly [ edit ] Technical dives may alternatively be defined as dives where the diver cannot safely ascend directly to the surface either due to a mandatory decompression stop or a physical ceiling. This form of diving implies a much greater reliance on the redundancy of critical life support equipment and procedural training since the diver must stay underwater until it is safe to ascend or the diver has successfully exited the overhead environment.

[ 38 ] Decompression stops [ edit ] Free floating decompression stop A diver at the end of a long or deep dive may need to do decompression stops or remain below a decompression ceiling to avoid decompression sickness , also known as "the bends". Metabolically inert gases in the diver's breathing gas, such as nitrogen and helium , are absorbed into body tissues when breathed under high pressure, mainly during the deep phase of the dive. These dissolved gases must be released slowly from the body tissues by controlling the ascent rate to restrict the formation and growth of bubbles. This is usually done by pausing or "doing stops" at various depths during the ascent to the surface. Most technical divers breathe oxygen enriched breathing gas mixtures such as nitrox and pure oxygen during long-duration decompression, as this increases the rate of inert gas elimination. Elimination of inert gases continues during the surface intervals (time spent on the surface between dives), which must be considered when planning subsequent dives. A decompression obligation is also referred to as a "soft", or "physiological" ceiling.

[ 39 ] Physical ceiling [ edit ] These types of physical overhead, or "hard" or "environmental" ceiling can prevent the diver from surfacing directly: Cave diving – diving into a cave system.

Ice diving – diving under ice.

Wreck diving – diving inside a shipwreck.

Diving under any other form of overhead physical obstruction to a direct ascent to the free surface, such as under the hull of a ship or under a harbour or offshore structure or a net.

In all of these situations, a guide line or lifeline from the exit to the diver is the standard method of reducing the risk of being unable to find the way out. A lifeline fixed to the diver is more reliable as it is not easy to lose, and is often used when diving under ice, where the line is unlikely to snag and the distance is reasonably short, and can be tended by a person at the surface.

[ 40 ] Static guidelines are more suitable when a lifeline is likely to snag on the environment or on other divers in the group, and may be left in situ to be used for other dives, or recovered on the way out by winding back onto the reel. Guidelines may be very much longer than lifelines, and may be branched and marked. They are used as standard practice for cave diving and wreck penetration.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Extremely limited visibility [ edit ] Technical dives in waters where the diver's vision is severely impeded by low-visibility conditions, caused by turbidity or silt out and low light conditions due to depth or enclosure, require greater competence. The combination of low visibility and strong current can make dives in these conditions extremely hazardous, particularly in an overhead environment, and greater skill and reliable and familiar equipment are needed to manage this risk.

[ citation needed ] Limited visibility diving can cause disorientation, potentially leading to loss of sense of direction, loss of effective buoyancy control, etc. Divers in extremely limited visibility situations depend on their instruments such as dive lights , pressure gauges, compass, depth gauge , bottom timer, dive computer, etc., and guidelines for orientation and information. Training for cave and wreck diving includes techniques for managing extreme low visibility, as finding the way out of an overhead environment before running out of gas is a safety-critical skill.

[ 38 ] Equipment [ edit ] Technical diver with decompression gases in side-mounted stage cylinders Technical divers may use diving equipment other than the usual single cylinder open circuit scuba equipment used by recreational divers. Typically, technical dives take longer than average recreational scuba dives.

[ 31 ] Because a decompression obligation prevents a diver in difficulty from surfacing immediately, there is a need for redundancy of breathing equipment. Technical divers usually carry at least two independent breathing gas sources, each with its own gas delivery system. In the event of a failure of one set, the second set is available as a back-up system. The backup system should allow the diver to safely return to the surface from any point of the planned dive, but may involve the intervention of other divers in the team.

Stage cylinders may be dropped along the guideline for later use during the exit or for another dive.

[ 43 ] A stage cylinder is an additional diving cylinder filled with breathing gas and fitted with a regulator.

[ 44 ] Equipment configuration [ edit ] Technical divers preparing for a mixed-gas decompression dive . Note the backplate and wing setup with sidemounted decompression cylinders.

The usual configurations used for increased primary gas supply are manifolded or independent twin back mounted cylinders, multiple side mounted cylinders, or rebreathers .

[ 31 ] Bailout and decompression gas may be included in these arrangements, or carried separately as side-mounted stage and decompression cylinders. Cylinders may carry a variety of gases depending on when and where they will be used, and as some may not support life if used at the wrong depth, they are marked for positive identification of the contents. Managing the larger number of cylinders is an additional task loading on the diver. Cylinders are usually labeled with the gas mixture and will also be marked with the maximum operating depth and if applicable, minimum operating depth .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Gas mixes [ edit ] Technical diving can be done using air as a breathing gas, but other breathing gas mixtures are commonly used to manage specific problems.

[ 31 ] Some additional knowledge is required to understand the effects of these gases on the body during a dive and additional skills are needed to safely manage their use.

[ 47 ] Deep air/extended range diving [ edit ] One of the more divisive subjects in technical diving concerns using compressed air as a breathing gas on dives below 130 feet (40 m). Some training agencies still promote and teach courses using air up to depths of 60m. These include TDI, IANTD and DSAT/PADI. Others, including NAUI Tec, GUE, ISE and UTD consider that diving deeper than 100–130 feet (30–40 m), depending upon agency, on air is unacceptably risky. They promote the use of mixtures containing helium to limit the apparent narcotic depth to their agency specified limit should be used for dives beyond a certain limit. Even though TDI and IANTD teach courses using air up to depths of 60m, they also offer courses include "helitrox" "recreational trimix" and "advance recreational trimix" that also use mixtures containing helium to mitigate narcotic concerns when the diving depth is limited to 30-45m.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Such courses used to be referred to as "deep air" courses, but are now commonly called "extended range" courses. The 130 ft limit entered the recreation and technical communities in the USA from the military diving community where it was the depth at which the US Navy recommended shifting from scuba to surface-supplied air.

[ citation needed ] The American scientific diving community represented by the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) has never specified a 130-foot limit in its protocols and has never experienced any accidents or injuries during air dives between 130 feet and the deepest air dives that the American scientific diving community permits, [ citation needed ] 190 feet, where the U.S. Navy Standard Air Tables shifts to the Exceptional Exposure Tables . In Europe, some countries set the recreational diving limit at 50 metres (160 ft), [ 50 ] and that corresponds with the limit also imposed in some professional fields, such as police divers in the UK. The major French agencies all teach diving on air to 60 metres (200 ft) as part of their standard recreational certifications.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Deep air proponents base the depth limit of air diving upon the risk of oxygen toxicity . Accordingly, they view the limit as being the depth at which partial pressure of oxygen reaches 1.4 ATA, which occurs at about 186 feet (57 m). Both sides of the community tend to present self-supporting data. Divers trained and experienced in deep air diving report fewer problems with narcosis than those trained and experienced in mixed gas diving trimix/heliox, though scientific evidence does not show that a diver can train to overcome any measure of narcosis at a given depth or become tolerant of it.

[ 54 ] The Divers Alert Network does not endorse or reject deep air diving but does note the additional risks involved.

[ 55 ] Mixtures to reduce decompression time [ edit ] Nitrox is a popular diving gas mix, that reduces the maximum allowable depth as compared to air. Nitrox also allows greater bottom time and shorter surface intervals by reducing the buildup of nitrogen in the diver's tissues. This is accomplished by increasing the percentage of oxygen in the breathing gas. The depth limit of a nitrox mixture is governed by the partial pressure of oxygen, which is generally limited to 1.4 to 1.6 bar depending on the activity of the diver and duration of exposure.

[ 31 ] Nitrox mixtures up to 100% oxygen are also used for accelerated decompression .

[ 31 ] Mixtures to reduce nitrogen narcosis [ edit ] Increased pressure due to depth causes nitrogen to become narcotic , resulting in a reduced ability to react or think clearly.

[ 31 ] By adding helium to the breathing mix, these effects can be reduced, as helium does not have the same narcotic properties at depth.

[ 31 ] Helitrox/triox proponents argue that the defining risk for air and nitrox diving depth should be nitrogen narcosis , and suggest that when the partial pressure of nitrogen reaches approximately 4.0 ATA, which occurs at about 130 feet (40 m) for air, helium is necessary to limit the effects of the narcosis.

[ 31 ] Mixtures to reduce oxygen toxicity [ edit ] Technical dives may also be characterised by the use of hypoxic breathing gas mixtures, including hypoxic trimix , heliox , and heliair . A diver breathing normal air (with 21% oxygen) will be exposed to increased risk of central nervous system oxygen toxicity at depths greater than about 180 feet (55 m) [ 31 ] The first sign of oxygen toxicity is usually a convulsion without warning which usually results in death when the demand valve mouthpiece falls out and the victim drowns. Sometimes the diver may get warning symptoms before the convulsion. These can include visual and auditory hallucinations, nausea, twitching (especially in the face and hands), irritability and mood swings, and dizziness.

[ 56 ] These gas mixes can also lower the level of oxygen in the mix to reduce the danger of oxygen toxicity. Once the oxygen is reduced below about 18% the mix is known as a hypoxic mix as it does not contain enough oxygen to be used safely at the surface.

[ 31 ] Safety [ edit ] See also: Diving safety Technical diving encompasses multiple aspects of diving, that typically share a lack of direct access to the surface, which may be caused by physical constraints, like an overhead environment , or physiological, like decompression obligation . In case of emergency, therefore, the diver or diving team must be able to troubleshoot and solve the problem underwater. This requires planning, situational awareness, and redundancy in critical equipment, and is facilitated by skill and experience in appropriate procedures for managing reasonably foreseeable contingencies.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Some rebreather diving safety issues can be addressed by training, others may require a change in technical diver culture. A major safety issue is that many divers become complacent as they become more familiar with the equipment, and begin to neglect predive checklists while assembling and preparing the equipment for use - procedures that are officially part of all rebreather training programs. There can also be a tendency to neglect post-dive maintenance, and some divers will dive knowing that there are functional problems with the unit, because they know that there is generally redundancy designed into the system. This redundancy is intended to allow a safe termination of the dive if it occurs underwater, by eliminating a critical failure point. Diving with a unit that already has a malfunction, means that there is a single critical point of failure in that unit, which could cause a life-threatening emergency if another item in the critical path were to fail. The risk may increase by orders of magnitude.

[ 6 ] Accident modes [ edit ] Several factors have been identified as predispositions to accidents in technical diving. The techniques and equipment are complex, which increases the risk of errors or omissions - the task loading for a closed circuit rebreather diver during critical phases of a dive is greater than for open circuit scuba equipment, The circumstances of technical diving generally mean that errors or omissions are likely to have more serious consequences than in normal recreational diving, and there is a tendency towards competitiveness and risk-taking among many technical divers which appears to have contributed to some well-publicized accidents.

[ 31 ] Some errors and failures that have repeatedly been implicated in technical diving accidents include: Incorrect gas switches in open circuit diving; [ 31 ] The gas could be hypoxic, with a risk of blackout, hyperoxic, with a risk of oxygen toxicity seizure, or have an excessively high partial pressure of nitrogen, with a risk of nitrogen narcosis .

Having an incorrect gas in a cylinder resulting in hypoxia, hyperoxia, nitrogen narcosis or inadequate decompression, usually a consequence of failure to analyse all the mixes; [ 31 ] Incorrect gas consumption calculations and failure to monitor use and change plans during the dive, causing running out of gas before the end of the dive; [ 31 ] Losing staged decompression gas which was cached to be picked up later; [ 31 ] The development of an insufficient or excessive oxygen partial pressure in the loop of closed or semi-closed circuit rebreathers; [ 31 ] High CO 2 levels in the breathing loop of rebreathers due to scrubber breakthrough; [ 31 ] Flooding of the rebreather loop rendering it unusable; [ 31 ] Failure to control depth.

Failure to control depth is critical during decompression, where the inability to stay at the correct depth due to excessive buoyancy is associated with a high risk of decompression sickness and a raised risk of barotrauma of ascent. There are several ways that excessive buoyancy can be caused, some of which can be managed by the diver if prompt and correct action is taken, and others that cannot be corrected. This problem may be caused by poor planning, in that the diver may underestimate the weight loss of using up the breathing gas in all the cylinders, by losing ballast weights during the dive, or by inflation problems with buoyancy compensator or drysuit, or both.

Insufficient ballast weight to allow neutral buoyancy at the shallowest decompression stop with nearly empty cylinders is an example of a buoyancy problem that can generally not be corrected by the diver. If an empty cylinder is positively buoyant, the diver may jettison it and allow it to float away, but if the empty cylinders are negatively buoyant, jettisoning them will exacerbate the problem, making the diver even more buoyant. Drysuit and buoyancy compensator inflation can cause runaway ascent, which can usually be managed if corrected immediately. If the initial problem is caused by loss of ballast weights or a reel jam when deploying an inflatable decompression buoy, and the reel is clipped on, the diver may not be able to manage several simultaneously accelerating buoyancy malfunctions.

Dual bladder buoyancy compensators can contain air inadvertently added to the backup bladder, which the diver does not release as it is not supposed to be there in the first place. All of these failures can be either avoided altogether or the risk minimized by configuration choices, procedural methods, and correct response to the initial problem.

Failure to control depth due to insufficient buoyancy can also lead to scuba accidents. It is less of a problem with surface-supplied diving as the depth that the diver can sink to is limited by the umbilical length, and a sudden or rapid descent can often be quickly stopped by the tender. In early diving using copper helmets and a limited flow air supply, a sudden rapid descent could lead to severe helmet squeeze, but this is prevented by demand-supplied gas, and neck dams on later helmets, which allow water to flood the helmet until the gas supply catches up with the compression. Surface supply ensures that the gas supply will not run out suddenly due to high demand, which can deplete scuba supply to the extent that there may not be enough left to surface according to plan. Any sudden increase in depth can also cause barotrauma of the ears and sinuses if the diver cannot equalize fast enough.

Accident statistics [ edit ] There is very little reliable data describing the demographics, activities and accidents of the technical diving population. Conclusions about accident rates must be considered tentative. The 2003 DAN report on decompression illness and dive fatalities indicates that 9.8% of all cases of decompression illness and 20% of diving fatalities in the USA happened to technical divers. It is not known how many technical dives this was spread over, but it was considered likely that technical divers are at greater risk.

[ 31 ] The techniques and associated equipment that have been developed to overcome the limitations of conventional single-cylinder, open-circuit scuba diving are necessarily more complex and subject to error, and technical dives are often done in more dangerous environments, so the consequences of an error or malfunction are greater. Although the skill levels and training of technical divers are generally significantly higher than those of recreational divers, there are indications that technical divers, in general, are at higher risk, and that closed circuit rebreather diving may be particularly dangerous.

[ 31 ] Operations [ edit ] Relatively complex technical diving operations may be planned and run like an expedition, or professional diving operation, with surface and in-water support personnel providing direct assistance or on stand-by to assist the expedition divers. Surface support might include surface stand-by divers, boat crew, porters, emergency medical personnel, and gas blenders. In-water support may provide supplementary breathing gas, monitor divers during long decompression stops, and provide communications services between the surface team and the expedition divers.

[ 21 ] In some cases the risk assessment may persuade the dive team to use similar equipment to that used in professional diving, such as ROV monitoring or the use of a stage or wet bell for the ascent and descent, and having a decompression chamber available at the surface.

[ 59 ] In an emergency, the support team would provide rescue and if necessary search and recovery assistance.

[ 21 ] Training [ edit ] Tech diver training Technical diving requires specialized equipment and training. There are many technical training organizations: see the Technical Diving section in the list of diver certification organizations .

Technical Diving International (TDI), Global Underwater Explorers (GUE), Professional Scuba Association International (PSAI), International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) and National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) were popular as of 2009 [update] .

Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) joined in 1997. Recent entries into the market include Split-Face Diving (UTD), InnerSpace Explorers (ISE) and Diving Science and Technology (DSAT), the technical arm of Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI). The Scuba Schools International (SSI) Technical Diving Program (TechXR – Technical eXtended Range) was launched in 2005.

[ 60 ] British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) training has always had a technical element to its higher qualifications, however, it has recently begun to introduce more technical level Skill Development Courses into all its training schemes by introducing technical awareness into its lowest level qualification of Ocean Diver, for example, and nitrox training will become mandatory. It has also recently introduced trimix qualifications and continues to develop closed-circuit training.

[ citation needed ] Certification [ edit ] Technical diving certification is issued by several recreational diver training agencies, under a variety of names, often with considerable overlap or in some cases split into depth ranges. The certification titles vary between agencies but can be categorized as: Advanced nitrox diver , a scuba diver certified as competent to dive in open water using open circuit nitrogen-based gas mixtures that are safe to breathe at atmospheric pressure, and decompress using approved schedules on gases carried by the diver, usually including oxygen or oxygen-rich nitrox Normoxic trimix diver , a scuba diver certified as competent to dive in open water using open circuit trimix gases which are safe to breathe at atmospheric pressure, and decompress using approved schedules, on gases carried by the diver, usually including oxygen or oxygen-rich nitrox.

Hypoxic trimix diver , or Advanced trimix diver , a scuba diver certified as competent to dive in open water using open circuit trimix gases which are not safe to breathe at atmospheric pressure, to use a travel gas to descend through the depth range in which the bottom gas is unsafe, and decompress using approved schedules, on gases carried by the diver, usually including oxygen or oxygen-rich nitrox.

Rebreather certification for various types of diving rebreather . Training in the use of rebreathers has two components: Generic training for the class of rebreather, including the theory of operation, general procedures as well as specific training for the model of rebreather; which covers the details of preparation, testing, user maintenance, and troubleshooting, and those details of normal operating and emergency procedures which are specific to the model of rebreather. Crossover training from one model to another generally only requires the second aspect if the equipment is similar in design and operation.

Nitrox semi-closed circuit rebreather diver, Nitrox closed circuit rebreather diver, Mixed gas rebreather diver. This may distinguish between normoxic and hypoxic depth ranges.

Cave diver , of various grades, Wreck penetration diver , of various grades, See also [ edit ] Breathing gas – Gas used for human respiration Hypercapnia , also known as Carbon dioxide poisoning – Abnormally high tissue carbon dioxide levels List of diving hazards and precautions – Hazards associated with underwater diving Rebreather diving – Underwater diving using self contained breathing gas recycling apparatus Oxygen toxicity – Toxic effects of breathing oxygen at high partial pressures Solo diving – Recreational diving without a dive buddy Trimix – Breathing gas consisting of oxygen, helium and nitrogen References [ edit ] ^ Richardson, Drew (2003).

"Taking 'tec' to 'rec': the future of technical diving" (PDF) .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

33 (4) . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"The changing technical diving mindset:Issues in modern technical diving" .

scubatechphilippines.com . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ Gilliam, Bret (1995-01-25).

Deep Diving . Aqua Quest Publications. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-922769-31-5 . Retrieved 2009-09-14 .

^ Menduno, Michael (July 2019).

"The Technical Diving Revolution – part 2" . DIVER Magazine.

^ a b c d Yount, David E.; Maiken, Eric B.; Baker, Erik C. (2000). Lang, M.A.; Lehner, C.E. (eds.).

Implications of the Varying Permeability Model for Reverse Dive Profiles . Proceedings of the Reverse Dive Profiles Workshop, October 29–30, 1999. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. pp.

29– 60.

^ a b Menduno, Michael (18–20 May 2012). Vann, Richard D.; Denoble, Petar J.; Pollock, Neal W. (eds.).

Building a consumer rebreather market: Lessons from the technical diving revolution (PDF) . Rebreather Forum 3 Proceedings. Durham, North Carolina: AAUS/DAN/PADI. pp.

2– 23.

ISBN 978-0-9800423-9-9 .

^ "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 2016-11-04 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ CACSTD (30 August 1979).

Report of the Advisory Committee of Scientific and Technical Diving Operations, Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board, Department of Industrial Relations, State of California .

downloads.regulations.gov (Report).

^ a b c d e f Menduno, Michael (June 2019).

"The Technical Diving Revolution – part 2" . DIVER Magazine.

^ Menduno, Michael (August 2019).

"The Technical Diving Revolution – part 3" . DIVER Magazine.

^ Gorman, Des F. (1992). "High-tech diving".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

22 (1).

^ Gorman, Des F. (1995).

"Safe Limits: A International Dive Symposium. Introduction" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

25 (1). Archived from the original on April 15, 2013 . Retrieved 2009-08-07 .

^ Hamilton, R. W. Jr. (1996). "What is technical diving? (letter to editor)".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

26 (1).

^ Rossier, Robert N. (January 2000).

Recreational Nitrox Diving (1 ed.). Best Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0941332835 .

^ Douglas, Eric (2011).

"Nitrox" .

Alert Diver online - Fall 2011 . Divers Alert Network. Archived from the original on 31 May 2016 . Retrieved 25 April 2016 .

^ Staff (2016).

"Recreational Diver Level 1 - Nitrox diver" .

Global Underwater Explorers website . Global Underwater Explorers . Retrieved 25 April 2016 .

^ Menduno, Michael (2014).

"Rise of the Recreational Rebreather" .

Diver magazine - online . Diver magazine . Retrieved 25 April 2016 .

^ Staff (2016).

"Explorer rebreather" .

Hollis website . Hollis. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 25 April 2016 .

^ Staff (2016).

"Rebreather diver" .

PADI website . PADI. Archived from the original on 21 April 2016 . Retrieved 25 April 2016 .

^ "What is "Technical" Diving?" . ANDI. 2015 . Retrieved 31 July 2016 .

^ a b c Gurr, Kevin (August 2008). "13: Operational safety". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. p. 173.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ Staff (5 May 2016).

"Technical Diving" .

www.naui.org . National Association of Underwater Instructors . Retrieved 14 January 2017 .

^ "Technical Diving" .

NOAA . 24 February 2006 . Retrieved 25 September 2008 .

^ PADI, Enriched Air Diving , page 91.

ISBN 978-1-878663-31-3 ^ Staff.

"Technical Diving International" .

Our story . SDI - TDI - ERDI . Retrieved 17 January 2017 .

^ Staff (2 December 2011).

"Recreational Diving, Recreational Technical Diving and Snorkelling Code of Practice 2011" (PDF) .

Queensland Government Gazette . The State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2017 . Retrieved 25 April 2017 .

^ "Technical diving - British Sub-Aqua Club" . Retrieved 2 October 2017 .

^ a b c Cole, Bob (March 2008). "System Definitions".

The Bühlmann Deep-Stop System Handbook .

Sub-Aqua Association . pp.

2– 2, 2– 3.

ISBN 978-0953290482 .

^ Cole, Bob (2009). "Appendix 1 - Overview".

Student Diver Tool Box . Sub-Aqua Association. pp. A1–9–10.

ISBN 978-0-9532904-9-9 .

^ "PADI Deep Diver" . Archived from the original on 2002-12-05.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Mitchell, S. J. (1 May 2004). In: Moon, R.E.; Piantadosi, C.A.; Camporesi, E.M. (eds.). Technical Diving.

Dr. Peter Bennett Symposium Proceedings.

(Report). Durham, N.C.: Divers Alert Network.

^ Carney, Brian; Bissett, Donna (2012).

A guide to advanced nitrox : the full spectrum of nitrox mixtures . Jensen Beach, Florida: Technical Diving International.

ISBN 978-1931451758 .

OCLC 990167469 .

^ a b Staff (2024).

"Diver-Level Courses" .

PADI website . PADI . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ "RESA" .

Rebreather Education & Safety Association . Retrieved 2017-11-21 .

^ "Technical Diver Courses | NAUI Worldwide. Dive Safety Through Education" .

NAUI . 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 2017-11-21 .

^ Dreher, Richard (2013).

Diving in overhead environments : your complete guide to cavern and cave diving . Jensen Beach, FL, USA: Technical Diving International.

ISBN 978-1931451710 .

OCLC 985481420 .

^ Doolette, David J. (August 2008). "2: Inert Gas Narcosis". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

33– 40.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ a b Tydeman, Bill (15 March 2024).

"What is Technical Diving?" .

Viking Dives . Retrieved 15 March 2024 .

^ Gilliam, Bret (March 2015). "Soft Ceilings Can Be Just As Hard".

Tech Diving Mag (18). www.techdivingmag.com: 3– 6.

^ Lang, M. A.; Sayer, M.D.J., eds. (2007).

Proceedings of the International Polar Diving Workshop (PDF) . Svalbard: Smithsonian Institution. pp.

211– 213 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ Devos, Fred; Le Maillot, Chris; Riordan, Daniel (2004).

"Introduction to Guideline Procedures - Part 2: Methods" (PDF) .

DIRquest .

5 (4).

Global Underwater Explorers . Retrieved 2016-06-21 .

^ Exley, Sheck (1977).

Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival . National Speleological Society Cave Diving Section.

ISBN 99946-633-7-2 .

^ Staff (13 April 2010).

"Using Multiple Cylinders" .

Sport Diver . PADI Diving Society . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ "Stage Cylinder" .

www.c-studio.eu . Teclinediving . Retrieved 2024-11-27 .

^ Mount, Tom (August 2008). "11: Dive Planning". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

113– 158.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ Mount, Tom (August 2008). "9: Equipment Configuration". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

91– 106.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ Beresford, M.; Southwood, P. (2006).

CMAS-ISA Normoxic Trimix Manual (4th ed.). Pretoria, South Africa: CMAS Instructors South Africa.

^ "TDI Helitrox Diver" .

SDI | TDI | ERDI . Retrieved 2017-11-21 .

^ IANTD.

"IANTD World Headquarters - Advanced Recreational Trimix Diver (OC, Rebreather)" . Retrieved 2017-11-21 .

^ Brittain, Colin (2004). "Diving Air and Deep Diving".

Let's Dive: Sub-Aqua Association Club Diver Manual (2nd ed.). Wigan, UK: Dive Print. p. 80.

ISBN 0-9532904-3-3 .

The Association strongly endorses a maximum depth of 50 metres (50 metres (160 ft)) ^ Staff (15 November 2016).

"Plongeur Encadre 60 m" (PDF) .

Manuel de Formation Technique (in French). FFESSM. p. 1 . Retrieved 17 January 2017 .

Le plongeur titulaire de la qualification PE60 est capable d'évoluer en exploration dans l'espace 0 - 60 m au sein d'une palanquée prise en charge par un Guide de Palanquée (E4) ^ Commission Formation (August 2012).

"Plongeur autonome 60m" (PDF) .

Manuel du Moniteur (in French). FSGT. p. 52. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 January 2017 .

Ce module doit permettre de compléter l'expérience d'un plongeur autonome confirmé qui souhaiterait évoluer à l'air et en sécurité dans l'espace sub-lointain (40 à 60m).

^ "Les brevets de plongeur et les qualifications" .

Cursus Air (in French). ANMP . Retrieved 17 January 2017 .

^ Hamilton, K.; Laliberté, M. F.; Heslegrave, R. (1992). "Subjective and behavioral effects associated with repeated exposure to narcosis".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

63 (10): 865– 9.

PMID 1417647 .

^ Lippmann, John.

"How deep is too deep?" . DAN. Archived from the original on 2009-02-21 . Retrieved 2009-09-03 .

^ NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 Feb 2001). Joiner, James T. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS)in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company ^ Lock, Gareth (8 May 2011).

Human factors within sport diving incidents and accidents: An Application of the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) (PDF) . Cognitas Incident Management Limited . Retrieved 5 November 2016 .

^ Jablonski, Jarrod (2006).

Doing it Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . Global Underwater Explorers.

ISBN 0-9713267-0-3 .

^ Bishop, Leigh (6 May 2020).

"The Logistics of Exploration" .

www.dansa.org . DAN Southern Africa . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ "SSI TechXR - Technical diving program" . Scuba Schools International . Retrieved 2009-06-22 .

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ In his 1989 book, Advanced Wreck Diving , author and technical diver, Gary Gentile , commented that there was no accepted term for divers who dived beyond agency-specified recreational limits for non-professional purposes. Revised editions use the term technical diving , and Gary Gentile published a further book in 1999 entitled The Technical Diving Handbook .

^ Some recreational diving agencies recommend diving no deeper than 30 metres (100 ft), and suggest an absolute limit of 40 metres (130 ft). This has changed over time, and the PADI Deep Diver certification changed from 18 to 30 m max, to 18 to 40 m.

^ There is a reasonable body of professional opinion that considers decompression diving to be the sole differentiator for "technical" diving, but another body of professional opinion that considers all dives to be decompression dives. The distinction is between dives for which there is no obligatory decompression stop, and dives for which the decompression planning system (dive computer or schedule) indicates a requirement for a decompression stop. The same dive profile may or may not require a stop, depending on the system used to monitor the profile and the algorithm chosen to model decompression requirements.

^ Some certification agencies prefer to the term "cavern diving" to cave penetration within recreational diving limits.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Technical diving .

Tech Diving Mag official website RebreatherPro Archived 2008-06-05 at the Wayback Machine Jill Heinerth 's interactive multimedia technical diving website v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Extreme and adventure sports Boardsports Bellyboarding Bodyboarding Dirtsurfing Kite landboarding Kiteboarding Longboarding Mountainboarding Riverboarding Sandboarding Skateboarding Skimboarding Skysurfing Snowboarding Snowskating Street luging Surfing River surfing Wakeboarding Windsurfing Motorsports Drifting Motocross Rallycross Rallying Rally raid Snocross Water sports Coasteering Freediving High diving Jet Skiing Scuba diving Cave diving Technical diving Snorkeling Water skiing Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater rafting Climbing Canyoning Crane climbing Ice climbing Mixed climbing Mountaineering Alpine climbing Rock climbing Big wall climbing Free solo climbing Traditional climbing Skyrunning Falling BASE jumping Free BASE Ski-BASE jumping Bungee jumping Cliff-diving Cliff jumping Tombstoning Parachuting/Skydiving Flying Aerobatics Air racing Gliding Hang gliding Paragliding Powered paragliding Parasailing Speed flying Wingsuit flying Cycling BMX BMX racing Freestyle BMX Mountain biking Downhill Rolling Freestyle scootering Inline skating Aggressive inline skating Vert skating Roller skating Skiing Extreme skiing Freeriding Freestyle skiing Speed skiing Ski mountaineering Sledding Bobsleigh Extreme sledding Luge Skeleton Others Adventure racing Caving Cheese rolling Extreme ironing Extreme Pogo Fell running Obstacle racing Orienteering Powerbocking Slacklining Ultramarathon Zip-lining Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technical_diving&oldid=1305024267 " Category : Technical diving Hidden categories: All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from November 2017 CS1: unfit URL CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from September 2021 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 16:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technical diving 14 languages Add topic

