Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pre-historical 2 Modern examples and effects 3 Economics and technological development Toggle Economics and technological development subsection 3.1 Funding 3.1.1 Government funding for new technology 3.1.2 Private funding 3.2 Other economic considerations 4 Relation to science 5 Sociological factors and effects Toggle Sociological factors and effects subsection 5.1 Values 5.1.1 Institutions and groups 5.2 International 6 Environment Toggle Environment subsection 6.1 Negative effects on the environment 7 Construction and shaping Toggle Construction and shaping subsection 7.1 Choice 7.2 Autonomous technology 7.3 Government 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Technology and society 8 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Shqip தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( March 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Technology, society and life or technology and culture refers to the inter-dependency, co-dependence , co-influence, and co-production of technology and society upon one another. Evidence for this synergy has been found since humanity first started using simple tools. The inter-relationship has continued as modern technologies such as the printing press and computers have helped shape society. The first scientific approach to this relationship occurred with the development of tektology , the "science of organization", in early twentieth century Imperial Russia .

[ 1 ] In modern academia, the interdisciplinary study of the mutual impacts of science, technology, and society, is called science and technology studies .

The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools . The prehistoric discovery of how to control fire and the later Neolithic Revolution increased the available sources of food, and the invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. Developments in historic times have lessened physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale, such as the printing press , telephone , and Internet .

Technology has developed advanced economies , such as the modern global economy , and has led to the rise of a leisure class . Many technological processes produce by-products known as pollution , and deplete natural resources to the detriment of Earth's environment . Innovations influence the values of society and raise new questions in the ethics of technology . Examples include the rise of the notion of efficiency in terms of human productivity , and the challenges of bioethics .

Philosophical debates have arisen over the use of technology, with disagreements over whether technology improves the human condition or worsens it.

Neo-Luddism , anarcho-primitivism , and similar reactionary movements criticize the pervasiveness of technology, arguing that it harms the environment and alienates people. However, proponents of ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition .

Pre-historical [ edit ] The importance of stone tools , circa 2.5 million years ago, is considered fundamental in the human development in the hunting hypothesis .

[ citation needed ] Primatologist, Richard Wrangham , theorizes that the control of fire by early humans and the associated development of cooking was the spark that radically changed human evolution.

[ 2 ] Texts such as Guns, Germs, and Steel suggest that early advances in plant agriculture and husbandry fundamentally shifted the way that collective groups of individuals, and eventually societies, developed.

Modern examples and effects [ edit ] Technology has taken a large role in society and day-to-day life. When societies know more about the development in a technology, they become able to take advantage of it. When an innovation achieves a certain point after it has been presented and promoted, this technology becomes part of the society. The use of technology in education provides students with technology literacy, information literacy, capacity for life-long learning, and other skills necessary for the 21st century workplace.

[ 3 ] Digital technology has entered each process and activity made by the social system . In fact, it constructed another worldwide communication system in addition to its origin.

[ 4 ] A 1982 study by The New York Times described a technology assessment study by the Institute for the Future , "peering into the future of an electronic world." The study focused on the emerging videotex industry, formed by the marriage of two older technologies, communications, and computing. It estimated that 40 percent of American households will have two-way videotex service by the end of the century. By comparison, it took television 16 years to penetrate 90 percent of households from the time commercial service was begun.

Since the creation of computers achieved an entire better approach to transmit and store data . Digital technology became commonly used for downloading music and watching movies at home either by DVDs or purchasing it online.
Digital music records are not quite the same as traditional recording media. Obviously, because digital ones are reproducible, portable and free.

[ 5 ] Around the globe many schools have implemented educational technology in primary schools, universities and colleges. According to the statistics, in the early beginnings of 1990s the use of Internet in schools was, on average, 2–3%.

[ citation needed ] Continuously, by the end of 1990s the evolution of technology increases rapidly and reaches to 60%, and by the year of 2008 nearly 100% of schools use Internet on educational form. According to ISTE researchers, technological improvements can lead to numerous achievements in classrooms. E-learning system, collaboration of students on project based learning, and technological skills for future results in motivation of students.

[ citation needed ] Although these previous examples only show a few of the positive aspects of technology in society, there are negative side effects as well.

[ 6 ] Within this virtual realm, social media platforms such as Instagram , Facebook , and Snapchat have altered the way Generation Y culture is understanding the world and thus how they view themselves. In recent years, there has been more research on the development of social media depression in users of sites like these. "Facebook Depression" is when users are so affected by their friends' posts and lives that their own jealousy depletes their sense of self-worth. They compare themselves to the posts made by their peers and feel unworthy or monotonous because they feel like their lives are not nearly as exciting as the lives of others.

[ 3 ] Technology has a serious effect on youth's health. The overuse of technology is said to be associated with sleep deprivation which is linked to obesity and poor academic performance in the lives of adolescents.

[ 7 ] Economics and technological development [ edit ] Nuclear reactor, Doel , Belgium In ancient history, economics began when spontaneous exchange of goods and services was replaced over time by deliberate trade structures. Makers of arrowheads, for example, might have realized they could do better by concentrating on making arrowheads and barter for other needs. Regardless of goods and services bartered, some amount of technology was involved—if no more than in the making of shell and bead jewelry. Even the shaman's potions and sacred objects can be said to have involved some technology. So, from the very beginnings, technology can be said to have spurred the development of more elaborate economies. Technology is seen as primary source in economic development.

[ 8 ] Technology advancement and economic growth are related to each other. The level of technology is important to determine the economic growth. It is the technological process which keeps the economy moving.

In the modern world, superior technologies, resources, geography, and history give rise to robust economies; and in a well-functioning, robust economy, economic excess naturally flows into greater use of technology. Moreover, because technology is such an inseparable part of human society, especially in its economic aspects, funding sources for (new) technological endeavors are virtually illimitable. However, while in the beginning, technological investment involved little more than the time, efforts, and skills of one or a few men, today, such investment may involve the collective labor and skills of many millions.

Most recently, because of the COVID-19 pandemic , the proportion of firms employing advanced digital technology in their operations expanded dramatically. It was found that firms that adopted technology were better prepared to deal with the pandemic's disruptions. Adaptation strategies in the form of remote working, 3D printing, and the use of big data analytics and AI to plan activities to adapt to the pandemic were able to ensure positive job growth.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Funding [ edit ] Consequently, the sources of funding for large technological efforts have dramatically narrowed, since few have ready access to the collective labor of a whole society, or even a large part. It is conventional to divide up funding sources into governmental (involving whole, or nearly whole, social enterprises ) and private (involving more limited, but generally more sharply focused) business or individual enterprises.

Government funding for new technology [ edit ] The government is a major contributor to the development of new technology in many ways. In the United States alone, many government agencies specifically invest billions of dollars in new technology.

In 1980, the UK government invested just over six million pounds in a four-year program, later extended to six years, called the Microelectronics Education Programme (MEP), which was intended to give every school in Britain at least one computer, software, training materials, and extensive teacher training. Similar programs have been instituted by governments around the world.

Technology has frequently been driven by the military, with many modern applications developed for the military before they were adapted for civilian use. However, this has always been a two-way flow, with industry often developing and adopting a technology only later adopted by the military.

Entire government agencies are specifically dedicated to research, such as America's National Science Foundation , the United Kingdom's scientific research institutes , America's Small Business Innovative Research effort. Many other government agencies dedicate a major portion of their budget to research and development.

Private funding [ edit ] Research and development is one of the smallest areas of investments made by corporations toward new and innovative technology.

[ citation needed ] Many foundations and other nonprofit organizations contribute to the development of technology. In the OECD , about two-thirds of research and development in scientific and technical fields is carried out by industry, and 98 percent and 10 percent, respectively, by universities and government. But in poorer countries such as Portugal and Mexico the industry contribution is significantly less. The U.S. government spends more than other countries on military research and development, although the proportion has fallen from about 30 percent in the 1980s to less than 10 percent.

[ 12 ] The 2009 founding of Kickstarter allows individuals to receive funding via crowdsourcing for many technology related products including both new physical creations as well as documentaries, films, and web-series that focus on technology management . This circumvents the corporate or government oversight most inventors and artists struggle against but leaves the accountability of the project completely with the individual receiving the funds.

Other economic considerations [ edit ] Appropriate technology , sometimes called "intermediate" technology, more of an economics concern , refers to compromises between central and expensive technologies of developed nations and those that developing nations find most effective to deploy given an excess of labour and scarcity of cash.

Persuasion technology : In economics , definitions or assumptions of progress or growth are often related to one or more assumptions about technology's economic influence. Challenging prevailing assumptions about technology and its usefulness has led to alternative ideas like uneconomic growth or measuring well-being . These, and economics itself, can often be described as technologies, specifically, as persuasion technology.

Technocapitalism Technological diffusion Technology acceptance model Technology life cycle Technology transfer Relation to science [ edit ] The relationship between science and technology can be complex.  Science may drive technological development, by generating demand for new instruments to address a scientific question, or by illustrating technical possibilities previously unconsidered.  An environment of encouraged science will also produce scientists and engineers, and technical schools, which encourages innovation and entrepreneurship that are capable of taking advantage of the existing science.  In fact, it is recognized that "innovators, like scientists, do require access to technical information and ideas" and "must know enough to recognize useful knowledge when they see it." [ 13 ] Science spillover also contributes to greater technological diffusion.

[ 14 ] Having a strong policy contributing to basic science allows a country to have access to a strong a knowledge base that will allow them to be "ready to exploit unforeseen developments in technology," [ 15 ] when needed in times of crisis.

For most of human history, technological improvements were arrived at by chance, trial and error, or spontaneous inspiration.  Stokes referred to these innovators as " 'improvers of technology'…who knew no science and would not have been helped by it if they had." [ 15 ] This idea is supported by Diamond who further indicated that these individuals are "more likely to achieve a breakthrough if [they do] not hold the currently dominant theory in too high regard." [ 16 ] Research and development directed towards immediate technical application is a relatively recent occurrence, arising with the Industrial Revolution and becoming commonplace in the 20th century.  In addition, there are examples of economies that do not emphasize science research that have been shown to be technological leaders despite this.  For example, the United States relied on the scientific output of Europe in the early 20th century, though it was regarded as a leader in innovation. Another example is the technological advancement of Japan in the latter part of the same century, which emphasized more applied science (directly applicable to technology).

[ 15 ] Though the link between science and technology has need for more clarity, what is known is that a society without sufficient building blocks to encourage this link are critical.  A nation without emphasis on science is likely to eventually stagnate technologically and risk losing competitive advantage.  The most critical areas for focus by policymakers are discouraging too many protections on job security, leading to less mobility of the workforce, [ 17 ] encouraging the reliable availability of sufficient low-cost capital for investment in R&D, by favorable economic and tax policies, [ 18 ] and supporting higher education in the sciences to produce scientists and engineers.

[ 18 ] Sociological factors and effects [ edit ] See also: Social construction of technology Values [ edit ] The implementation of technology influences the values of a society by changing expectations and realities. The implementation of technology is also influenced by values. There are (at least) three major, interrelated values that inform, and are informed by, technological innovations: Mechanistic world view : Viewing the universe as a collection of parts (like a machine), that can be individually analyzed and understood.

[ 19 ] This is a form of reductionism that is rare nowadays. However, the "neo-mechanistic world view" holds that nothing in the universe cannot be understood by the human intellect. Also, while all things are greater than the sum of their parts (e.g., even if we consider nothing more than the information involved in their combination), in principle, even this excess must eventually be understood by human intelligence. That is, no divine or vital principle or essence is involved.

Efficiency : A value, originally applied only to machines, but now applied to all aspects of society, so that each element is expected to attain a higher and higher percentage of its maximal possible performance, output, or ability.

Social progress : The belief that there is such a thing as social progress, and that, in the main, it is beneficent. Before the Industrial Revolution , and the subsequent explosion of technology, almost all societies believed in a cyclical theory of social movement and, indeed, of all history and the universe. This was, obviously, based on the cyclicity of the seasons, and an agricultural economy's and society's strong ties to that cyclicity. Since much of the world is closer to their agricultural roots, they are still much more amenable to cyclicity than progress in history. This may be seen, for example, in Prabhat Rainjan Sarkar's modern social cycles theory.

[ 20 ] For a more westernized version of social cyclicity, see Generations: The History of America's Future, 1584 to 2069 (Paperback) by Neil Howe and William Strauss; Harper Perennial; Reprint edition (September 30, 1992); ISBN 0-688-11912-3 , and subsequent books by these authors.

Institutions and groups [ edit ] Technology often enables organizational and bureaucratic group structures that otherwise and heretofore were simply not possible. Examples of this might include: The rise of very large organizations: e.g., governments, the military, health and social welfare institutions, supranational corporations.

The commercialization of leisure: sports events, products, etc. (McGinn) The almost instantaneous dispersal of information (especially news) and entertainment around the world.

International [ edit ] Technology enables greater knowledge of international issues, values, and cultures. Due mostly to mass transportation and mass media, the world seems to be a much smaller place, due to the following: [ 21 ] Globalization of ideas Embeddedness of values Population growth and control Environment [ edit ] See also: Environmental technology , Design , and Human impact on the environment § Technology impacts Smog caused by the invention, construction, dissemination and use of car-technology and -infrastructure alongside possibly less than suboptimal product- and industrial production -designs Technology can provide understanding of and appreciation for the world around us, enable sustainability and improve environmental conditions but also degrade the environment and facilitate unsustainability.

Some polities may conclude that certain technologies' environmental detriments and other risks to outweigh their benefits, especially if or once substitutive technologies have been or can be invented, leading to directed technological phase-outs such as the fossil fuel phase-out and the nuclear fission power phase-out .

Most modern technological processes produce unwanted byproducts in addition to the desired products, which are known as waste and pollution . While material waste is often re-used in industrial processes , many processes lead to a release into the environment with negative environmental side effects, such as pollution and lack of sustainability.

Development and technologies' implications Some technologies are designed specifically with the environment in mind, but most are designed first for financial or economic effects such as the free market's profit motive .

[ 22 ] The effects of a specific technology is often not only dependent on how it is used – e.g. its usage context – but also predetermined by the technology's design or characteristics, as in the theory of " the medium is the message " which relates to media-technologies in specific. In many cases, such predetermined or built-in implications may vary depending on factors of contextual contemporary conditions such as human biology, international relations and socioeconomics. However, many technologies may be harmful to the environment only when used in specific contexts or for specific purposes that not necessarily result from the nature of the technology.

Values Historically, from the perspective of economic agent-centered responsibility, an increased, as of 2021 commonly theoretic and informal, value of healthy environments and more efficient productive processes may be the result of an increase in the wealth of society. Once people are able to provide for their basic needs , they can – and are often facilitated to – not only afford more environmentally destructive products and services, but could often also be able to put an – e.g. individual morality -motivated – effort into valuing less tangible goods such as clean air and water if product-, alternatives-, consequences- and services-information are adequate.

From the perspective of systems science and cybernetics , economies (systems) have economic actors and sectors make decisions based upon a range of system-internal factors with structures – or sometimes forms of leveraging existing structures – that lead to other outcomes being the result of other architectures – or systems-level configurations of the existing designs – which are considered to be possible in the sense that such could be modeled, tested, priorly assessed , developed and studied.

Negative effects on the environment [ edit ] The effects of technology on the environment are both obvious and subtle. The more obvious effects include the depletion of nonrenewable natural resources (such as petroleum, coal, ores, and precious metals), and the added pollution of air , water, and land. The more subtle effects may include long-term effects (e.g.

global warming , deforestation , natural habitat destruction , and coastal wetland loss.) Pollution and energy requirements Each wave of technology creates a set of waste previously unknown by humans: toxic waste , radioactive waste , electronic waste , plastic waste , and space waste .

Electronic waste creates direct environmental impacts through the production and maintaining the infrastructure necessary for using technology and indirect impacts by breaking barriers for global interaction through the use of information and communications technology.

[ 23 ] Certain usages of information technology and infrastructure maintenance consume energy that contributes global warming . This includes software-designs such as international cryptocurrencies [ 24 ] and most hardware powered by nonrenewable sources.

One of the main problems is the lack of societal decision-making processes – such as the contemporary economy and politics – that lead to sufficient implementation of existing as well as potential efficient ways to remove, recycle and prevent these pollutants on a large scale expediently.

Digital technologies, however, are important in achieving the green transition and specifically, the SDGs and European Green Deal 's environmental targets. Emerging digital technologies, if correctly applied, have the potential to play a critical role in addressing environmental issues. A few examples are: smart city mobility, precision agriculture , sustainable supply chains, environmental monitoring , and catastrophe prediction.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Construction and shaping [ edit ] Choice [ edit ] Society also controls technology through the choices it makes. These choices not only include consumer demands; they also include: the channels of distribution, how do products go from raw materials to consumption to disposal; the cultural beliefs regarding style, freedom of choice, consumerism, materialism, etc.; the economic values we place on the environment, individual wealth, government control, capitalism, etc.

According to Williams and Edge, [ 27 ] the construction and shaping of technology includes the concept of choice (and not necessarily conscious choice). Choice is inherent in both the design of individual artifacts and systems, and in the making of those artifacts and systems.

The idea here is that a single technology may not emerge from the unfolding of a predetermined logic or a single determinant, technology could be a garden of forking paths, with different paths potentially leading to different technological outcomes. This is a position that has been developed in detail by Judy Wajcman . Therefore, choices could have differing implications for society and for particular social groups.

Autonomous technology [ edit ] In one line of thought, technology develops autonomously, in other words, technology seems to feed on itself, moving forward with a force irresistible by humans. To these individuals, technology is "inherently dynamic and self-augmenting." [ 28 ] Jacques Ellul is one proponent of the irresistibleness of technology to humans. He espouses the idea that humanity cannot resist the temptation of expanding our knowledge and our technological abilities. However, he does not believe that this seeming autonomy of technology is inherent. But the perceived autonomy is because humans do not adequately consider the responsibility that is inherent in technological processes.

Langdon Winner critiques the idea that technological evolution is essentially beyond the control of individuals or society in his book Autonomous Technology. He argues instead that the apparent autonomy of technology is a result of "technological somnambulism," the tendency of people to uncritically and unreflectively embrace and utilize new technologies without regard for their broader social and political effects.

In 1980, Mike Cooley published a critique of the automation and computerisation of engineering work under the title "Architect or Bee? The human/technology relationship".  The title alludes to a comparison made by Karl Marx , on the issue of the creative achievements of human imaginative power.

[ 29 ] According to Cooley ""Scientific and technological developments have invariably proved to be double-edged. They produced the beauty of Venice and the hideousness of Chernobyl; the caring therapies of Rontgen's X-rays and the destruction of Hiroshima," [ 30 ] Government [ edit ] Individuals rely on governmental assistance to control the side effects and negative consequences of technology.

Supposed independence of government. An assumption commonly made about the government is that their governance role is neutral or independent. However, some argue that governing is a political process, so government will be influenced by political winds of influence. In addition, because government provides much of the funding for technological research and development, it has a vested interest in certain outcomes. Other point out that the world's biggest ecological disasters, such as the Aral Sea , Chernobyl , and Lake Karachay have been caused by government projects, which are not accountable to consumers.

Liability. One means for controlling technology is to place responsibility for the harm with the agent causing the harm. Government can allow more or less legal liability to fall to the organizations or individuals responsible for damages.

Legislation. A source of controversy is the role of industry versus that of government in maintaining a clean environment. While it is generally agreed that industry needs to be held responsible when pollution harms other people, there is disagreement over whether this should be prevented by legislation or civil courts, and whether ecological systems as such should be protected from harm by governments.

Recently, the social shaping of technology has had new influence in the fields of e-science and e-social science in the United Kingdom, which has made centers focusing on the social shaping of science and technology a central part of their funding programs.

See also [ edit ] Technology portal Anthropology of technology Appropriate technology Artificial intelligence and elections – Use and impact of AI on political elections Critique of technology Cultural lag High technology History of science and technology Information culture Knowledge economy List of emerging technologies The Lucas Plan Technological convergence Technological superpowers Technopoly: the Surrender of Culture to Technology Theories of technology References [ edit ] ^ Gare, Arran (November 2000).

"Aleksandr Bogdanov and Systems Theory" .

Democracy & Nature .

6 (3): 341– 359.

doi : 10.1080/10855660020020230 .

hdl : 1959.3/751 .

^ Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human ^ a b ( Puricelli 2011 , p. 4) ^ ( Rückriem 2009 , p. 88) ^ ( Katz 2010 , p. 185) ^ Lynden, Burke (12 May 2011).

"Generation Y Heavily Dependent On Technology, Promotes Laziness" .

The Jambar . Retrieved 28 October 2015 .

^ Saudi med J. 2016 pages 436–439 ^ See, e.g., Andrey Korotayev , Artemy Malkov, and Daria Khaltourina.

Introduction to Social Macrodynamics: Compact Macromodels of the World System Growth ISBN 5-484-00414-4 ^ Bank, European Investment (2022-05-05).

Digitalisation in Europe 2021-2022: Evidence from the EIB Investment Survey . European Investment Bank.

ISBN 978-92-861-5233-7 .

^ "Digital transformation: importance, benefits and EU policy - EU monitor" .

www.eumonitor.eu . Retrieved 2022-05-31 .

^ "Productivity gains from teleworking in the post COVID-19 era: How can public policies make it happen?" .

OECD . Retrieved 2022-05-31 .

^ "Key Figures" (PDF) .

OECD . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 23, 2006.

^ Marburger, John H. (2011).

"Science, technology and innovation in a 21st century context" (PDF) .

Policy Sciences .

44 (3).

doi : 10.1007/s11077-011-9137-3 .

^ Otsuka, Kozo. 2007. "Role of Science and Technology on Knowledge Production Function: The Case of Japan and USA".

International Journal of Technology, Knowledge and Society 3 (4): 17–26.

doi : 10.18848/1832-3669/CGP/v03i04/55764 .

^ a b c Stokes, Donald E. 1997.

Pasteur's Quadrant : Basic Science and Technological Innovation . Print. Washington, D.C., United States of America: Brookings Institution Press.

^ Diamond, Arthur M, Jr. 2019.

Openness to Creative Destruction: Sustaining Innovative Dynamism . Kindle. New York, United States of America: Oxford University Press.

^ Soete, Luc. 2002. "The European Research Area: Perspectives and Opportunities".

Prepared for the International Workshop on Research Incentives and Institutions, Italian Ministry of Economics and Finance . Paper. Rome, Italy.

^ a b Aghion, Phillippe, Paul A David, and Dominique Foray. 2009. "Science, Technology and Innovation for Economic Growth:  Linking Policy Research and Practice in 'STIG Systems ' ".

Research Policy , no. 38 (March).

^ ( McGinn 1991 ) ^ Galtung, Johan.

"Prabhat rainjan sarkar's social cycles, world unity and peace; Renaissance 2000 honoring Sarkar's 75th Anniversary, LA 1" .

Metafuture.org . Retrieved July 6, 2016 .

^ "21st century information technology revolution" .

ubiquity.acm.org . 4 March 2021.

^ Martin, Kirsten; Shilton, Katie; Smith, Jeffery (2019-12-01).

"Business and the Ethical Implications of Technology: Introduction to the Symposium" .

Journal of Business Ethics .

160 (2): 307– 317.

doi : 10.1007/s10551-019-04213-9 .

ISSN 1573-0697 .

^ Higón, D. A., Gholami, R., Shirazi, F. , "ICT and environmental sustainability: A global perspective" , Telematics and Informatics , 2017 ^ Jiang, Shangrong; Li, Yuze; Lu, Quanying; Hong, Yongmiao; Guan, Dabo; Xiong, Yu; Wang, Shouyang (6 April 2021).

"Policy assessments for the carbon emission flows and sustainability of Bitcoin blockchain operation in China" .

Nature Communications .

12 (1): 1938.

Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.1938J .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22256-3 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 8024295 .

PMID 33824331 .

Available under CC BY 4.0 .

^ Bank, European Investment (2022-05-05).

Digitalisation in Europe 2021-2022: Evidence from the EIB Investment Survey . European Investment Bank.

ISBN 978-92-861-5233-7 .

^ "The potential of digital business models in the new energy economy – Analysis" .

IEA . 7 January 2022 . Retrieved 2022-06-05 .

^ ( Williams & Edge 1996 ) ^ ( McGinn 1991 , p. 73) ^ cf Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I ^ "Expert stresses designs which are orientated towards people" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 2023-08-28 .

Sources [ edit ] Katz, Mark (2010).

Capturing Sound: How Technology Has Changed Music . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520261051 .

McGinn, Robert E. (1991).

Science, Technology, and Society . Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 0-13-794736-4 .

Puricelli, F (2011).

" Early Twentieth Century Transportation Technology and the Creation of Modern American Culture " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-11-03.

Rückriem, F (2009).

Digital technology and mediation: A challenge to activity theory.

Learning and expanding with activity theory' . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521760751 .

Williams, Robin; Edge, David (1996).

"What is the Social Shaping of Technology? (The Introduction to paper "The Social Shaping of Technology".)" .

Research Policy 25 . Archived from the original on September 17, 2006 . Retrieved August 10, 2006 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adas, Michael (1989).

Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0-8014-2303-1 .

Bereano, P. (1977).

Technology as a Social and Political Phenomenon . Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0471068756 .

Castells, Manuel (2009).

The Rise of the Network Society (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK.: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1405196864 .

Cochrane, T; Bateman, R (2010).

"Smartphones give you wings: Pedagogical affordances of mobile Web 2.0" .

Australasian Journal of Educational Technology . Archived from the original on 2016-03-15 . Retrieved 2014-11-03 .

Dickson, D. (1977).

Politics of Alternative Technology . Universe Publisher, ISBN 0876639171 .

Easton, T. (2011).

Taking Sides: Clashing Views in Science, Technology, and Society . McGraw-Hill/Dushkin, ISBN 0078050278 .

Harrington, Jan L. (2008).

Technology and Society . Sudbury, Massachusetts: Jones and Bartlett.

ISBN 9781449673918 .

( Google Books preview) Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011).

Technofix: Why Technology Won't Save Us or the Environment , New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044 , 464 pp.

Andrey Korotayev , Artemy Malkov, and Daria Khaltourina.

Introduction to Social Macrodynamics: Compact Macromodels of the World System Growth ISBN 5-484-00414-4 ] MacKenzie, D., and J. Wajcman. (1999).

The Social Shaping of Technology . McGraw Hill Education, ISBN 0335199135 .

Mesthene, E.G. (1970).

Technological Change: Its Impact on Man and Society . Harvard University Press, ISBN 0674872355 .

Mumford, L. (2010).

Technics and Civilization . University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226550273 .

Noble, David F.

(1984), Forces of Production: A Social History of Industrial Automation , New York, New York, US: Knopf, ISBN 978-0-394-51262-4 , LCCN 83048867 .

Postman, N. (1993).

Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology . Vintage, ISBN 0679745408 .

Sclove, R.E. (1995).

Democracy and Technology . The Guilford Press, ISBN 089862861X .

Dan Senor and Saul Singer, Start-up Nation: The Story of Israel's Economic Miracle, Hachette Book Group, New York, (2009) ISBN 0-446-54146-X Shaw, Jeffrey M. (2014).

Illusions of Freedom: Thomas Merton and Jacques Ellul on Technology and the Human Condition . Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock.

ISBN 978-1625640581 .

Sicilia, David B.; Wittner, David G.

Strands of Modernization: The Circulation of Technology and Business Practices in East Asia, 1850–1920 (University of Toronto Press, 2021) online review Smil, Vaclav (1994).

Energy in World History . Boulder: Westview Press. pp.

259– 267.

ISBN 0-8133-1901-3 .

Cited at Technology Chronology (accessed September 11, 2005).

Volti, Rudi (2017).

society and technological change . New York: Worth. p. 3.

ISBN 9781319058258 .

Winston, Morton (2003). "Children of invention". In Morton Winston; Ralph Edelbach (eds.).

Society, Ethics, and Technology (2nd ed.). Belmont, Calif.: Thomson/Wadsworth .

ISBN 0-534-58540-X .

Ruckenstein, Minna (2023).

The Feel of Algorithms (University of California Press).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Technology in society .

Science, Technology, and Society: An International Journal Scientists for Global Responsibility Technology and Society Books and Journal Articles Technology and Society Book Reviews Archived 2019-12-21 at the Wayback Machine The Loka Institute Archived 2014-12-17 at the Wayback Machine The New Atlantis: A Journal of Technology and Society Union of Concerned Scientists v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Sociology Outline History Timeline Index General aspects Public sociology Social research Social theory Sociological theory Sociological practice Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Related fields and subfields Anthropology Comparative sociology Criminology Cultural anthropology Demography Historical sociology Industrial society Marxist sociology Political sociology Rural sociology Social anthropology Social movements Social psychology Sociolinguistics Urban sociology Sociology of art body consciousness culture death deviance disaster economics education emotions environment family food gender health immigration Internet knowledge language law leisure literature medicine military music peace, war, and social conflict philosophy punishment race and ethnicity religion sociology space sport science small groups space stratification technology terrorism visual work Major theorists Sieyès Comte Martineau Tocqueville Marx Spencer Le Bon Ward Pareto Tönnies Veblen Simmel Durkheim Addams Mead Weber Du Bois Mannheim Elias Fromm Adorno Gehlen Aron Merton Nisbet Mills Bell Schoeck Goffman Bauman Foucault Luhmann Habermas Baudrillard Bourdieu Giddens Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Categories lists Journals Commons WikiProject Society portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐ftfw2
Cached time: 20250814233110
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.984 seconds
Real time usage: 1.201 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4057/1000000
Revision size: 43413/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 179355/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12736/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 162768/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.679/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22656283/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1024.841      1 -total
 18.13%  185.838      1 Template:Reflist
 12.96%  132.849      3 Template:Navbox
 11.72%  120.154      1 Template:Columns-list
 10.57%  108.349      1 Template:Annotated_link
 10.18%  104.302      1 Template:Sociology
  9.97%  102.129      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.44%   96.721      1 Template:Sociology2
  8.27%   84.723      3 Template:Excerpt
  7.94%   81.343     15 Template:ISBN Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30862857:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814233110 and revision id 1305095742. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technology_and_society&oldid=1305095742 " Categories : Technology in society Information society Interdisciplinary historical research Social information processing Sociological theories Technological change Technology Technology systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from March 2010 All articles with style issues Articles that may contain original research from March 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 01:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technology and society 8 languages Add topic

