Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Influence 4 Gallery 5 Bibliography 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Étienne de La Boétie 48 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Ido Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Magyar مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French judge, writer and philosopher (1530–1563) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(December 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Étienne de La Boétie]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Étienne de La Boétie}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Étienne de La Boétie Born ( 1530-11-01 ) 1 November 1530 Sarlat-la-Canéda , Périgord, France Died 18 August 1563 (1563-08-18) (aged 32) Germignan near Bordeaux, France Education Education College of Guienne University of Orléans Philosophical work Era Renaissance philosophy 16th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy French philosophy School French Renaissance Renaissance humanism Main interests Classical studies , legal philosophy , poetry , political philosophy Notable ideas Voluntary servitude French and Francophone literature by category History Medieval Renaissance 17th 18th 19th 20th century Contemporary Movements Précieuses Classicism Rococo Decadent Parnassianism Symbolism Nouveau roman Writers Chronological list Writers by category Essayists Novelists Playwrights Poets Short story writers Children's writers Countries and regions France Quebec Franco-American Haiti Postcolonial Portals France Literature v t e Étienne or Estienne de La Boétie ( French: [etjɛn də la bɔesi] ⓘ , also [bwati] or [bɔeti] ; [ 1 ] Occitan : Esteve de La Boetiá ; 1 November 1530 – 18 August 1563) was a French magistrate, classicist, writer, poet and political theorist, best remembered for his friendship with essayist Michel de Montaigne .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] His early political treatise Discourse on Voluntary Servitude was posthumously adopted by the Huguenot movement and is sometimes seen as an early influence on modern anti-statist , utopian and civil disobedience thought.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Life [ edit ] La Boétie was born in Sarlat , in the Périgord region of southwest France, in 1530 to an aristocratic family. His father was a royal official of the Périgord region and his mother was the sister of the president of the Bordeaux Parliament (assembly of lawyers). Orphaned at an early age, he was brought up by his uncle and namesake, the curate of Bouilbonnas, and received his law degree from the University of Orléans in 1553. His great and precocious ability earned La Boétie a royal appointment to the Bordeaux Parliament the following year, despite his being under the minimum age. There he pursued a distinguished career as judge and diplomatic negotiator until his untimely death from illness in 1563 at the age of thirty-two. La Boétie was also a distinguished poet and humanist, translating Xenophon and Plutarch , and being closely connected with the leading young Pleiade group of poets, including Pierre de Ronsard , Jean Daurat and Jean-Antoine de Baïf .

[ 5 ] La Boétie was favorable to the conciliation of Catholicism and Protestantism ;  "warned of the dangerous and divisive consequences of permitting two religions , which could lead to two opposed states in the same country. The most he would have allowed the Protestants was the right to worship in private, and he pointed out their own intolerance of Catholics. His policy for religious peace was one of conciliation and concord through reforms in the church that would eventually persuade the Protestants to reunite with Catholicism".

[ 6 ] He served with Montaigne in the Bordeaux parlement and is immortalized in Montaigne's essay on friendship . Some historians [ 7 ] have questioned whether the two were lovers or not, but each played influential roles in each other's lives regardless.

Writings [ edit ] La Boétie's writings include a few sonnets , translations from the classics and an essay attacking absolute monarchy and tyranny in general, Discours de la servitude volontaire ou le Contr'un ( Discourse on Voluntary Servitude, or the Anti-Dictator ). The essay asserts that tyrants have power because the people give it to them.

Liberty has been abandoned once by society, which afterward stayed corrupted and prefers the slavery of the courtesan to the freedom of one who refuses to dominate as he refuses to obey . Thus, La Boétie linked obedience and domination, a relationship which would be later theorised by latter anarchist thinkers. By advocating a solution of simply refusing to support the tyrant, he became one of the earliest advocates of civil disobedience and nonviolent resistance .

Murray N. Rothbard summarizes La Boétie's political philosophy as follows: To him, the great mystery of politics was obedience to rulers. Why in the world do people agree to be looted and otherwise oppressed by government overlords? It is not just fear, Boetie explains in the Discourse on Voluntary Servitude , for our consent is required. And that consent can be non-violently withdrawn.

[ 5 ] It was once thought following Montaigne's claims that La Boétie wrote the essay in 1549 at the age of eighteen, but recent authorities argue that it is "likely that the Discourse was written in 1552 or 1553, at the age of twenty-two, while La Boétie was at the university".

[ 8 ] Some Montaigne scholars have argued that the essay was in fact the work of Montaigne himself. The essay was circulated privately and not published until 1576 after La Boétie's death. He died in Germignan near Bordeaux in 1563. His last days are described in a long letter from Montaigne to his own father.

Influence [ edit ] In the 20th century, many European anarchists began to cite La Boétie as an influence, including Gustav Landauer , Bart de Ligt and Simone Weil .

[ 9 ] Autonomist Marxist thinker John Holloway also cites him in his book Crack Capitalism in order to explain his idea of "breaking with capitalism".

[ 10 ] Gene Sharp , the leading theorist of nonviolent struggle, cites his work frequently in both The Politics of Nonviolent Action and From Dictatorship to Democracy .

Gallery [ edit ] Discours de la servitude volontaire Œuvres complètes ( Complete Works ), 1892 La Boétie's home at Sarlat Birthplace of La Boétie Bibliography [ edit ] Œuvres complètes , Editions William Blake & Co., 1991.

ISBN 2905810602 .

Discours de la servitude volontaire , Editions Mille et une nuits, 1997.

ISBN 2910233944 .

Discours de la servitude volontaire , Editions Flammarion, 1993.

ISBN 2080703943 .

The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude , translated by Harry Kurz and with an introduction by Murray Rothbard , Montrèal/New York/London: Black Rose Books, 1997.

ISBN 1551640899 .

The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude , translated by Harry Kurz and with an introduction by Murray Rothbard , Free Life Editions, 1975.

ISBN 091415611X .

References [ edit ] ^ Paul Bonnefon (1892).

Œuvres complètes d'Estienne de La Boétie (Bordeaux: C. Gounouilhou, and Paris: J. Rouam et Cie.), pp. 385–386 (available online in pdf format at Gallica ).

^ a b Keohane, Nannerl O. (1977). "The Radical Humanism of Étienne De La Boétie".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

38 (1): 119– 130.

doi : 10.2307/2708844 .

JSTOR 2708844 .

^ Kurz, Harry (1950). "Montaigne and La Boétie in the Chapter on Friendship".

PMLA .

65 (4): 483– 530.

doi : 10.2307/459652 .

JSTOR 459652 .

S2CID 163176803 .

^ Mazzocchi, Paul (2018). "Desire, Friendship, and the Politics of Refusal: The Utopian Afterlives of La Boétie's Discourse on Voluntary Servitude".

Utopian Studies .

29 (2): 248– 266.

doi : 10.5325/utopianstudies.29.2.0248 .

JSTOR 10.5325/utopianstudies.29.2.0248 .

S2CID 149508037 .

^ a b Murray Rothbard .

"Ending Tyranny Without Violence" .

^ Zagorin, Perez. (2013).

How the Idea of Religious Toleration Came to the West . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1306142809 .

OCLC 863671693 .

^ Aldrich, Robert; Wotherspoon, Garry (2001).

Who's who in Gay and Lesbian History: From Antiquity to World War II . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0415159821 .

^ Rockwell, Lew (11 February 2011), p. 38. n. 2. "Having remained long in manuscript, the actual date of writing the Discourse of Voluntary Servitude remains a matter of dispute. It seems clear, however, and has been so accepted by recent authorities, that Montaigne's published story that La Boétie wrote the Discourse at the age of eighteen or even of sixteen was incorrect. Montaigne's statement, as we shall see further below, was probably part of his later campaign to guard his dead friend's reputation by dissociating him from the revolutionary Huguenots who were claiming La Boétie's pamphlet for their own. Extreme youth tended to cast the Discourse in the light of a work so youthful that the radical content was hardly to be taken seriously as the views of the author. Internal evidence as well as the erudition expressed in the work make it likely that the Discourse was written in 1552 or 1553, at the age of twenty-two, while La Boétie was at the university." See Paul Bonnefon (1892), pp. 390–391; and Donald Frame, Montaigne: A Biography (New York: Harcourt Brace, & World, 1965), p. 71 (37–38 n. 2).

^ Roland Bleiker (2000), '' Popular Dissent. Human Agency and Global Politics . Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521778298 (pp. 86–87).

^ John Holloway.

Crack Capitalism . Pluto Press (2010). p. 6.

ISBN 978-0745330082 .

Further reading [ edit ] Keohane, Nannerl O. (1977). 'The Radical Humanism of Étienne de la Boétie', Journal of the History of Ideas . 38:119–130.

Lablénie, Edmond (1930). 'L'Énigme de la "Servitude Volontaire"', Revue du seizième siècle . 17:203–227 [French].

Podoksik, Efraim (2003). 'Estienne de La Boëtie and the Politics of Obedience', Bibliothèque d'Humanisme et Renaissance . LXV(1): 83–95.

Presley, Sharon (2008).

"La Boétie, Étienne de (1530–1563)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage/ Cato Institute . p. 277.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n165 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

External links [ edit ] Étienne de La Boétie at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude , from The Ludwig von Mises Institute , Online Edition ( PDF ).

(in English) Discours de la servitude volontaire , translated and with an introduction about its reception .

(in French) Text on Wikisource .

Poetry (in French) .

(in Dutch) Vertoog over de Vrijwillige Slavernij (pdf) Etiennedelaboetie.net – website dedicated to the works and life of Etienne de La Boétie (in English, German, and French) Étienne de La Boétie: Against Voluntary Servitude – Discourse on the fall of tyrants Online-Exhibition (2012).

Works by Étienne de La Boétie at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Portals : Economics France Liberalism Libertarianism Philosophy Politics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Étienne_de_La_Boétie&oldid=1302895205 " Categories : 1530 births 1563 deaths People from Sarlat-la-Canéda Catholic libertarians Catholic philosophers French Roman Catholic writers Nonviolence advocates French political philosophers Renaissance humanists 16th-century French philosophers 16th-century French male writers 16th-century Roman Catholics French male non-fiction writers Libertarian theorists Proto-anarchists 16th-century French poets French male poets College of Guienne alumni Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Occitan (post 1500)-language text Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 00:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Étienne de La Boétie 48 languages Add topic

