Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 World War I and Zimmerwald 1.3 Russian Revolution and aftermath 2 Philosophy 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Revolutionary socialism 23 languages العربية বাংলা Català Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Socialist revolution ) Socialist political ideology stressing revolution "Socialist revolution" redirects here. The term may also refer to Communist revolution .

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Revolutionary socialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Revolutionary socialism is a political philosophy , doctrine, and tradition within socialism that stresses the idea that a social revolution is necessary to bring about structural changes in society. More specifically, it is the view that revolution is a necessary precondition for transitioning from a capitalist to a socialist mode of production . Revolution is not necessarily defined as a violent insurrection; it is defined as a seizure of political power by mass movements of the working class so that the state is directly controlled or abolished by the working class as opposed to the capitalist class and its interests.

[ 1 ] Revolutionary socialists believe such a state of affairs is a precondition for establishing socialism and orthodox Marxists believe it is inevitable but not predetermined. Revolutionary socialism encompasses multiple political and social movements that may define "revolution" differently from one another. These include movements based on orthodox Marxist theory such as De Leonism , impossibilism and Luxemburgism , as well as movements based on Leninism and the theory of vanguardist -led revolution such as the Stalinism , Maoism , Marxism–Leninism and Trotskyism . Revolutionary socialism also includes other Marxist , Marxist-inspired and non-Marxist movements such as those found in democratic socialism , revolutionary syndicalism , anarchism and social democracy .

[ 2 ] Revolutionary socialism is contrasted with reformist socialism , especially the reformist wing of social democracy and other evolutionary approaches to socialism. Revolutionary socialism is opposed to social movements that seek to gradually ameliorate capitalism's economic and social problems through political reform.

[ 3 ] According to a 2025 study, rebels fighting under a revolutionary socialist ideology were able to sustain insurgencies more effectively than other kinds of rebels. However, because they posed a credible threat to incumbent regimes, revolutionary socialist rebels triggered a more powerful counter-mobilization , which meant that the insurgents were not more likely to win the civil war.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] This section possibly contains original synthesis .

Source material should verifiably mention and relate to the main topic.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Portrait of Karl Marx in 1875 In The Communist Manifesto , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels wrote: The proletariat, the lowest stratum of our present society, cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, without the whole superincumbent strata of official society being sprung into the air. Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle. The proletariat of each country must, of course, first of all settle matters with its own bourgeoisie. In depicting the most general phases of the development of the proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging within existing society, up to the point where that war breaks out into open revolution, and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of the proletariat. [...] The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; [...] The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution.

[ 5 ] Twenty-four years after The Communist Manifesto , first published in 1848, Marx and Engels admitted that in developed countries, "labour may attain its goal by peaceful means".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Marxist scholar Adam Schaff argued that Marx, Engels, and Lenin had expressed such views "on many occasions".

[ 8 ] By contrast, the Blanquist view emphasised the overthrow by force of the ruling elite in government by an active minority of revolutionaries, who then proceeded to implement socialist change, disregarding the state of readiness of society as a whole and the mass of the population in particular for revolutionary change.

[ citation needed ] In 1875, the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) published a somewhat reformist Gotha Program , which Marx attacked in Critique of the Gotha Program , where he reiterated the need for the dictatorship of the proletariat . The reformist viewpoint was introduced into Marxist thought by Eduard Bernstein , one of the leaders of the SPD. From 1896 to 1898, Bernstein published a series of articles entitled " Probleme des Sozialismus " ("Problems of Socialism"). These articles led to a debate on revisionism in the SPD and can be seen as the origins of a reformist trend within Marxism.

[ citation needed ] In 1900, Rosa Luxemburg wrote Social Reform or Revolution?

, a polemic against Bernstein's position. The work of reforms, Luxemburg argued, could only be carried on "in the framework of the social form created by the last revolution". In order to advance society to socialism from the capitalist 'social form', a social revolution will be necessary: Bernstein, thundering against the conquest of political power as a theory of Blanquist violence, has the misfortune of labeling as a Blanquist error that which has always been the pivot and the motive force of human history. From the first appearance of class societies, having class struggle as the essential content of their history, the conquest of political power has been the aim of all rising classes. Here is the starting point and end of every historic period. [...] In modern times, we see it in the struggle of the bourgeoisie against feudalism.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] In 1902, Vladimir Lenin attacked Bernstein's position in his What Is to Be Done?

When Bernstein first put forward his ideas, the majority of the SPD rejected them. The 1899 congress of the SPD reaffirmed the Erfurt Program , as did the 1901 congress. The 1903 congress denounced "revisionist efforts".

[ citation needed ] World War I and Zimmerwald [ edit ] On 4 August 1914, the SPD members of the Reichstag voted for the government's war budget, while the French and Belgian socialists publicly supported and joined their governments. The Zimmerwald Conference in September 1915, attended by Lenin and Leon Trotsky , saw the beginning of the end of the uneasy coexistence of revolutionary socialists and reformist socialists in the parties of the Second International . The conference adopted a proposal by Trotsky to avoid an immediate split with the Second International. Though initially opposed to it, Lenin voted [ 11 ] for Trotsky's resolution to avoid a split among anti-war socialists.

In December 1915 and March 1916, eighteen Social Democratic representatives, the Haase - Ledebour Group, voted against war credits and were expelled from the Social Democratic Party. Liebknecht wrote Revolutionary Socialism in Germany in 1916, arguing that this group was not a revolutionary socialist group despite their refusal to vote for war credits, further defining in his view what was meant by a revolutionary socialist.

[ 12 ] Russian Revolution and aftermath [ edit ] Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Vladimir Lenin , founder of the Soviet Union and the leader of the Bolshevik party .

Leon Trotsky , founder of the Red Army and a key figure in the October Revolution .

Many revolutionary socialists argue that the Russian Revolution led by Vladimir Lenin follows the revolutionary socialist model of a revolutionary movement guided by a vanguard party . By contrast, the October Revolution is portrayed as a coup d'état or putsch along the lines of Blanquism .

[ citation needed ] Revolutionary socialists, particularly Trotskyists, argue that the Bolsheviks only seized power as the expression of the mass of workers and peasants, whose desires are brought into being by an organised force—the revolutionary party. Marxists such as Trotskyists argue that Lenin did not advocate seizing power until he felt that the majority of the population, represented in the soviets , demanded revolutionary change and no longer supported the reformist government of Alexander Kerensky established in the earlier revolution of February 1917. In the Lessons of October , Leon Trotsky wrote: Lenin, after the experience of the reconnoiter, withdrew the slogan of the immediate overthrow of the Provisional Government. But he did not withdraw it for any set period of time, for so many weeks or months, but strictly in dependence upon how quickly the revolt of the masses against the conciliationists would grow.

[ 13 ] [ non-primary source needed ] For these Marxists, the fact that the Bolsheviks won a majority (in alliance with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries ) in the second all-Russian congress of Soviets—democratically elected bodies—which convened at the time of the October revolution, shows that they had the popular support of the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers, the vast majority of Russian society.

[ citation needed ] In his pamphlet Lessons of October , first published in 1924, [ 14 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Trotsky argued that military power lay in the hands of the Bolsheviks before the October Revolution was carried out, but this power was not used against the government until the Bolsheviks gained mass support.

[ citation needed ] The mass of soldiers began to be led by the Bolshevik party after July 1917 and followed only the orders of the Military Revolutionary Committee under the leadership of Trotsky in October, also termed the Revolutionary Military Committee in Lenin's collected works.

[ 15 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Trotsky mobilized the Military Revolutionary Committee to seize power on the advent of the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies , which began on 25 October 1917.

[ citation needed ] The Communist International (also known as the Third International) was founded following the October Revolution . This International became widely identified with communism but also defined itself in terms of revolutionary socialism. However, in 1938 Trotskyists formed the Fourth International because they thought that the Third International turned to Marxism–Leninism —this latter International became identified with revolutionary socialism.

Luxemburgism is another revolutionary socialist tradition.

[ citation needed ] Emerging from the Communist International but critical of the post-1924 Soviet Union , the Trotskyist tradition in Western Europe and elsewhere uses the term "revolutionary socialism". In 1932, the first issue of the first Canadian Trotskyist newspaper, The Vanguard , published an editorial entitled "Revolutionary Socialism vs Reformism".

[ 16 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Today, many Trotskyist groups advocate revolutionary socialism instead of reformism and consider themselves revolutionary socialists. The Committee for a Workers International states, "[w]e campaign for new workers' parties and for them to adopt a socialist programme. At the same time, the CWI builds support for the ideas of revolutionary socialism".

[ 17 ] [ non-primary source needed ] In "The Case for Revolutionary Socialism", Alex Callinicos from the Socialist Workers Party in Britain argues in favour of it.

[ 18 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Philosophy [ edit ] Revolutionary socialist discourse has long debated the question of how the preordained revolution moment would originate, i.e., the extent to which revolt needs to be concertedly organized and by whom.

[ 19 ] Rosa Luxemburg, in particular, was known for her theory of revolutionary spontaneity.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Critics argued that Luxemburg overstated the role of spontaneity and neglected the role of party organization.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Socialism portal Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-syndicalism Authoritarian socialism Communism Criticism of capitalism Libertarian socialism Political revolution References [ edit ] ^ Thompson, Carl D. (October 1903).

"What Revolutionary Socialism Means" (PDF) .

The Vanguard . Vol. 2, no. 2. Green Bay: Socialist Party of America . Retrieved 31 August 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Kautsky, Karl (1903) [1902].

The Social Revolution . Translated by Simons, Algie Martin; Simons, May Wood. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr & Co . Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Cox, Ronald W. (October 2019).

"In Defense of Revolutionary Socialism: The Implications of Bhaskar Sunkara's 'The Socialist Manifesto' " .

Class, Race and Corporate Power .

7 (2).

doi : 10.25148/CRCP.7.2.008327 . Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via ResearchGate.

^ Balcells, Laia; Kalyvas, Stathis N. (2025).

"Ideology and Revolution in Civil Wars: The "Marxist Paradox" " .

American Political Science Review .

doi : 10.1017/S0003055425000188 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

^ Engels, Friedrich ; Marx, Karl (1969) [1848].

"I. Bourgeois and Proletarians" .

The Communist Manifesto .

Marx/Engels Collected Works . Vol. I. Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

98– 137 . Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Engels, Friedrich; Marx, Karl (187 September 1872).

"La Liberté Speech" . The Hague Congress of the International. Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via the Marxist Internet Archive. "[W]e do not deny that there are countries like England and America, [...] where labour may attain its goal by peaceful means." ^ Engels, Friedrich, Marx, Karl (1962).

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels on Britain . Moscow: Foreign Languages Press.

^ Schaff, Adam (April–June 1973). "Marxist Theory on Revolution and Violence".

Journal of the History of Ideas . University Press of Pennsylvania.

34 (2): 263–270.

doi : 10.2307/2708729 .

JSTOR 2708729 . "Both Marx and Engels and, later, Lenin on many occasions referred to a peaceful revolution, that is, one attained by a class struggle, but not by violence." ^ Luxemburg, Rosa (1986) [1900].

"8: Conquest of Political Power" .

Social Reform or Revolution?

. London: Militant Publications . Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Luxemburg, Rosa (1970).

Rosa Luxemburg Speaks (2nd ed.). Pathfinder. pp.

107– 108.

ISBN 978-0873481465 .

^ Fagan, Guy (1980).

Biographical Introduction to Christian Rakovsky, Selected Writings on Opposition in the USSR 1923–30 (1st ed.). London and New York: Allison & Busby and Schocken Books.

ISBN 978-0850313796 . Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Liebknecht, Karl (1919) [1916].

"Revolutionary Socialism in Germany" . In Fraina, Louis C. (ed.).

The Social Revolution in Germany . The Revolutionary Age Publishers . Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1937) [1924].

Lessons of October .

"Chapter Four: The April Conference" . Translated by Wright, John. G. New York: Pioneer Publishers. Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via the Marxist Internet Archive.

^ Trotsky, Leon (1937) [1924].

Lessons of October . Translated by Wright, John. G. New York: Pioneer Publishers. Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via the Marxist Internet Archive.

^ Trotsky, Leon.

Lessons of October .

"Chapter Six: On the Eve of the October Revolution – the Aftermath" . Translated by Wright, John. G. New York: Pioneer Publishers. Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via the Marxist Internet Archive. "On October 16th the Military Revolutionary Committee was created, the legal Soviet organ of insurrection." ^ "Revolutionary Socialism vs Reformism" .

The Vanguard (1). 1932. Retrieved 22 September 2020 – via the Socialist History Project.

^ [1] . Committee for a Workers International.

Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 27 September 2007 – via the Socialist World .

^ Callinicos, Alex (7 December 2003).

"The Case for Revolutionary Socialism" . Socialist Workers Party.

Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 22 September 2020.

^ Gandio, Jason Del; Thompson, A. K. (2017-08-28).

Spontaneous Combustion: The Eros Effect and Global Revolution . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-1-4384-6727-6 .

^ Talmon, Jacob L. (1991).

Myth of the Nation and Vision of Revolution: Ideological Polarization in the Twentieth Century .

Routledge . p. 70.

ISBN 9781412848992 .

^ Guérin, Daniel (2017).

For a Libertarian Communism . PM Press. p. 75.

ISBN 978-1-62963-236-0 .

^ Nowak, Leszek; Paprzycki, Marcin (1993).

Social System, Rationality and Revolution . Rodopi.

ISBN 978-90-5183-560-1 .

v t e Revolutionary socialism Concepts Class conflict Communist revolution Communization Foco Impossibilism People's war Permanent revolution Platformism Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Revolutionary base area Revolutionary terror Situationist prank Social revolution United front Vanguardism World revolution Tendencies Blanquism De Leonism Insurrectionary anarchism Mao-spontex Syndicalism Groups The Invisible Committee Situationist International People Mikhail Bakunin Louis Auguste Blanqui Daniel De Leon Régis Debray Friedrich Engels Che Guevara Abimael Guzmán Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Vladimir Lenin Karl Liebknecht Rosa Luxemburg Mao Zedong Karl Marx Thomas Sankara Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Related topics Anarchist communism Anarcho-pacifism Collectivist anarchism General strike Popular front Radical feminism Reformism Refusal of work Socialism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐474qj
Cached time: 20250815203214
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.675 seconds
Real time usage: 0.841 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4963/1000000
Revision size: 20608/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 162823/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14212/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93417/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.431/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23548999/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  705.347      1 -total
 22.88%  161.393      1 Template:Reflist
 21.04%  148.395      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.61%  117.150      1 Template:Socialism_sidebar
 11.25%   79.366      1 Template:Lang
 10.41%   73.442     14 Template:Fix
  9.19%   64.818      1 Template:Cite_news
  8.82%   62.197      1 Template:Short_description
  7.86%   55.438     10 Template:Cite_book
  7.53%   53.126      8 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42549239:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815203214 and revision id 1295804729. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Revolutionary_socialism&oldid=1295804729 " Categories : Economic ideologies History of socialism Political theories Types of socialism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from August 2018 All articles lacking reliable references Articles that may contain original research from September 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles containing German-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2023 This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Revolutionary socialism 23 languages Add topic

