Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Similar real-world projects 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Arcology 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of design principles for human habitats Not to be confused with Archaeology .

Part of a series on Sustainable energy Energy conservation Arcology Building insulation Cogeneration Compact fluorescent lamp Eco hotel Eco-cities Ecohouse Ecolabel Efficient energy use Energy audit Energy efficiency implementation Energy recovery Energy recycling Energy saving lamp Energy Star Energy storage Environmental planning Environmental technology Fossil fuel phase-out Glass in green buildings Green building and wood Green building Heat pump List of low-energy building techniques Low-energy house Microgeneration Passive house Passive solar building design Sustainable architecture Sustainable city Sustainable habitat Sustainable refurbishment Thermal energy storage Tropical green building Waste-to-energy Zero heating building Zero-energy building Renewable energy Biofuel Sustainable Biogas Biomass Carbon-neutral fuel Geothermal energy Geothermal power Geothermal heating Hydropower Hydroelectricity Micro hydro Pico hydro Run-of-the-river Small hydro Marine current power Marine energy Tidal power Tidal barrage Tidal farm Tidal stream generator Ocean thermal energy conversion Renewable energy transition Renewable heat Solar Wave Wind Community Farm Floating wind turbine Forecasting Industry Lens Outline Rights Turbine Windbelt Windpump Sustainable transport Green vehicle Electric vehicle Bicycle Solar vehicle Wind-powered vehicle Human-electric Twike Plug-in Human-powered transport Helicopter Hydrofoil Land vehicle Bicycle Cycle rickshaw Kick scooter Quadracycle Tricycle Velomobile Roller skating Skateboarding Walking Watercraft Personal transporter Rail transport Tram Rapid transit Personal rapid transit Category Renewable energy portal v t e Concept design for the NOAH ( New Orleans Arcology Habitat) proposal, designed by E. Kevin Schopfer [ 1 ] Arcology , a portmanteau of " architecture " and " ecology ", [ 2 ] is a field of creating architectural design principles for very densely populated and ecologically low-impact human habitats.

The term was coined in 1969 by architect Paolo Soleri , who believed that a completed arcology would provide space for a variety of residential, commercial, and agricultural facilities while minimizing individual human environmental impact .

[ 3 ] These structures have been largely hypothetical, as no large-scale arcology has yet been built.

The concept has been promoted by various science fiction writers.

Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle provided a detailed description of an arcology in their 1981 novel Oath of Fealty .

William Gibson popularized the term in his seminal 1984 cyberpunk novel Neuromancer , where each corporation has its own self-contained city known as an arcology. More recently, authors such as Peter Hamilton in Neutronium Alchemist and Paolo Bacigalupi in The Water Knife explicitly used arcologies as part of their scenarios. They are often portrayed as self-contained or economically self-sufficient .

Development [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An arcology is distinguished from a merely large building in that it is designed to lessen the impact of human habitation on any given ecosystem . It could be self-sustainable, employing all or most of its own available resources for a comfortable life: power, climate control, food production, air and water conservation and purification, sewage treatment, etc. An arcology is designed to make it possible to supply those items for a large population. An arcology would supply and maintain its own municipal or urban infrastructures in order to operate and connect with other urban environments apart from its own.

Arcologies were proposed in order to reduce human impact on natural resources. Arcology designs might apply conventional building and civil engineering techniques in very large, but practical projects in order to achieve pedestrian economies of scale that have proven, post-automobile, to be difficult to achieve in other ways.

Frank Lloyd Wright proposed an early version [ 4 ] called Broadacre City although, in contrast to an arcology, his idea is comparatively two-dimensional and depends on a road network. Wright's plan described transportation, agriculture, and commerce systems that would support an economy. Critics said that Wright's solution failed to account for population growth, and assumed a more rigid democracy than the US actually has.

Buckminster Fuller with a drawing of his domed city proposal Buckminster Fuller proposed the Old Man River's City project , a domed city with a capacity of 125,000, as a solution to the housing problems in East St. Louis, Illinois .

Paolo Soleri proposed later solutions, and coined the term "arcology".

[ 5 ] Soleri describes ways of compacting city structures in three dimensions to combat two-dimensional urban sprawl , to economize on transportation and other energy uses. Like Wright, Soleri proposed changes in transportation, agriculture, and commerce. Soleri explored reductions in resource consumption and duplication, land reclamation; he also proposed to eliminate most private transportation. He advocated for greater "frugality" and favored greater use of shared social resources, including public transit (and public libraries).

Similar real-world projects [ edit ] Arcosanti city Arcosanti is an experimental "arcology prototype", a demonstration project under construction in central Arizona since 1970. Designed by Paolo Soleri , its primary purpose is to demonstrate Soleri's personal designs, his application of principles of arcology to create a pedestrian-friendly urban form.

Many cities in the world have proposed projects adhering to the design principles of the arcology concept, like Tokyo , and Dongtan near Shanghai .

[ 6 ] The Dongtan project may have collapsed, and it failed to open for the Shanghai World Expo in 2010.

[ 7 ] The Ihme-Zentrum in Hanover was an attempt to build a "city within a city".

McMurdo Station McMurdo Station of the United States Antarctic Program and other scientific research stations on Antarctica resemble the popular conception of an arcology as a technologically advanced, relatively self-sufficient human community. The Antarctic research base provides living and entertainment amenities for roughly 3,000 staff who visit each year. Its remoteness and the measures needed to protect its population from the harsh environment give it an insular character. The station is not self-sufficient: The U.S. military delivers 30,000,000 liters (8,000,000 US gal) of fuel and 5 kilotonnes (11 million pounds) of supplies and equipment yearly through its Operation Deep Freeze resupply effort, [ 8 ] but it is isolated from conventional support networks. Under international treaty , it must avoid damage to the surrounding ecosystem.

Begich Towers Begich Towers operates like a small-scale arcology encompassing nearly all of the population of Whittier, Alaska . The building contains residential housing as well as a police station, grocery, and municipal offices.

[ 9 ] The Line was planned as a 170-kilometre (110 mi) long and 200-metre (660 ft) wide linear smart city in Saudi Arabia in Neom , Tabuk Province , designed to have no cars, streets or greenhouse gas emissions .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The Line is planned to be the first development in Neom , a $500 billion project.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The city's plans anticipated a population of 9 million.

[ 16 ] Excavation work had started along the entire length of the project by October 2022. However, the project was scaled down in 2024 to 2.4 kilometres (1.5 mi) long, housing 300,000 people.

[ 17 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Most proposals to build real arcologies have failed due to financial, structural or conceptual shortcomings. Arcologies are therefore found primarily in fictional works.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In Robert Silverberg 's The World Inside , most of the global population of 75 billion live inside giant skyscrapers, called "urbmons", each of which contains hundreds of thousands of people. The urbmons are arranged in "constellations". Each urbmon is divided into "neighborhoods" of 40 or so floors. All the needs of the inhabitants are provided inside the building — food is grown outside and brought into the building — so the idea of going outside is heretical and can be a sign of madness.

[ 20 ] The book examines human life when the population density is extremely high.

[ 21 ] Another significant example is the 1981 novel Oath of Fealty by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle , in which a segment of the population of Los Angeles has moved into an arcology. The plot examines the social changes that result, both inside and outside the arcology. Thus the arcology is not just a plot device but a subject of critique.

[ 22 ] In the city-building video game SimCity 2000 , self-contained arcologies can be built, reducing the infrastructure needs of the city.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The isometric, cyberpunk-themed action roleplay game The Ascent takes place in a futuristic dystopian version of an arcology on the alien world Veles and prominently uses the structure and its levels to flesh out progression in the game, starting the player in the bottom levels of the sewers with the ultimate goal of reaching the top of the structure to leave the city.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Autonomous building – Building designed to be independent from public infrastructure Bionic architecture – Contemporary architetonic movement Domed city – Large urban area enclosed within a dome Earthship – Style of architecture that uses native materials and upcycled materials to build homes Kowloon Walled City – Former slum in Hong Kong Megastructure – Very large artificial object List of visionary tall buildings and structures Shimizu Mega-City Pyramid – Proposed arcology project in Japan Underground city – Series of linked subterranean spaces Urban ecology – Scientific study of living organisms Vertical farming – Practice of growing crops in vertically stacked layers References [ edit ] ^ Seth, Radhika.

"Heavenly Abode" on the Yanko Design website (August 17, 2009). Retrieved April 29, 2015.

^ Soleri, Paolo (1973), The Bridge Between Matter & Spirit is Matter Becoming Spirit; The Arcology of Paolo Soleri , Garden City, New York : Anchor Books , pp.

46 , ISBN 978-0-385-02361-0 .

^ Grierson, David (2003).

"Arcology and Arcosanti: Towards a Sustainable Built Environment" .

Electronic Green Journal .

1 (18).

doi : 10.5070/G311810506 .

^ Wright, Frank Lloyd, "An Organic Architecture" ^ Soleri, Paolo, "Arcology: The City in the Image of Man" ^ Kane, Frank (November 6, 2005).

"British to help China build 'eco-cities' " .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved April 25, 2010 .

^ Fred Pearce (23 April 2009).

"Greenwash: The dream of the first eco-city was built on a fiction" .

the Guardian .

^ Modern Marvels: Sub-Zero . The History Channel.

^ "Everyone In This Alaskan Town Lives In The Same Building" .

digg.com .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Summers, Nick (2021-01-11).

"Saudi Arabia is planning a 100-mile line of car-free smart communities" .

Engadget .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-12 . Retrieved 2021-01-12 .

^ "Top Global Oil Exporter Saudi Arabia Launches Car-free City" .

Barron's . 2021-01-10.

Archived from the original on 2021-01-11 . Retrieved 2021-01-12 .

^ "What is The Line? All you need to know about Saudi Arabia's plan for a futuristic zero-carbon city" .

The Free Press Journal .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-11 . Retrieved 2021-01-12 .

^ "An Accelerator of human progress" .

NEOM .

Archived from the original on 2020-12-08 . Retrieved 2021-01-10 .

^ Tangermann, Victor (2021-01-12).

"Saudi Arabia Is Building a Zero-Carbon City in a 100-Mile Straight Line" .

Futurism .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-13 . Retrieved 2021-01-13 .

^ McKay, Tom (2021-01-12).

"Saudi Crown Prince Asks, Answers What if a City, But It's a 105-Mile Line" .

Microsoft News .

Gizmodo .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-13 . Retrieved 2021-01-13 .

^ "Saudi Arabia plans 100-mile-long mirrored skyscraper megacity" .

the Guardian . 27 July 2022.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2022 . Retrieved 29 July 2022 .

^ Nolsøe, Eir (9 April 2024).

"Why Mohammed bin Salman has been forced to rein in his dreams of a mirror city" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Ash, Theodore (2014) Neoarcology ^ Tate, Karl (July 5, 2013) "Inside Arcology, the City of the Future (Infographic)" Live Science ^ Silverberg, Robert (1971).

The World Inside . New York: Doubleday. pp. 3–4.

^ Stableford, Brian "Silverberg, Robert" in Clute, John and Nicholls, Peter (eds.) (1995) The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction New York: St. Martin's Griffin. p. 1106.

ISBN 0-312-13486-X ^ Seed, David (2011) Science Fiction: A Very Short Introduction ^ Luke Plunkett (11 July 2011).

"The Real Story Behind Sim City's Arcologies" .

Kotaku .

^ Alex Hern (14 March 2013).

"The depressing suburbanisation of SimCity" .

New Statesman .

^ Kelly, Andy (29 July 2021).

"The Ascent's cyberpunk metropolis is way cooler than Night City" .

PC Gamer .

Further reading [ edit ] Soleri, Paolo (1969).

Arcology: The City in the Image of Man . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arcology .

Arcology: The City in the Image of Man by Paolo Soleri (full text online) Arcology.com – useful links The Night Land by William Hope Hodgson (full text online) Victory City A discussion of arcology concepts What is an Arcology?

Usage of "arcology" vs. "hyperstructure" Arcology.com ("An arcology in southern China" on front page) Arcology ("An arcology is a self-contained environment...") SculptorsWiki: Arcology ("The only arcology yet on Earth...") Review of Shadowrun: Renraku Arcology ("What's an arcology? A self-contained, largely self-sufficient living, working, recreational structure...") v t e Emerging technologies Fields Architecture 3D concrete printing Arcology Construction 3D printing Contour crafting Domed city Seasteading Smog tower Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arcology&oldid=1293122630 " Categories : Megastructures Exploratory engineering Environmental design Human habitats Planned communities Urban studies and planning terminology Cyberpunk themes Architecture related to utopias Proposed arcologies Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from August 2023 All articles that may contain original research Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arcology 31 languages Add topic

