Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principle of operation Toggle Principle of operation subsection 1.1 Readout 1.2 Limitations 2 Types and applications Toggle Types and applications subsection 2.1 Particle detection 2.2 Gamma and X-ray detection 2.3 Neutron detection 2.4 Gamma measurement—personnel protection and process control 2.5 Physical design 2.6 Guidance on application use 3 History 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Geiger counter 62 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Instrument used for measuring ionizing radiation For the album, see Geiger Counter (album) .

Geiger–Müller counter A "two-piece" bench-type Geiger–Müller counter using a cylindrical end-window detector connected to an electronics module with analogue readout Other names Geiger Counter Inventor Hans Geiger , Walther Müller Related items Geiger–Müller tube The sound of a geiger counter A Geiger counter ( / ˈ ɡ aɪ ɡ ər / , GY -gər ; [ 1 ] also known as a Geiger–Müller counter or G-M counter ) is an electronic instrument for detecting and measuring ionizing radiation with the use of a Geiger–Müller tube . It is widely used in applications such as radiation dosimetry , radiological protection , experimental physics and the nuclear industry .

"Geiger counter" is often used generically to refer to any form of dosimeter (or, radiation-measuring device ), but scientifically, a Geiger counter is only one specific type of dosimeter.

It detects ionizing radiation such as alpha particles , beta particles , and gamma rays using the ionization effect produced in a Geiger–Müller tube , which gives its name to the instrument.

[ 2 ] In wide and prominent use as a hand-held radiation survey instrument , it is perhaps one of the world's best-known radiation detection instruments.

The original detection principle was realized in 1908 at the University of Manchester , [ 3 ] but it was not until the development of the Geiger–Müller tube in 1928 that the Geiger counter could be produced as a practical instrument. Since then, it has been very popular due to its robust sensing element and relatively low cost. However, there are limitations in measuring high radiation rates and the energy of incident radiation.

[ 4 ] The Geiger counter is one of the first examples of data sonification .

[ 5 ] Principle of operation [ edit ] Diagram of a Geiger counter using an "end window" tube for low-penetration radiation. A loudspeaker is also used for indication.

Main article: Geiger–Müller tube A Geiger counter consists of a Geiger–Müller tube (the sensing element which detects the radiation) and the processing electronics, which display the result.

The Geiger–Müller tube is filled with an inert gas such as helium , neon , or argon at low pressure, to which a high voltage is applied. The tube briefly conducts electrical charge when high energy particles or gamma radiation make the gas conductive by ionization.  The ionization is considerably amplified within the tube by the Townsend discharge effect to produce an easily measured detection pulse, which is fed to the processing and display electronics. This large pulse from the tube makes the Geiger counter relatively cheap to manufacture, as the subsequent electronics are greatly simplified.

[ 4 ] The electronics also generate the high voltage, typically 400–900 volts, that has to be applied to the Geiger–Müller tube to enable its operation. This voltage must be carefully selected, as too high a voltage will allow for continuous discharge, damaging the instrument and invalidating the results. Conversely, too low a voltage will result in an electric field that is too weak to generate a current pulse.

[ 6 ] The correct voltage is usually specified by the manufacturer. To help quickly terminate each discharge in the tube a small amount of halogen gas or organic material known as a quenching mixture is added to the fill gas.

Readout [ edit ] There are two types of detected radiation readout: counts and radiation dose .

The counts display is the simplest, and shows the number of ionizing events detected, displayed either as a count rate, such as "counts per minute" or "counts per second", or as a total number of counts over a set time period (an integrated total). The counts readout is normally used when alpha or beta particles are being detected.

More complex to achieve is a display of radiation dose rate, displayed in units such as the sievert , which is normally used for measuring gamma or X-ray dose rates. A Geiger–Müller tube can detect the presence of radiation, but not its energy , which influences the radiation's ionizing effect. Consequently, instruments measuring dose rate require the use of an energy compensated Geiger–Müller tube, so that the dose displayed relates to the counts detected.

[ 4 ] The electronics will apply known factors to make this conversion, which is specific to each instrument and is determined by design and calibration.

The readout can be analog or digital, and modern instruments offer serial communications with a host computer or network.

There is usually an option to produce audible clicks representing the number of ionization events detected. This is the distinctive sound associated with handheld or portable Geiger counters. The purpose of this is to allow the user to concentrate on manipulation of the instrument while retaining auditory feedback on the radiation rate.

Limitations [ edit ] There are two main limitations of the Geiger counter: Because the output pulse from a Geiger–Müller tube is always of the same magnitude (regardless of the energy of the incident radiation), the tube cannot differentiate between radiation types or measure radiation energy, which prevents it from correctly measuring dose rate .

[ 4 ] The tube is less accurate at high radiation rates, because each ionization event is followed by a "dead time", an insensitive period during which any further incident radiation does not result in a count. Typically, the dead time will reduce indicated count rates above about 10 4 to 10 5 counts per second, depending on the characteristic of the tube being used.

[ 4 ] While some counters have circuitry which can compensate for this, for measuring very high dose rates, ion chamber instruments are preferred for high radiation rates.

Types and applications [ edit ] Geiger counter with pancake type probe Laboratory use of a Geiger counter with end-window probe to measure beta radiation The intended detection application of a Geiger counter dictates the tube design used. Consequently, there are a great many designs, but they can be generally categorized as "end-window", windowless "thin-walled", "thick-walled", and sometimes hybrids of these types.

Particle detection [ edit ] The first historical uses of the Geiger principle were to detect α- and β-particles, and the instrument is still used for this purpose today. For α-particles and low energy β-particles, the "end-window" type of a Geiger–Müller tube has to be used, as these particles have a limited range and are easily stopped by a solid material. Therefore, the tube requires a window which is thin enough to allow as many as possible of these particles through to the fill gas. The window is usually made of mica with a density of about 1.5–2.0 mg/cm 2 .

[ 2 ] α-particles have the shortest range, and to detect these the window should ideally be within 10 mm of the radiation source due to α-particle attenuation .

[ 2 ] However, the Geiger–Müller tube produces a pulse output which is the same magnitude for all detected radiation, so a Geiger counter with an end window tube cannot distinguish between α- and β-particles.

[ 4 ] A skilled operator can use varying distance from a radiation source to differentiate between α- and high energy β-particles.

The "pancake" Geiger–Müller tube is a variant of the end-window probe, but designed with a larger detection area to make checking quicker. However, the pressure of the atmosphere against the low pressure of the fill gas limits the window size due to the limited strength of the window membrane.

Some β-particles can also be detected by a thin-walled "windowless" Geiger–Müller tube, which has no end-window, but allows high energy β-particles to pass through the tube walls. Although the tube walls have a greater stopping power than a thin end-window, they still allow these more energetic particles to reach the fill gas.

[ 2 ] End-window Geiger counters are still used as a general purpose, portable, radioactive contamination measurement and detection instrument, owing to their relatively low cost, robustness and relatively high detection efficiency; particularly with high energy β-particles.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] However, for discrimination between α- and β-particles or provision of particle energy information, scintillation counters or proportional counters should be used.

[ 8 ] Those instrument types are manufactured with much larger detector areas, which means that checking for surface contamination is quicker than with a Geiger counter.

Gamma and X-ray detection [ edit ] Geiger counters are widely used to detect gamma radiation and X-rays , collectively known as photons , and for this the windowless tube is used. However, detection efficiency is low compared to alpha and beta particles.
The article on the Geiger–Müller tube carries a more detailed account of the techniques used to detect photon radiation. For high energy photons, the tube relies on the interaction of the radiation with the tube wall, usually a material with a high atomic number such as stainless steel of 1–2 mm thickness, to produce free electrons within the tube wall, due to the photoelectric effect . If these migrate out of the tube wall, they enter and ionize the fill gas.

[ 4 ] This effect increases the detection efficiency because the low-pressure gas in the tube has poorer interaction with higher energy photons than a steel tube. However, as photon energies decrease to low levels, there is greater gas interaction, and the contribution of direct gas interaction increases. At very low energies (less than 25 keV ), direct gas ionisation dominates, and a steel tube attenuates the incident photons. Consequently, at these energies, a typical tube design is a long tube with a thin wall which has a larger gas volume, to give an increased chance of direct interaction of a particle with the fill gas.

[ 2 ] Above these low energy levels, there is a considerable variance in response to different photon energies of the same intensity, and a steel-walled tube employs what is known as "energy compensation" in the form of filter rings around the naked tube, which attempts to compensate for these variations over a large energy range.

[ 2 ] A steel-walled Geiger–Müller tube is about 1% efficient over a wide range of energies.

[ 2 ] Neutron detection [ edit ] Geiger tube filled with BF 3 for detection of thermal neutrons A variation of the Geiger tube can be used to exclusively measure radiation dosage from neutrons rather than from gammas by the process of neutron capture . The tube, which can contain the fill gas boron trifluoride or helium-3 , is surrounded by a plastic moderator that reduces neutron energies prior to capture. When a capture occurs in the fill gas, the energy released is registered in the detector.

A modern one-piece Geiger–Müller counter, including Geiger–Müller tube type 70 019 (at the top) Gamma measurement—personnel protection and process control [ edit ] While "Geiger counter" is practically synonymous with the hand-held variety, the Geiger principle is in wide use in installed "area gamma" alarms for personnel protection, as well as in  process measurement and interlock applications. The processing electronics of such installations have a higher degree of sophistication and reliability than those of hand-held meters.

Physical design [ edit ] Pancake G-M tube used for alpha and beta detection; the delicate mica window is usually protected by a mesh when fitted in an instrument.

For hand-held units there are two fundamental physical configurations: the "integral" unit with both detector and electronics in the same unit, and the "two-piece" design which has a separate detector probe and an electronics module connected by a short cable.

In the 1930s a mica window was added to the cylindrical design allowing low-penetration radiation to pass through with ease.

[ 9 ] The integral unit allows single-handed operation, so the operator can use the other hand for personal security in challenging monitoring positions, but the two piece design allows easier manipulation of the detector, and is commonly used for alpha and beta surface contamination monitoring where careful manipulation of the probe is required or the weight of the electronics module would make operation unwieldy. A number of different sized detectors are available to suit particular situations, such as placing the probe in small apertures or confined spaces.

Gamma and X-Ray detectors generally use an "integral" design so the Geiger–Müller tube is conveniently within the electronics enclosure. This can easily be achieved because the casing usually has little attenuation, and is employed in ambient gamma measurements where distance from the source of radiation is not a significant factor. However, to facilitate more localised measurements such as "surface dose", the position of the tube in the enclosure is sometimes indicated by targets on the enclosure so an accurate measurement can be made with the tube at the correct orientation and a known distance from the surface.

There is a particular type of gamma instrument known as a "hot spot" detector which has the detector tube on the end of a long pole or flexible conduit. These are used to measure  high radiation gamma locations whilst protecting the operator by means of distance shielding.

Particle detection of alpha and beta can be used in both integral and two-piece designs. A pancake probe (for alpha/beta) is generally used to increase the area of detection in two-piece instruments whilst being relatively light weight. In integral instruments using an end window tube there is a window in the body of the casing to prevent shielding of particles.  There are also hybrid instruments which have a separate probe for particle detection and a gamma detection tube within the electronics module. The detectors are switchable by the operator, depending the radiation type that is being measured.

Guidance on application use [ edit ] In the United Kingdom the National Radiological Protection Board issued a user guidance note on selecting the best portable  instrument type for the radiation measurement application concerned.

[ 8 ] This covers all radiation protection instrument technologies and includes a guide to the use of G-M detectors.

History [ edit ] Rutherford & Geiger  particle counter (1908). Alpha particles from a source in the firing tube were admitted through aperture "D" to the detecting vessel, which was a brass tube with a central co-axial wire "B" at a relative potential of 1320 volts DC. The aperture had a mica window so the detecting vessel could run at an absolute pressure of 2-5 mm of mercury. These conditions enabled creation of a Townsend discharge for every alpha particle entering the vessel. At very low count rates these registered as "kicks" on an electrometer needle.

Early Geiger–Müller tube made in 1932 by Hans Geiger for laboratory use In 1908 Hans Geiger , under the supervision of Ernest Rutherford at the Victoria University of Manchester (now the University of Manchester ), developed an experimental technique for detecting alpha particles that would later be used to develop the Geiger–Müller tube in 1928.

[ 10 ] This early counter was only capable of detecting alpha particles and was part of a larger experimental apparatus. The fundamental ionization mechanism used was discovered by John Sealy Townsend between 1897 and 1901, [ 11 ] and is known as the Townsend discharge , which is the ionization of molecules by ion impact.

It was not until 1928 that Geiger and Walther Müller (a PhD student of Geiger) developed the sealed Geiger–Müller tube which used basic ionization principles previously used experimentally. Small and rugged, not only could it detect alpha and beta radiation as prior models had done, but also gamma radiation.

[ 9 ] [ 12 ] Now a practical radiation instrument could be produced relatively cheaply, and so the Geiger counter was born. As the tube output required little electronic processing, a distinct advantage in the thermionic valve era due to minimal valve count and low power consumption, the instrument achieved great popularity as a portable radiation detector.

Modern versions of the Geiger counter use halogen quench gases, a technique invented in 1947 by Sidney H. Liebson .

[ 13 ] Halogen compounds have superseded the organic quench gases because of their much longer life and lower operating voltages; typically 400-900 volts.

[ 14 ] Gallery [ edit ] Use of a "hot spot" detector on a long pole to survey waste casks.

G-M pancake detector (right) feeding a microcontroller data-logger (left) sending data to a PC via bluetooth . A radioactive rock was placed on the detector causing the graph (in background) to rise.

G-M counters being used in the search for debris of satellite Kosmos 954 See also [ edit ] Becquerel , the SI unit of the radioactive decay rate of a quantity of radioactive material Civil defense Geiger counters , handheld radiation monitors, both G-M and ion chambers Counting efficiency the ratio of radiation events reaching a detector and the number it counts Data sonification , the interpretation or processing of data by sound Dosimeter , a device used by personnel to measure what radiation dose they have received Ionization chamber , the simplest ionising radiation detector Gaseous ionization detector , an overview of the main gaseous detector types Geiger–Müller tube , provides a more detailed description of Geiger–Müller tube operation and types Geiger plateau , the correct operating voltage range for a Geiger–Müller tube Photon counting Radioactive decay , the process by which unstable atoms emit radiation Safecast (organization) , use of Geiger–Müller counter technology in citizen science Scintillation counter , a gasless radiation detector Sievert , the SI unit of stochastic effects of radiation on the human body References [ edit ] ^ "Geiger counter | Pronunciation in English" .

^ a b c d e f g ’’Geiger Muller Tubes; issue 1’’ published by Centronics Ltd, UK.

^ E. Rutherford and H. Geiger (1908) "An electrical method of counting the number of α particles from radioactive substances," Proceedings of the Royal Society (London), Series A, vol. 81, no. 546, pages 141–161.

^ a b c d e f g h Glenn F Knoll.

Radiation Detection and Measurement , third edition 2000. John Wiley and Sons, ISBN 0-471-07338-5 ^ "What is Sonification - Accessible Oceans" .

What is data sonificaiton . Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute . Retrieved 2024-05-30 .

^ Siegel, Peter; Eskandari, Sephir.

"Introduction to Geiger Counters" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-02-21.

^ "G-M detector function and measuring methods" . Retrieved 2017-03-07 .

^ a b [1] Archived 2018-07-30 at the Wayback Machine Selection, use and maintenance of portable monitoring instruments. UK HSE ^ a b Korff, Sebastian (2012). "Das Geiger-Müller-Zählrohr".

NTM Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Wissenschaften, Technik und Medizin .

20 (4): 271– 308.

doi : 10.1007/s00048-012-0080-y .

PMID 23233194 .

^ E. Rutherford and H. Geiger (1908) "An electrical method of counting the number of α particles from radioactive substances," Proceedings of the Royal Society (London) , Series A, vol. 81, no. 546, pages 141–161.

^ John S. Townsend (1901) "The conductivity produced in gases by the motion of negatively charged ions," Philosophical Magazine , series 6, 1 (2) :  198-227.

^ See: H. Geiger and W. Müller (1928), "Elektronenzählrohr zur Messung schwächster Aktivitäten" (Electron counting tube for the measurement of the weakest radioactivities), Die Naturwissenschaften (The Sciences), vol. 16, no. 31, pages 617–618.

Geiger, H. and Müller, W. (1928) "Das Elektronenzählrohr" (The electron counting tube), Physikalische Zeitschrift , 29 : 839-841.

Geiger, H. and Müller, W. (1929) "Technische Bemerkungen zum Elektronenzählrohr" (Technical notes on the electron counting tube), Physikalische Zeitschrift , 30 : 489-493.

Geiger, H. and Müller, W. (1929) "Demonstration des Elektronenzählrohrs" (Demonstration of the electron counting tube), Physikalische Zeitschrift , 30 : 523 ff.

^ Liebson, S. H. (1947).

"The Discharge Mechanism of Self-Quenching Geiger–Mueller Counters" (PDF) .

Physical Review .

72 (7): 602– 608.

Bibcode : 1947PhRv...72..602L .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRev.72.602 .

hdl : 1903/17793 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-09-21.

^ "History of Portable Radiation Detection Instrumentation from the period 1920–60" .

Archived from the original on 2009-01-13 . Retrieved 2008-07-15 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Geiger counters at Wikimedia Commons How a Geiger counter works.

v t e Radiation protection Main articles Background radiation Dosimetry Health physics Ionizing radiation Internal dosimetry Radioactive contamination Radioactive sources Radiobiology Measurement quantities and units Absorbed dose Becquerel Committed dose Computed tomography dose index Counts per minute Effective dose Equivalent dose Gray Mean glandular dose Monitor unit Rad Roentgen Rem Sievert Instruments and measurement techniques Airborne radioactive particulate monitoring Dosimeter Geiger counter Ion chamber Scintillation counter Proportional counter Radiation monitoring Semiconductor detector Survey meter Whole-body counting Protection techniques Lead shielding Glovebox Potassium iodide Radon mitigation Respirators Organisations Euratom HPS (USA) IAEA ICRU ICRP IRPA SRP (UK) UNSCEAR Regulation IRR (UK) NRC (USA) ONR (UK) Radiation Protection Convention, 1960 Radiation effects Acute radiation syndrome Radiation-induced cancer See also the categories Medical physics , Radiation effects , Radioactivity , Radiobiology , and Radiation protection Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5pgtk
Cached time: 20250817044254
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.379 seconds
Real time usage: 0.476 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1722/1000000
Revision size: 24431/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 40635/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1712/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54528/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.226/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6535574/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  392.838      1 -total
 31.97%  125.587      1 Template:Reflist
 18.75%   73.672      4 Template:Cite_web
 18.03%   70.844      1 Template:Radiation_protection
 17.58%   69.051      1 Template:Navbox
 15.63%   61.402      1 Template:Short_description
  8.25%   32.408      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.08%   31.735      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.49%   25.488      1 Template:Infobox_laboratory_equipment
  5.81%   22.822      1 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12984:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044254 and revision id 1303693768. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geiger_counter&oldid=1303693768 " Categories : Particle detectors Laboratory equipment Counting instruments Ionising radiation detectors 1908 introductions 1928 introductions English inventions German inventions Radiation protection Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 14:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geiger counter 62 languages Add topic

