Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient Greek philosophy 2 Medieval philosophy 3 Modern science 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of matter 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français ГӀалгӀай Հայերեն Ido Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Taclḥit Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Matter (philosophy) ) Branch of philosophy relating to the material world This article is about matter in philosophy. For other uses, see Matter (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Philosophy of matter" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Philosophy of matter is the branch of philosophy concerned with issues surrounding the ontology , epistemology and character of matter and the material world. The word matter is derived from the Latin word materia , meaning "wood", or “timber”, in the sense "material", as distinct from "mind" or "form".

[ 1 ] The image of wood came to Latin as a calque from the ancient Greek philosophical usage of hyle (ὕλη).

Ancient Greek philosophy [ edit ] In ancient Greek philosophy , arche (ἀρχή) is the beginning or the first principle of the world.

Thales of Miletus claimed that the first principle of all things is water. His theory was supported by the observation of moisture throughout the world and coincided with his theory that the earth floated on water.

Thales's theory was refuted by his pupil and successor, Anaximander . Anaximander noted that water could not be the arche because it could not give rise to its opposite, fire. Anaximander claimed that none of the elements (earth, fire, air, water) could be arche for the same reason. Instead, he proposed the existence of the apeiron , an indefinite substance from which all things are born and to which all things will return.

Anaximenes , Anaximander's pupil, advanced yet another theory. He returns to the elemental theory, but this time posits air, rather than water, as the arche. Anaximenes suggests that all is made from air through either rarefication or condensation (thinning or thickening). Rarefied, air becomes fire; condensed, it becomes first wind, then cloud, water, earth, and stone in order.

Pythagoras of Samos , a mathematician, mystic, and scientist, taught that number, rather than matter, constitutes the true nature of things. He seems to have influenced Socrates' ideal form .

Heraclitus held that all is flux. In such a system there is no need for or possibility of matter.

Leucippus held that there exist indivisible particles, atoms , underlying existence.

Empedocles held that there are four elements , from which things are derived, Earth , Water , Fire and Air . Some added a fifth element, the Aether , from which the heavens were derived.

Socrates accepted (or at least did not reject) that list, as seen from Plato's Timaeus , which identified the five elements with the Platonic solids . Earth was associated with the cube , air with the octahedron , water with the icosahedron , fire with the tetrahedron , and the heavens with the dodecahedron .

Aristotle , rejecting the atomic theory, instead analyzed the four terrestrial elements with the sense of touch: Air is primarily wet and secondarily hot.

Fire is primarily hot and secondarily dry.

Earth is primarily dry and secondarily cold.

Water is primarily cold and secondarily wet.

He developed Socrates' ideal form into a theory which aimed to explain existence through the composition of matter and form. He conceived of matter as a passive possibility that something might be actualized by an active principle, a substantial form, giving it real existence. The theory of matter and form came to be known as Hylomorphism .

Aristotle's ideas had little impact on the ancient world. The rise of Stoicism represented the return to earlier ideas. Their categories were an attempt to explain all existence without reference to anything incorporeal .

Philo held that matter is the basis of evil.

Plotinus revived the ideas of Plato and Aristotle .

Medieval philosophy [ edit ] Many Christians , such as Augustine of Hippo , accepted Plotinus as the greatest of the pagan philosophers . Parts of Plotinus' Six Enneads were translated into Arabic as the Theology of Aristotle , leading to a blossoming of Aristotle's philosophy in the Islamic world. This Islamic version of Aristotle eventually reached the University of Paris and the attention of scholastic philosophy, and the work of Thomas Aquinas .

Modern science [ edit ] From a philosophical viewpoint, the term "matter" still is used to distinguish the material aspects of the universe from those of the spirit.

[ 2 ] The rise of modern chemistry and physics marked a return to the atomic theories of Leucippus.

Quantum physics and special relativity however, complicate the picture through the identification of matter and energy , particle and wave .

See also [ edit ] Hylomorphism Materialism Mereological essentialism Substantial form Notes [ edit ] ^ Oxford English Dictionary : "matter" ^ Henri Bergson (2004). "Introduction".

Matter and Memory (Reprint of edition of 1904 ed.). Courier Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-43415-X .

Further reading [ edit ] Gideon Manning (ed.), Matter and Form in Early Modern Science and Philosophy , Leiden, Brill, 2012.

Ernan Mc Mullin (ed.), The Concept of Matter in Greek and Medieval Philosophy , Notre Dame, University of Notre Dame Press, 1965.

Ernan Mc Mullin (ed.), The Concept of Matter in Modern Philosophy , Notre Dame, University of Notre Dame Press, 1978.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of matter at Wiktionary v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_matter&oldid=1134581374 " Category : Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 January 2023, at 11:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of matter 35 languages Add topic

