Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Population 2 History 3 Media 4 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 4.1 Philippine-born 4.2 Filipino ancestry 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Filipino Australians 2 languages Cebuano Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian citizens of Filipino ancestry Ethnic group Filipino Australians Mga Australyanong Pilipino Total population 408,836 by ancestry (2021 census) [ 1 ] ( 1.6% of the Australian population ) [ 1 ] 300,620 born in the Philippines (2021) [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations Sydney , Melbourne , Perth , Brisbane , Adelaide Languages Australian English , Tagalog , Visayan languages ( Cebuano , Hiligaynon ), Kapampangan , Pangasinan , Ilocano , other Philippine languages Religion Roman Catholicism · Protestantism · Irreligion [ citation needed ] Related ethnic groups Filipino people , Overseas Filipinos , Filipino Americans , Filipino Canadians Filipino Australians ( Filipino : Mga Australyanong Pilipino ) are Australians of Filipino ancestry. Filipino Australians are one of the largest groups within the global Filipino diaspora . At the 2021 census, 408,836 people stated that they had Filipino ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), representing 1.6% of the Australian population.

[ 1 ] In 2021, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that there were 310,620 Australian residents born in the Philippines.

[ 2 ] Population [ edit ] People born in the Philippines as a percentage of the population in Sydney divided geographically by postal area, as of the 2011 census Currently Filipinos are the third largest Asian Australian immigrant group behind Chinese Australians and Indian Australians .

[ 3 ] At the 2021 census, 408,836 people stated that they had Filipino ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), representing 1.6% of the Australian population.

[ 1 ] In 2021, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that there were 310,620 Australian residents born in the Philippines.

[ 2 ] At the 2021 census, the states with the largest numbers of people reporting Filipino ancestry were: New South Wales (152,804), Victoria (95,186), Queensland (73,805), Western Australia (46,785) and South Australia (21,257).

[ 3 ] Females account for 61% while males represent 39% of Filipino Australians born in the Philippines.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] During the 1800s until the early 20th century, Broome became the pearling capital of the world. Filipinos worked as divers, crew, shell openers, and sorters. Eventually, they married with local women in Broome.

[ 5 ] Filipinos were excluded from entering Australia under the White Australia policy . As a consequence, their numbers in Australia remained minimal; confined to descendants of those few Filipinos who had migrated to the north west pearling areas of Western Australia and the sugar cane plantations of Queensland prior to 1901; until the abolition of racially selective immigration policies in 1966.

[ 6 ] The 1901 census had recorded 700 Filipinos in Australia.

[ 6 ] The number of permanent settlers arriving in Australia from the Philippines since 1991 (monthly) Martial law in the Philippines, declared by former Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos in 1972, and the renunciation of the White Australia policy made Australia an attractive destination for Filipino emigrants, particularly skilled workers. Many Filipinos also settled in Australia from the 1970s onward as either migrant workers or the spouses of Australian citizens. Marriages between Filipinos and Australians rose very sharply from 1978, peaked in 1986, and remained high as of 2000, despite a dip in the early 1990s.

[ 7 ] The 1980s were the period of the greatest Filipino immigration, with 1987-1988 being the peak year.

[ 6 ] Media [ edit ] The Philippine Times is Victoria 's longest-running community paper. The first edition was published in November 1990.

[ 8 ] Notable people [ edit ] Philippine-born [ edit ] Aljin Abella , actor from the TV series Power Rangers Jungle Fury Migo Adecer , singer, dancer, model, and actor Jhoanna Aguila , singer, and The Voice Australia Season 3 contestant Alyssa Alano , actress and model Leila Alcasid , singer and songwriter Joey Mead King , model, VJ, and TV and events host Shar Mae Amor , singer and former Paradiso Girls member Hannah Arnold , model and beauty queen, crowned Binibining Pilipinas 2021 Mig Ayesa , theatre actor and rock vocalist Merlinda Bobis , writer Shey Bustamante , reality show contestant Arianne Caoili , chess player Israel Cruz , singer Kathleen de Leon Jones , original Hi-5 member Felino Dolloso , theatre actor Ben Gonzales , rugby league player Sef Gonzales , convicted murderer Nathalie Hart , actress Fely Irvine , former Hi-5 member Jal Joshua , singer, dancer, and Australia's Got Talent Season 3 1st runner-up Alfred Nicdao , actor Kylie Padilla , actress, singer and model Yshrael Pascual , singer and The Voice Australia Season 1 contestant Jim Paredes , singer, songwriter, member of APO Hiking Society trio Rose Porteous , socialite RJ Rosales , actor and musical theatre performer Claire Ruiz , actress, singer, dancer, and model Jerson Trinidad , singer and The Voice Australia Season 1 contestant Guillermo Capati , civil and environmental engineer Yeshaiah Varona , USASA City West Undergraduate Representative.

Filipino ancestry [ edit ] Abigail Adriano , singer and The Voice Kids Australia contestant Chelsea Castillo , singer and Australia's Got Talent Season 3 finalist Chris Cayzer , actor and singer Kate Ceberano , singer Genesis Cerezo , beatboxer and Australia's Got Talent Season 6 finalist Sarah Christophers , former actress Elizabeth Clenci , model and beauty queen, Miss Grand International 2017 2nd runner-up Jessica Connelly , singer and former reality show contestant Anne Curtis , actress, model, and singer Jasmine Curtis-Smith , actress and model Rod Davies , wing for Queensland Reds Super Rugby team Jason Day , golfer Ashley del Mundo , actress and former reality show contestant Ezekiel Dimaguila , reality show contestant Stef Draper , reality show contestant Kai Espenido , reality show contestant Alyssa Exala , reality show contestant Karen Gallman , model and beauty queen crowned Binibining Pilipinas Intercontinental 2018 and Miss Intercontinental 2018 Ylona Garcia , singer Kevin Gordon , Gold Coast Titans Rugby League player Catriona Gray , singer and model crowned Miss World Philippines 2016 , Miss Universe Philippines 2018 and Miss Universe 2018 Payne Haas , Brisbane Broncos Rugby League player Sheralyn Hill , singer, The X Factor Australia Season 6 finalist, and former TRILL member Jessica Jade , singer, The X Factor Australia Season 6 finalist, and former TRILL member Mojo Juju , musician Clinton Kane , singer Kelebek , rapper, The X Factor Australia Season 5 finalist, and former Third Degree member Stephanie Lacerna , singer and Idol Philippines contestant Philip Lampart , reality show contestant Michael Letts , rugby player Vanessa Librea , singer and The Voice Australia Season 11 contestant Jericho Malabonga , winner of the fourth series of Australian Survivor Reyanna Maria , singer and rapper Janette McBride , former actress Michael McCoy , reality show contestant Reef McInnes , Australian rules footballer Natalie Mendoza , actress ( Hotel Babylon ) Rebecca Jackson Mendoza , actress, singer, and dancer Paul Merciadez , singer, dancer, and member of dance group Justice Crew Bella Micucci , singer and The Voice Teens Philippines Season 2 contestant Patrick Miller , Married at First Sight Australia Season 5 star Montaigne , singer Seann Miley Moore , singer, The X Factor U.K.

Season 12 finalist, and The Voice Australia Season 10 contestant Kenneth Moraleda , director & actor Bobby Morley , actor from Home and Away and The 100 TV series Charlotte Nicdao , actress Cyrell Paule , Married at First Sight Australia Season 6 star John Pearce , singer, dancer, member of Justice Crew, and member of children's music group The Wiggles Lenny Pearce , singer, dancer, and member of Justice Crew Mick Pennisi , basketball player Chad Peralta, singer Marlisa Punzalan , winner of the sixth series of The X Factor Australia Iain Ramsay , professional football (soccer) player. Has chosen to represent the Philippines national football team at the international level.

James Reid , actor, singer, and dancer Lauren Reid , model, actress, events and television host, and blogger Sheldon Riley , singer, 2022 Australian Eurovision representative , The Voice Australia Season 7 2nd runner-up, The X Factor Australia Season 8 finalist Nina Robertson , beauty queen crowned Miss Earth Australia 2017 Marissa Saroca , singer and The Voice of the Philippines Season 1 contestant Nicole Schmitz , beauty queen and model crowned Binibining Pilipinas 2012 , Miss International 2012 Top 15 finalist Naomi Sequeira , actress and singer, Hanging with Adam & Naomi , The Evermoor Chronicles Monique Shippen , model, singer and beauty queen crowned Miss Earth Australia 2018 and Miss International Australia 2019 Flip Simmons , theatre actor and musician Starley , singer Calmell Teagle , singer, The X Factor Australia Season 8 finalist, and former AYA member Melanie Vallejo , actress from the TV series Power Rangers: Mystic Force Michelle Vergara Moore , actress from the TV series The Time of Our Lives Matthew Victor Pastor , film director Iya Villania , singer, actress and model Cyrus Villanueva , winner of the seventh series of The X Factor Australia Craig Wing , Australian Rugby League player ( South Sydney Rabbitohs ) Trinity Young , singer and The Voice Kids Australia contestant Gwen Zamora , actress and model See also [ edit ] Australia portal Philippines portal Australia–Philippines relations Embassy of the Philippines, Canberra References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "2021 Census Community Profiles: Australia" .

www.censusdata.abs.gov.au .

^ a b c "Table 5.1 - Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

^ a b "Census of Population and Housing: Cultural diversity data summary, 2021" .

^ "2016 Census Community Profiles: Australia" .

www.censusdata.abs.gov.au . Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .

^ Ladrido, R. C. (8 January 2024).

"The Manilamen and their Australian Connection" .

VERA Files . Retrieved 9 January 2024 .

^ a b c "The Philippines-born Community - Historical background" . Department of Immigration and Citizenship. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 .

^ "Family Formation: Cultural diversity in marriages" .

4102.0 - Australian Social Trends, 2000 . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 4 July 2000 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 .

^ Martinez, Madriel (9 February 2024).

"PhilTimes' George Gregorio on new beginnings, maxing seven credit cards and serving the community" .

SBS Filipino . Retrieved 11 February 2024 .

External links [ edit ] The Philippine Consulate General in Sydney Archived 21 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine Embassy of the Philippines in Canberra Pinoy Australia Information Forum Bayanihan The Community Newspaper of Australia Ang Kalatas Newspaper Filipin-Oz News of Filipino's in Australia and Business Directory Philtimes.com.au Australia's Filipino newspaper v t e Overseas Filipinos Africa Egypt Libya Nigeria South Africa Uganda Americas Brazil Canada Chile [ es ] Cuba Honduras [ zh ] Mexico United States template Demographics History Asia East Asia China Hong Kong Japan South Korea Taiwan South Asia India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Southeast Asia Indonesia Malaysia Singapore Thailand West Asia Bahrain Israel Kuwait Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Turkey United Arab Emirates Europe Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Spain Sweden [ sv ] Switzerland Ukraine [ uk ] United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Palau v t e Asian Australians Central Asia Afghan Hazara Armenian Azeri Georgian Kazakh Kyrgyz Pathan Tatar Tajik Turkmen Uzbek Uyghur East Asia Chinese Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hakka Hoklo Hong Konger Tibetan Japanese Korean Mongolian Taiwanese South Asia Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Indian Indo-Fijian Bengali Gujarati Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Maldivian Nepalese Pakistani Baloch Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Sri Lankan Tamil Southeast Asia Burmese Mon Chin Cambodian East Timorese Filipino Hmong Indonesian Javanese Madurese Sundanese Acehnese Balinese Karen Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Mien Singaporean Thai Vietnamese History General Immigration Topics Organized crime Politics Stereotypes East Asians South Asians According to Australian Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic Groups (ASCCEG) [1] Category Commons v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Filipino_Australians&oldid=1306526796 " Categories : Asian diaspora in Australia Filipino diaspora by country Australian people of Filipino descent Australia–Philippines relations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2017 Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 06:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Filipino Australians 2 languages Add topic

