Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Author 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents James R. Newman 7 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mathematician, science policy bureaucrat and historian James R. Newman Born 1907 Died 1966 Known for Mathematics and the Imagination Scientific career Fields mathematics James Roy Newman (1907–1966) was an American mathematician and mathematical historian. He was also a lawyer , practicing in the state of New York from 1929 to 1941. During and after World War II , he held several positions in the United States government, including Chief Intelligence Officer at the US Embassy in London , Special Assistant to the Undersecretary of War , and Counsel to the US Senate Committee on Atomic Energy . In the latter capacity, he helped to draft the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 . He became a member of the board of editors for Scientific American beginning in 1948. He is also credited for first publishing the mathematical term " googol " in his book Mathematics and The Imagination , co-authored with Edward Kasner .

Author [ edit ] In 1940 Newman and Edward Kasner wrote Mathematics and the Imagination , in which they reported the mathematical idea of a very large but finite number, called a " googol ", consisting of 1 followed by 100 zeroes, and a larger number called a " googolplex ". In 1942 Newman wrote The Tools of War , which was an illustrated examination of warfare. In 1948 he published The control of atomic energy with Byron S. Miller. In 1955 he wrote What is Science .

In 1956 Newman published The World of Mathematics , a four-volume library on the literature of mathematics from A'h-mosé the Scribe to Albert Einstein , presented with commentaries and notes (1956). The four volumes cover many branches of mathematics and represent a 15-year effort by Newman to collect what he felt were the most important essays in the field. With essays ranging from a biography of Srinivasa Ramanujan by Newman to Bertrand Russell 's "Definition of Number", the series is often praised as suitable for any level of mathematical maturity . The series has been reprinted several times by various publishers.

[ 1 ] Newman also wrote Gödel's Proof (1958) with Ernest Nagel , presenting the main results of Gödel's incompleteness theorem and the mathematical work and philosophies leading up to its discovery in a more accessible manner.

[ 2 ] This book inspired Douglas Hofstadter to take up the study of mathematical logic, write his famous book Gödel, Escher, Bach , and prepare a second edition of Gödel's Proof , published in 2002.

Works [ edit ] 1940: (with Edward Kasner ) Mathematics and the Imagination 1942 The Tools of War 1948: The Control of Atomic Energy via Internet Archive 1955: What is Science ?

1956: The World of Mathematics , 4 volumes, 2535 pages, Simon and Schuster LCCN 55-10060 1958: Nagel, Ernest ; Newman, James R.

(1958).

Gödel's Proof . New York: New York University Press – via Internet Archive .

1961: Science and Sensibility 1962: The Rule of Folly 1963: The Harper Encyclopedia of Science References [ edit ] ^ David E. H. Jones (1989) "The World of Mathematics by James R. Newman" , Nature ^ Nagel, Ernest; Newman, James R.

(1958).

Gödel's Proof . New York: New York University Press – via Internet Archive .

External links [ edit ] Obituary: J.R. Newman , The New York Times 29 May, 1966 Lionel E. Deimel (2003) "Where Are You When I Need You, James R. Newman?" , (poem re The World of Mathematics ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_R._Newman&oldid=1304897616 " Categories : 1907 births 1966 deaths 20th-century American mathematicians American historians of mathematics 20th-century American historians Lawyers from New York City Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James R. Newman 7 languages Add topic

