Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Areas of study 1.2 Independence as a discipline 2 Psychogenic mode Toggle Psychogenic mode subsection 2.1 A psychoclass for postmodern times 3 Criticisms 4 Organizations 5 Notable psychohistorians 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychohistory 23 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic discipline For Isaac Asimov's use of the term in science fiction, see Foundation universe § Psychohistory .

Psychohistory is a transdisciplinary field of knowledge that represents an amalgam of psychology , history , psychoanalysis , political psychology , anthropology , ethnology , and related social sciences , art, and humanities .

[ 1 ] Psychohistorians examine the "why's" of history, utilizing the bottom-up approach rather than starting with psychological theories. They combine the insights of psychodynamic psychology, especially psychoanalysis , with the research methodology of the social sciences and humanities, to understand the emotional origin of the behavior of individuals, groups and nations, past and present. Psychohistorians are interested in examining one's childhood, personality, family dynamics , as well as dreams, overcoming adversity, creativity, group and political affiliations.

Description [ edit ] Rembrandt's painting of the sacrifice of Isaac ( Gen .22). Psychohistory holds that ritual child sacrifice once occurred in most cultures.

Psychohistorians claim to derive many of its concepts from areas that are perceived to be ignored by conventional historians and anthropologists as shaping factors of human history, in particular, the effects of parenting practice and child abuse.

[ 2 ] According to conventional historians "the science of culture is independent of the laws of biology and psychology " [ 3 ] and "the determining cause of a social fact should be sought among social facts preceding and not among the states of individual consciousness ".

[ 4 ] Psychohistorians, on the other hand, suggest that social behavior such as crime and war may be a self-destructive re-enactment of earlier abuse and neglect; that unconscious flashbacks to early fears and destructive parenting could dominate individual and  social behavior.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Psychohistory relies heavily on historical biography. Notable examples of psychobiographies are those of Lewis Namier , who wrote about the British House of Commons , and Fawn Brodie , who wrote about Thomas Jefferson .

Areas of study [ edit ] There are three inter-related areas of psychohistorical study.

[ 7 ] 1. The history of childhood – which looks at such questions as: How have children been raised throughout history How has the family been constituted How and why have practices changed over time The changing place and value of children in society over time How and why our views of child abuse and neglect have changed 2.

Psychobiography – which  seeks to understand individual historical people and their motivations in history.

[ citation needed ] 3. Group psychohistory – which  seeks to understand the motivations of large groups, including nations, in history and current affairs.  In doing so, psychohistory advances the use of group-fantasy analysis of political speeches, political cartoons and media headlines since the loaded terms , metaphors and repetitive words therein offer clues to unconscious thinking and behaviors.

[ 7 ] Independence as a discipline [ edit ] Psychohistorians have argued that psychohistory is a separate field of scholarly inquiry with its own particular methods, objectives and theories, which set it apart from conventional historical analysis and anthropology. Some historians, social scientists and anthropologists have, however, argued that their disciplines already describe psychological motivation and that psychohistory is not, therefore, a separate subject. Others regard it as an undisciplined field of study, due to its emphasis given to speculation on the psychological motivations of people in history. Doubt has also been cast on the viability of the application of post-mortem psychoanalysis by Freud's followers.

[ 8 ] Psychohistorians maintain that the difference is one of emphasis and that, in conventional study, narrative and description are central, while psychological motivation is hardly touched upon.

[ 9 ] Psychohistorians accuse most anthropologists and ethnologists of being apologists for incest, infanticide, cannibalism and child sacrifice.

[ 10 ] They maintain that what constitutes child abuse is a matter of objective fact, and that some of the practices which mainstream anthropologists apologize for (e.g., sacrificial rituals) may result in psychosis , dissociation and magical thinking.

Psychogenic mode [ edit ] Lloyd deMause has described a system of psychogenic modes (see below) which describe the range of styles of parenting he has observed historically and across cultures.

[ 11 ] Psychohistorians have written much about changes in the human psyche through history; changes that they believe were produced by parents, and especially the mothers' increasing capacity to empathize with their children. Due to these changes in the course of history, different psychoclasses (or psychogenic modes ) emerged. A psychoclass is a type of mentality that results from, and is associated with, a particular childrearing style, and in its turn influences the method of childrearing of the next generations. According to psychohistory theory, regardless of the changes in the environment, it is only when changes in childhood occur and new psychoclasses evolve that societies begin to progress.

[ citation needed ] The major psychogenic modes described by deMause are: [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mode Childrearing characteristics Historical manifestations Infanticidal Early infanticidal childrearing : Ritual sacrifice. High infanticide rates, incest, body mutilation, child rape and tortures.

Child sacrifice and infanticide among tribal societies, Mesoamerica and the Incas ; in Assyrian and Canaanite religions.

Phoenicians, Carthaginians and other early states also sacrificed infants to their gods.

On the other hand, the relatively more enlightened Greeks and Romans exposed some of their babies ("late" infanticidal childrearing).

Late infanticidal childrearing: While the young child is not overly rejected by the mother, many newborn babies, especially girls, are exposed to death.

Abandoning Early Christians considered a child as having a soul at birth, although possessed by evil tendencies. Routine infanticide was replaced by joining in the group fantasy of the sacrifice of Christ, who was sent by his father to be killed for the sins of others.

[ 13 ] Routine pederasty of boys continued in monasteries and elsewhere, and the rape of girls was commonplace.

[ 14 ] Infanticide replaced by abandonment. Those children who survived the experience did not internalize a completely murderous superego. Longer swaddling , fosterage , outside wetnursing , oblation of children to monasteries and nunneries, and apprenticeship .

Ambivalent The 12th century saw the first child instruction manuals and rudimentary child protection laws, although most mothers still emotionally rejected their children.

[ 13 ] Children were often treated as erotic objects by adults.

The later Middle Ages ended abandonment of children to monasteries. Early beating, shorter swaddling, mourning for deceased children, a precursor to empathy .

Intrusive During the 16th century, particularly in England, parents shifted from trying to stop children's growth to trying to control them and make them obedient. Parents were prepared to give them attention as long as they controlled their minds, their insides, their anger and the lives they led.

[ 13 ] The intrusive parent began to unswaddle the infant. Early toilet training, repression of child's sexuality.

Hell threats turned into the Puritan child so familiar from early modern childrearing literature. On the other hand, the end of swaddling and wet-nursing made possible the explosive modern takeoff in scientific advance.

Socializing Beginning in the 18th century, mothers began to enjoy child care, and fathers began to participate in younger children's development.

[ 13 ] The aim remained instilling parental goals rather than encouraging individuation.

Manipulation and spanking were used to make children obedient. Hellfire and the harsher physical disciplinary actions using objects to beat the child disappeared.

[ 13 ] The Socializing Mode remains the most popular model of parenting in North America and Western Europe to the present day.

Use of guilt, "mental discipline", humiliation , time-out , rise of compulsory schooling , delegation of parental unconscious wishes. As parental injections continued to diminish, the rearing of the child became less a process of conquering its will than of training it. The socializing psychoclass built the modern world.

[ 13 ] Helping Beginning in the mid-20th century, some parents adopted the role of helping children reach their own goals in life, rather than " socialize " them into fulfilling parental wishes. Less manipulation, more unconditional love. Children raised in this way are far more empathic towards others in society than earlier generations.

[ 13 ] Children's rights movement , natural childbirth , the abandonment of circumcision , attachment parenting , Taking Children Seriously , unconditional parenting, Parent Effectiveness Training , deschooling and free schooling .

Psychohistorians maintain that the five modes of abusive childrearing (excluding the "helping mode") are related to psychiatric disorders from psychoses to neuroses.

The chart below shows the dates at which these modes are believed to have evolved in the most advanced nations [ which?

] , based on contemporary accounts from historical records. A black-and-white version of the chart appears in Foundations of Psychohistory .

[ 13 ] The y-axis on the above chart serves as an indicator of the new stage and not a measurement of the stage's size or relation to the x-axis.

The timeline does not apply to hunter-gatherer societies. It does not apply either to the Greek and Roman world, where there was a wide variation in childrearing practices. The arrival of the Ambivalent mode of child-rearing preceded the start of the Renaissance (mid 14th century) by only one or two generations, and the arrival of the Socializing mode coincided with the Age of Enlightenment , which began in the late 18th century.

Earlier forms of childrearing coexist with later modes, even in the most advanced countries.  An example of this are reports of selective abortion (and sometimes exposure of baby girls ) [ 15 ] especially in China , Korea , Taiwan , Singapore , Malaysia , India , Pakistan , New Guinea, and many other developing countries in Asia and North Africa , [ 16 ] regions in which  millions of women are "missing".

[ 17 ] The conflict of new and old psychoclasses is also highlighted in psychohistorians' thought. This is reflected in political contrasts – for instance, in the clash between Blue State and Red State voters in the contemporary United States [ 18 ] [ 19 ] – and in civil wars.

Another key psychohistorical concept is that of group fantasy , which deMause regards as a mediating force between a psychoclass's collective childhood experiences (and the psychic conflicts emerging therefrom), and the psychoclass's behavior in politics, religion and other aspects of social life.

[ 14 ] A psychoclass for postmodern times [ edit ] According to the psychogenic theory, since Neanderthal man most tribes and families practiced infanticide, child mutilation, incest and beating of their children throughout prehistory and history.  Presently the Western socializing mode of childrearing is considered much less abusive in the field, though this mode is not yet entirely free of abuse. In the opening paragraph of his seminal essay "The Evolution of Childhood" (first article in The History of Childhood ), DeMause states: The history of childhood is a nightmare from which we have only recently begun to awaken.  The further back in history one goes, the lower the level of childcare, and the more likely children are to be killed, abandoned, beaten, terrorized and sexually abused.

[ 20 ] There is notwithstanding an optimistic trait in the field. In a world of "helping mode" parents, deMause believes, violence of any other sort will disappear as well, along with magical thinking , mental disorders, wars and other inhumanities of man against man. Although, the criticism has been made that this itself is a form of magical thinking.

[ 21 ] Criticisms [ edit ] There are no departments dedicated to "psychohistory" in any institution of higher learning, although some history departments have run courses in it. Psychohistory remains a controversial field of study, facing criticism in the academic community, [ 10 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] with critics referring to it as a pseudoscience .

[ 25 ] Psychohistory uses a plurality of methodologies, and it is difficult to determine which is appropriate to use in each circumstance. Yet this "plurality" is quite circumscribed.

In 1973, historian Hugh A. Trevor-Roper dismissed the field of psychohistory entirely in response to the publication of Walter Langer 's The Mind of Adolf Hitler .

He contended that psychohistory's methodology rested "on a defective philosophy" and was "vitiated by a defective method." [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Instead of using historical evidence to derive historical interpretations, Trevor-Roper contended that "psycho-historians move in the opposite direction. They deduce their facts from their theories; and this means, in effect, that facts are at the mercy of theory, selected and valued according to their consistence with theory, even invented to support theory." [ 26 ] [ 27 ] DeMause has received criticism on several levels. His formulations have been criticized for being insufficiently supported by credible research.

[ 28 ] He has also received criticism for being a strong proponent of the "black legend" view of childhood history (i.e. that the history of childhood was above all a history of progress, with children being far more often badly mistreated in the past).

[ 29 ] Similarly, his work has been called a history of child abuse, not childhood.

[ 30 ] The grim perspective of childhood history is known from other sources, e.g. Edward Shorter's The Making of the Modern Family and Lawrence Stone 's The Family, Sex and Marriage in England 1500-1800 . However, deMause received criticism for his repeated, detailed descriptions on childhood atrocities: [ 31 ] The reader is doubtless already familiar with examples of these psychohistorical "abuses." There is a significant difference, however, between the well-meaning and serious, if perhaps simplistic and reductionistic, attempt to understand the psychological in history and the psychohistorical expose that can at times verge on historical pornography. For examples of the more frivolous and distasteful sort of psychohistory, see Journal of Psychohistory . For more serious and scholarly attempts to understand the psychological dimension of the past, see The Psychohistory Review .

Recent psychohistory has also been criticized for being overly-entangled with DeMause, whose theories are not representative of the entire field.

[ 32 ] Organizations [ edit ] Boston University offers a Psychohistory course at the undergraduate level and has published course details.

[ 33 ] The Association for Psychohistory [ 34 ] was founded by Lloyd deMause . It has 19 branches around the globe and has for over 30 years published the Journal of Psychohistory . The International Psychohistorical Association was also founded by deMause and others in 1977 as a professional organization for the field of psychohistory. It publishes Psychohistory News and has a psychohistorical mail order lending library. The association hosts an annual convention.

[ 35 ] The Psychohistory Forum publishes the quarterly journal Clio's Psyche .  It was founded in 1983 by historian and psychoanalyst Paul H. Elovitz. This organization of academics, therapists, and laypeople holds regular scholarly meetings in New York City and at international conventions. It also sponsors an online discussion group.

In Germany, scientists taking an interest in psychohistory have met annually since 1987. In 1992, the Gesellschaft für Psychohistorie und politische Psychologie e.V.

(“Society for Psychohistory and Political Psychology”) was founded. This society issues the Jahrbuch für Psychohistorische Forschung (“Annual of Psychohistorical Research”) Notable psychohistorians [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lloyd deMause , founder of The Institute for Psychohistory.

Peter Gay , Sterling Professor at Yale University , author.

Robert Jay Lifton , a psychiatrist specializing in psychological motivations for war and terrorism.

Jerome Lee Shneidman , Editor of the Bulletin of the International Psychohistorical Association , established the Seminar in the History of Legal and Political Thought and Institutions at Columbia University .

Vamik Volkan , psychiatrist, psychoanalyst, University of Virginia professor emeritus, peacemaker, and Nobel Prize nominee.

Fawn Brodie , Professor at UCLA , and historian and biographer of Thomas Jefferson , Joseph Smith , and others.

See also [ edit ] Bicameral mentality – Hypothesis in psychology Child murder – Homicide of a minor Helicopter parent – Parent who closely manages their child's life Historicism – Approach to explaining social and cultural phenomena by studying their history Non-aggression principle – Core concept in libertarianism Poisonous pedagogy – Human Behavior Psychohistorical views on infanticide – Term used in the study of psychohistory Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Religious abuse – Abuse administered through religion Trauma model of mental disorders – Theory in psychopathology Notes [ edit ] ^ Paul H. Elovitz, Ed., Psychohistory for the Twenty-First Century (2013) p. 1-3. Note that there are varying definitions by accomplished and often distinguished psychohistorians such as Peter Loewenberg (UCLA), Charles B. Strozier (CUNY Graduate School), George Kren (Kansas State University), Bruce Mazlish (MIT), Paul Roazen (York University--Canada), J. Donald Hughes (University of Denver), Vamik Volkan (University of Virginia Medical School), Henry Lawton (Author of The Psychohistorians Handbook , 1988), Jacques Szaluta (US Merchant Marine Academy) and others.

^ Miller, Alice (1980).

For Your Own Good: Hidden Cruelty in Child-Rearing and the roots of violence . New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

ISBN 9780374522698 .

^ Murdock, G.P. (1932). "The science of culture".

American Anthropologist .

34 (2): 200– 215.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1932.34.2.02a00020 .

^ Durkheim, Émile (1962).

The Rules of the Sociological Method . IL: Free Press. p. 110.

^ Milburn, Michael A.; S.D. Conrad (1996). "The politics of denial".

Journal of Psychohistory .

23 : 238– 251.

^ Rhodes, Richard (2000).

Why They Kill: The Discoveries of a Maverick Criminologist . Vintage.

ISBN 9780375702488 .

^ a b "Lloyd deMause and Psychohistory" . Primal Psychotherapy WebPages . Retrieved 2008-03-11 .

^ [1] Review of Shrinking History on Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory - Reviewed in 1980 by Cosma Shalizi Note: The book under review criticizes the Freudian approach to psychohistory. It makes no mention of modern psychohistorical research, which uses different methods.

^ Davis, Glenn (1976).

Childhood and History in America . NY: Psychohistory Pr.

^ a b deMause, Lloyd (1988).

"On Writing Childhood History" .

Journal of Psychohistory .

16 (2 Fall).

^ Campbell, Joseph F. (2009). "Psychohistory: Creating a New Discipline".

Journal of Psychohistory .

37 (1): 2– 26.

PMID 19852236 .

^ " The Evolution of Childrearing Modes " . Archived from the original on 26 October 2009.

^ a b c d e f g h i deMause, Lloyd (January 1982).

Foundations of Psychohistory . Creative Roots Publishing. pp. 61 & 132–146.

ISBN 0-940508-01-X .

"CH 4 pp 132 - 146 - FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOHISTORY" . Archived from the original on 2006-07-03 . Retrieved 2006-07-03 .

^ a b deMause, Lloyd (2002).

The Emotional Life of Nations . NY/London: Karnak. pp.

104– 109, 391, 430ff.

^ "Female Infanticide" . Archived from the original on 2008-04-21 . Retrieved 2008-02-06 .

^ A. Gettis, J. Getis, and J. D. Fellmann (2004).

Introduction to Geography, Ninth Edition . New York:  McGraw-Hill, pp. 200f.

^ Goodkind, Daniel. (1999).

Should Prenatal Sex Selection be Restricted?: Ethical Questions and Their Implications for Research and Policy .

Population Studies, 53 (1), 49-61.

^ Dervin, Dan (2005). "George W. Bush's Second Term: Saving the World, Saving the Country".

Journal of Psychohistory .

33 : 117– 124.

^ deMause, Lloyd (2008). "[Book review of] Jonathan Schell's The Seventh Decade ".

Journal of Psychohistory .

35 : 308– 309.

^ Shore, Miles F.; deMause, Lloyd (1976).

"The Child and Historiography" .

Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

6 (3): 495.

doi : 10.2307/202668 .

JSTOR 202668 .

^ The evolution of psyche and society – deMause's explanatory chapter of The Emotional Life of Nations (op. cit.).

^ Stannard, David E. (1982).

Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory . Oxford University Press, USA.

ISBN 0-19-503044-3 .

^ Pomper, Philip (1973). "Problems of a Naturalistic Psychohistory".

History and Theory .

12 (4): 367– 388.

doi : 10.2307/2504699 .

JSTOR 2504699 .

^ Paul, Robert A. (1982). "Review of Lloyd deMause's Foundations of Psychohistory".

Journal of Psychoanalytic Anthropology .

5 : 469.

^ Hunt, Lynn (2002).

"Psychology, Pschoanalysis and Historical Thought -The Misfortunes of Psychohistory" . In Kramer Lloyd S. and Maza, Sarah C. (ed.).

A Companion to Western Historical Thought . Blackwell Publishing. pp.

337– 357.

ISBN 0-631-21714-2 .

^ a b Trevor-Roper, Hugh (February 18, 1973). "Re-inventing Hitler". The Arts.

The Sunday Times . p. 35.

^ a b Shepherd, Michael (1978).

"Clio and Psyche: the lessons of psychohistory" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

71 (6): 406– 412.

doi : 10.1177/014107687807100604 .

PMC 1436484 .

PMID 359805 .

^ Demos, John (1986).

"Child Abuse in Context: An Historian's Perspective". In Past, Present and Personal: The Family and The Life Course in American History . NY: Oxford University Press. pp.

68– 91.

^ Aries, Philippe (1975). "De l'enfant roi a l'enfant martyr".

Revue Psychologie .

68 : 6.

^ Heywood, Colin (2001).

A History of Childhood . Cambridge: Polity Press. p. 41.

^ Kohut, Thomas A. (1986). "Psychohistory as History".

The American Historical Review .

91 (2): 336– 354.

doi : 10.2307/1858137 .

JSTOR 1858137 .

PMID 11611943 .

^ Marc Comtois.

"Historical Sources On Line - A weblography of Historical Sources on the Internet" . Archived from the original on March 12, 2008.

^ Boston University has a Psychohistory Course. See [2] and CAS HI 503 at [3] Archived 2008-04-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Association for Psychohistory" .

^ "Conference and Membership" .

Bibliography [ edit ] deMause, Lloyd (1975).

A bibliography of psychohistory . Vol. 2. New York: Garland Pub. pp.

517– 62.

ISBN 0-8240-9999-0 .

PMID 11614558 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) deMause, Lloyd (1975).

The New Psychohistory . New York: Psychohistory Press.

ISBN 0-914434-01-2 .

deMause, Lloyd (1982).

Foundations of Psychohistory . New York: Creative Roots.

ISBN 0-940508-01-X . Archived from the original on 2002-10-20.

deMause, Lloyd (1984).

Reagan's America . New York: Creative Roots.

ISBN 0-940508-02-8 .

deMause, Lloyd (2002).

The Emotional Life of Nations , Publisher: Other Press; ISBN 1-892746-98-0 (available online at no cost) Ebel, Henry; deMause, Lloyd (1977).

Jimmy Carter and American fantasy: psychohistorical explorations . New York: Two Continents.

ISBN 0-8467-0363-7 .

Lawton, Henry W., The Psychohistorian's Handbook , New York: Psychohistory Press, ISBN 0-914434-27-6 (1989) Loewenberg, Peter, Decoding the Past: The Psychohistorical Approach , Transaction Pub, ISBN 1-56000-846-6 (2002) Stannard, David E., Shrinking History, On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory , Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-503044-3 (1980). A critique of the Freudian approach to psychohistory.

Szaluta, Jacques, Psychohistory: Theory and Practice , Publisher  Peter Lang, ISBN 0-8204-1741-6 (1999) External links [ edit ] The Institute for Psychohistory . This website contains over 1,500 pages of psychohistorical articles and books.

International Psychohistorical Association . The professional organization for the field of psychohistory.

Blind Trust: Leaders & followers in times of crisis : An acclaimed documentary film about the life and work of Vamik Volkan.

Clio's Psyche and The Psychohistory Forum : Psychological and Historical Insight without jargon.

German Society for Psychohistorical Research (in German).

The Institute for Social Psychohistory . Promotes research into and advocates for the field of social psychohistory.

v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Theories of history Annales Conceptual Cultural Economic Environmental Gender Historicism Marxist Macrohistory Microhistory Postcolonial Politics Postmodern Psychohistory Social List of historians History Big History v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychohistory&oldid=1300692321 " Categories : Applied psychology Child abuse Cultural history Fields of history Interdisciplinary historical research Psychoanalysis Intellectual history Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2024 Articles needing additional references from December 2022 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychohistory 23 languages Add topic

