Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Vendidad references 2 Yasht references Toggle Yasht references subsection 2.1 Mihr Yasht 2.2 Fravardin Yasht 2.3 Zamyad Yasht 3 Conclusion 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Notes 5.2 Citations 5.3 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Avestan geography 4 languages فارسی پښتو Русский Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Compilation of the geographical references in Avesta Part of a series on Zoroastrianism Primary topics Ahura Mazda Zarathustra Asha Vohu Manah Persia/Iran Faravahar Avestan Divine entities Amesha Spentas Yazatas Ahuras Daevas Fravashi Angra Mainyu Scripture and worship Zoroastrian literature Avesta Ashem Vohu Ahuna Vairya Yenghe hatam Airyaman ishya Fire Temples 101 Names of Ahura Mazda Adur Burzen-Mihr Adur Farnbag Adur Gushnasp Cypress of Kashmar Gathas Yasna Vendidad Visperad Yashts Khordeh Avesta The Rivayats Ab-Zohr Accounts and legends Dēnkard Bundahišn Book of Arda Viraf Book of Jamasp Story of Sanjan Chinvat Bridge Frashokereti History and culture Zurvanism Mazdakism Khurramites Gayomarthians Azarkeivanian Calendar Festivals Initiation Kushti Sedreh Marriage Burial Adherents Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan China Sichuan India Iranis Iran Iraq Pakistan Parsis Russia United States Uzbekistan Persecution of Zoroastrians Related topics Criticism of Zoroastrianism Zoroastrian cosmology Religious influences on Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Avestan geography refers to the investigation of place names in the Avesta and the attempt to connect them to real-world geographical sites.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is connected to but different from the cosmogony expressed in the Avesta, where place names primarily refer to mythical events or a cosmological order .

[ 3 ] Identifying such connections is important for localizing the people of the Avesta and is therefore crucial for understanding the early history of Zoroastrianism and the Iranians .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Sources for such geographical references are exclusively found in the younger Avestan portion of the text, in particular in the Vendidad and several of the Yashts . The identification of these Avestan place names with real locations is often supported by comparisons with references made in later Iranian sources.

[ 7 ] A major challenge to establish these connections is the fact that the Iranian people often used the same name for different places.

[ 8 ] As a result, not all Avestan place names can be identified with certainty with present-day locations and therefore remain subject to debate. Modern scholarship, however, agrees that the place names in the Avesta are concentrated in the eastern regions of Greater Iran up to the Indo - Iranian border.

[ 1 ] Vendidad references [ edit ] Approximate localization of the regions in the Vendidad . Differences in the scholarly opinions are indicated by color.

[ note 1 ] The main Avestan text of geographical interest is the first chapter of the Vendidad ( Avestan : vi.daēwa.dāta , 'The Law repudiating the Deavas '). It consists of a list of the sixteen good lands ( asah ) and countries ( šōiθra ) created by Ahura Mazda . Each country is introduced with a verse describing its Ohrmazdian characteristic, followed by one describing the corresponding counter-creation ( paityāra ) by Angra Mainyu . The only exceptions are the first and eleventh country on the list where two verses explain its Ahrimanic counter-creation: The first of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda , created, was the Airyanem Vaejah , by the good river Daitya.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu , who is all death, and he counter-created the serpent in the river and winter, a work of the Deavas .

There are ten winter months there, two summer months; and those are cold for the waters, cold for the earth, cold for the trees.

Winter falls there, with the worst of all plagues.

The second of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the Gava, inhabited by the Sogdians.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created the locust, which brings death unto cattle and plants.

...

The sixteenth of the good lands and countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the land by the floods of the Rangha , where people live who have no chiefs.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created winter, a work of the Daevas.

— Vendidad 5.33 - 5.35 (translated by James Darmesteter ).

[ 9 ] Early Pahlavi sources have traditionally located many of these countries in the western Iranian regions; a tendency that was followed by much of 20th century scholarship.

[ 10 ] This changed with the work of Gherardo Gnoli who argued that all place names in the Vendidad are located in the eastern part of Greater Iran, i.e. centered around modern day Afghanistan and Tajikistan .

[ 11 ] Since then, a number of revisions of Gnoli's work have been proposed, often attempting to derive the position of the more uncertain place names from an assumed arrangement according to which countries appear in the list.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The following list presents these place names and discusses the different localization attempts made by scholars throughout the years: Airyanem Vaejah , by the good river Daitya ( airiianəm vaẽjō vahuii dåitiiaii ): The identity of both Airyanem Vaejah and the river Daitya are not universally agreed upon. Iranian sources have traditionally located Aryanem Vaejah in around Azerbaijan , a hypothesis that was shared, e.g., by James Darmesteter .

[ 15 ] In contrast, historians such as Walter Bruno Henning , [ 16 ] Josef Markwart , [ 17 ] and Mary Boyce believe its location to be in Chorasmia or northeast Iran around the Aral Sea and the Oxus River . Yet according to Michael Witzel , Airyanem Vaejah should be located at the center of the sixteen lands, [ 18 ] specifically in what are now the central Afghan highlands (around modern Bamyan Province).

[ 19 ] One of arguments in favor of locating Airyanem Vaejah in central Afghanistan is that a mountainous region explains its severe climate (Vd. 1.2.3) better than does its supposed location in Chorasmia.

[ 20 ] According to Gnoli , [ 21 ] it was situated between the Helmand River and the Hindu Kush Mountains , while historians like Skjaervo have declared the localization of Airyanem Vaejah to be insolveable.

[ 22 ] Gava , inhabited by the Sogdians ( gāum yim suγδō.šaiianəm ): The toponym Gava appears twice in the Avesta. Each time it is connected with the Sogdians and it is consequently identified with the region of Sogdia .

[ 23 ] While the place name Gava remains elusive, Vogelsang connects it with Gabae, a Sogdian stronghold in western Sogdia and speculates that during the time of the Avesta, the center of Sogdia may have been closer to Bukhara instead of Samarkand .

[ 24 ] Mouru the just ( mōurum sūrəm ): This toponym is universally identified with Margiana , a historical region located in the eastern portion of Turkmenistan .

[ 25 ] Bahdi the beautiful with uplifted banners ( båxδīm srīrąm ərəδβō.drafšąm ): Likewise, Bahdi is universally identified with Bactria , a historical region around the city of Balkh located mostly in today's Afghanistan .

[ 23 ] Nisai between Mouru and Bahdi ( nisåim yim antarə mōurum-ca båxδīm-ca ): The Vendidad states that Nisai is located between Margiana and Bactria, which would place it somewhere near to today's Faryab Province . However, some historians have also proposed a more western location centered around Nisa in modern day southern Turkmenistan [ 26 ] or Neyshabur in north-eastern Iran .

[ 27 ] Haroiva with vis harezanem ( harōiiūm yim viš.harəzanəm ): The meaning of 'vis harezanem' is unclear, yet the name Haroiva continues in the modern city of Herat as well as the name of Aria , the satrapy that was centered around this city. The name Haroiva also appears as Sarayu , a Vedic river in India .

Vakereta , inhabited by the Duzhaka ( vaẽkərətəm yim dužakō.šaiianəm ): Early Pahlavi sources identify this country with the Kabul region. Modern scholarship mostly identifies Vakereta with the nearby region of Gandhara .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Diverting from this widely shared localization, Witzel places it close to Gorgan .

[ 31 ] Urva rich in pastures ( uruuąm pouru.våstrąm ): The exact location of Urva is unknown. Gnoli proposed Ghazni , [ 32 ] while Darmesteter believed it to be Urgench in modern day Uzbekistan .

[ 33 ] Khnenta , inhabited by the Vehrkana ( xnəntẽm yim vəhrkånō.šaiianəm ): This place name is not found in any historical sources, but the Vehrkana are often connected with the Hyrcanians and Khnenta is, therefore, identified with Hyrcania .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] However, Gnoli connects the name with the Barkanioi, a tribe mentioned by Ctesias and places Khnenta north of the Hindukush .

[ 36 ] On the other hand, Grenet connects the name Vehrkana with the town Urgun south of the Hindukush.

[ 37 ] Harakhvaiti the beautiful ( haraxᵛaitīm srīrąm ): This name appears during the Achaemenid Empire as Harauvatish and was known to the Greeks as Arachosia , a historical region centered around the valley of the Arghandab River in modern-day southern Afghanistan . The name also appears as Sarasvati , a Vedic river in India.

[ 38 ] It has been noted that the name of Harakhvaiti found in the Avesta differs from a reconstructed correct Avestan form * haranᵛhaitīm and therefore may reflect a local dialect.

[ 39 ] Haetumant possessing the Khvarenah ( haētumantəm raẽuuantəm xᵛarənanhantəm ): Haetumant is the region of Helmand River , which derives its name from it and roughly corresponds to the Achaemenian region of Drangiana , which later became known as Sistan under the Sassanians .

[ 40 ] Ragha of the three tribes ( raγąm θrizantūm ): Classic Pahlavi commentary identified Ragha with Median Ragā (modern day Rey in Tehran province ) and therefore placed it in western Iran. Following Gnoli, however, modern localization attempts often place it in Afghanistan, [ 11 ] [ 41 ] [ 4 ] whereas others still support its traditional localization in western Iran.

[ 35 ] Chakhra the strong, supporting the religious order ( caxrəm sūrəm asauuanəm ): The location of Chakhra is still uncertain, but Darmesteter believes the location is Čarx between Ghaznī and Kabul, in the valley of Lōgar , [ 42 ] whereas Grenet identifies Chakhra with the Chitral valley .

[ 43 ] Varena with four corners ( varənəm yim caθru.gaošəm ): According to Pahlavi tradition, Varena is located in mountainous Gilan , the birthplace of Zahhak, who was killed by Thraetaona . This localization was accepted by a number of historians.

[ 44 ] According to Gnoli, however, Varena is identified with modern Buner between the Indus River and the Swat District .

[ 11 ] Yet, according to Witzel, Varena lies south of Kabul .

[ 35 ] Hapta Hendu ( hapta həndu , Vsn.

Sapta Sindhava , 'seven rivers'): Beginning with Pahlavi tradition, Hapta Hendu has been interpreted as referring to Punjab plus the Kabul River and the Indus River , a tradition that is shared by the vast majority of modern scholars.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] The land by the floods of the Rangha , where people live who have no chiefs ( upa aodaẽšu rahaii yōi asårō aiβiiåxšaiieinti ): Like the first country on the list, Airyanem Vaejah, the last country Rangha is also afflicted by the same evil plague; the Deava-created winter. This makes a location in the north or the mountains plausible.

[ 47 ] The name Rangha is widely interpreted as the Avestan counterpart of the Rasā , a semi-mystical river known from Vedic geography .

[ 48 ] Like Airyanem Vaejah, the place name Rangha and its associated river are, therefore, sometimes interpreted to be both a mythological and a geographical location.

[ 49 ] In summary, there is a broad consensus regarding about half of the lands on this list, while Vakereta, Urva, Khnenta, Ragha, Chakhra and Varena are disputed to varying degrees.

[ 50 ] Airyanem Vaejah and Rangha, however, remain the most debated items. This is because these two place names may not only be geographical locations, but can also be interpreted as part of Iranian cosmology .

[ 51 ] This is due to the elusive description of both countries, the fact that they start and end the list, [ 52 ] the fact that they are both characterized by the same Deava-created winter, and the fact that they are both connected with a mythical river.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] As regards Airyanem Vaejah, it has been interpreted as "the traditional homeland" or "the ancient homeland" of the Iranians . These definitions perpetuate interpretations of the Airyanem Vaejah as Urheimat des Awestavolkes , Urland of the Indo-Iranians [ 55 ] or the Wiege aller iranischen Arier .

[ 56 ] Yasht references [ edit ] While the first chapter of the Vendidad contains the longest and most elaborate geographical description in the Avesta , several of the Yashts ( Avestan : yašt , 'prayer, honor') contain additional information. Of particular interest here are the Mihr Yasht, the Farvardin Yasht, and the Zamyad Yasht, in which a number of passages mention geographically relevant features such as mountains, regions, peoples, and rivers in various contexts.

Mihr Yasht [ edit ] See also: Mihr Yasht Approximate location of the place names mentioned in the Mihr Yasht of the Avesta The Mihr Yasht is the second longest of the Yashts and is dedicated to the Zoroastrian deity Mithra ( Avestan : miθra , 'covenant'). In it, a second list of Iranian countries is presented, albeit being shorter than the one in the Vendidad. The list is found in verses Yt. 10.12-10.14, where the text describes how Mithra reaches Mount Hara and looks at the entirety of the Iranian lands ( airiio.shaiianem ): Grass-land magnate Mithra we worship ...; who is the first supernatural god to approach across the Hara , in front of the immortal swift-horsed sun; who is the first to seize the beautiful gold-painted mountain tops; from there the most mighty surveys the whole land inahbitated by the Iranians; where gallant rulers organize many attacks, where high, sheltering mountains with ample pasture provide solicitous for cattle; where deep lakes stand with surging waves; where navigable rivers rush with wide a swell towards Parutian Ishkata, Haraivian Margu , Sogdian Gava , and Chorasmia .

— Mihr Yasht 10.12–14 (translated by Ilya Gershovitch).

[ 57 ] The middle items on this list, namely Haraivian Margu , and Sogdian Gava , are also found in the list of the Vendidad , whereas Chorasmia ( xᵛāirizəm , 'nourishing land') is a historical region south of the Aral lake. This leaves Ishkata ( iškatā ) and Pouruta ( pourutā ) to be identified. The place name Ishkata is mentioned several times in the Avesta.

[ 58 ] While in Yt. 193 and Yt. 10.11, Ishkata refers to a mountain in the Hindu Kush , the term in Yt. 11.14 has been interpreted as referring to the land dominated by this mountain.

Ilya Gershevitch has, for instance, argued that it should be located in the upper Helmand plain close to the Koh-i-Baba .

[ 59 ] Pouruta on the other hand has been connected to the Parautoi mentioned by Ptolemy ; a tribe that lived close to the Hindu Kush in the Ghor ( gairi , "mountain") region.

[ 60 ] Compared with the list in the Vendidad, a substantial overlap is visible. Overall, however, the area described is smaller. If Airyanem Vaejah can be located in Khwarazm, then the northern border of the two lists would coincide. Regardless, the area described in the Vendidad extends further east, south and, depending on the identification of some place names, west. The causes for this difference are not known but it may reflect Iranian/Zoroastrian movements over time.

[ 61 ] Fravardin Yasht [ edit ] See also: Frawardin Yasht Approximate location of the peoples mentioned in the Frawardin Yasht , namely the Iranians (as described in the Mihr Yasht), Turanians, Sairima and Daha.

The Frawardin Yasht is the longest of the Yashts and is dedicated to the veneration of the Fravashi , a unique Zoroastrian concept similar to and connected with the concept of the soul ( urvan ). In Yt. 13.143-44, the Fravashi of the righteous living in the lands of five different peoples are praised: We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Aryan countries; We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Aryan countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Turanian countries; We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Turanian countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Sairimyan countries; We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Sairimyan countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Saini countries; We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Saini countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Dahi countries; We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Dahi countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in all countries; We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in all countries.

— Frawardin Yasht 13.143-44 (translated by James Darmesteter).

[ 62 ] The Arya ( airiia , 'Iranians') are the main ethnic group mentioned in the Avesta, where they are typically equated with the Zoroastrian community in general. This ethnic epithet appears both in the Avesta as well as in early Iranian history as the self designation of the Iranian people.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] This interpretation is, however, context specific, since all people mentioned in the Avesta appear to be speakers of Iranian languages and would therefore be Iranian in a linguistic sense.

[ 65 ] Moreover, the term Arya ( Sanskrit : ārya ) also appears in ancient India as the self-designation of the people of the Vedas . The Arya of the Vedas show many similarities with the Arya of the Avesta and must have formed a single people at one point .

[ 66 ] Their relationship at the time of the Avesta is, however, unknown.

The Turya ( tūiriia , 'Turanians') are the second major ethnic group mentioned in the Avesta. They are commonly known as the Turanians from later Pahlavi sources as well as Iranian legend . While some Turanians in the Fravardin Yasht are depicted as faithful followers of Ahura Mazda, most passages in the Avesta as well as later Iranian tradition depicts them in a consistently antagonistic role. Their homeland is typically located in Transoxiania . After Turkic peoples began to spread in Central Asia , the term Turanian was increasingly applied to them.

[ 67 ] Regardless, the Turanians at the time of the Avesta were Iranian.

The Sarima are mentioned only in the Fravardin Yasht and do not appear in other parts of the Avesta. Their name, however, is found in later traditions involving the mythological ancestors of the Arya, the Turya and the Sarima. In these traditions, a figure known as Sarm, in Pahlavi texts, and Salm , in the Shahname , is given the western part of the known world to rule over.

[ 68 ] In addition, their name has been connected to the later Sarmatians based on etymological grounds.

[ 69 ] The Sarmatians were an Iranian speaking tribe that came into contact with the Greeks in the western steppe during classical antiquity but their origins are assumed to be in the southern Ural region.

The Saini are the forth group of people mentioned in the Fravardin Yasht. They do not appear in other parts of the Avesta or in later Iranian tradition. Nor are any later groups known from historical sources to be associated with them. As a result, their identity remains unclear.

The Daha are the last people being mentioned in the Fravardin Yasht. They appear as the Dahae in later historical sources.

[ 70 ] The Dahae were an Iranian speaking tribe which in antiquity lived modern day Turkmenistan . In addition to the Dahae, the name of the Daha appears as the Dasa in the Vedas , where they are described as non-Aryan adversaries of the Vedic Aryans. It is not known whether these etymological connections support an ethnic connections as well.

[ 71 ] Taken together, the available evidence points to these other peoples being Iranian tribes living in the steppes north of the Aryas.

[ 72 ] A memory of this kinship between them may be found in the Iranian epic Shahnameh , where the legendary Iranian hero Thraetaona has three sons, Iraj (Aryan), Tur (Turanian) and Salm (Sairima). It is therefore plausible that the Turanians, Sairima, Dahi, and possibly the Saini were part of or associated with the broader phenomenon of Scythian cultures .

[ 73 ] Zamyad Yasht [ edit ] Area of the Sistan Basin The Zamyad Yasht is named after Zam , the Zoroastrian divinity that personifies the Earth. The extant version of the Zamyad Yasht consists of two parts. The first part is a fragment of eight sections (Yt. 19.1-8) containing a list of 40 mountains. Despite its geographical character, the list is interpreted to represent mythology rather than geography.

[ 74 ] The second, much longer part is the Kayan Yasn, dedicated to the Khvarenah ( Avestan : xᵛarənah , 'glory') of the Kayanian dynasty . This glory is first bestowed by Ahura Mazda upon the Pishdadian dynasty , the mythical predecessors of the Kayanian dynasty. Yet after the downfall of Yima , they lose the glory which then becomes unseized or unappropriated ( axᵛarəta ). In search of a legitimate holder, the glory finally reaches the Kansayoya sea . At this point, the Yasht provides a detailed description of the hydrography of the Sistan Basin , in particular of Hāmūn-e Helmand : (the Unappropriated Glory ) which is coming over to Saoshyant Verethrajan who will rise from the area where the Kansayoya sea is situated by the (River) Haetumant and Mount Ushada around which the many watercourses meet, coming from the mountains.

Towards (Mount Ushada) the (River) Khvastra flows to meet (the others), towards it the Khvastra hurries to meet (the others), and (so do) the Huvaspa and the Fradata, the beautiful Khvarenanguhaiti, the strong Ushtavaiti, the Urva rich in pastures, the Erezi, and the Zurenumaiti; towards (Mount Ushada) the Haetumant flows to meet (the others), towards it the Haetumant hurries (to meet the others), being splendid and glorious, parading with its white surges and sending down many floods.

— Zamyad Yasht 19.66–77 (translated by Helmut Humbach).

[ 75 ] Apart from the Helmand River , these verses contain the names of eight other rivers flowing into lake Hamun; namely the Khvastra ( xᵛāstrā , 'good pasture'), the Huvaspa ( hvaspā , 'good horse'), the Fradata ( fradaθā , 'wealthy'), the Khvarenanguhaiti ( xᵛarənahvaitī ), the Ushtavaiti ( uštavaitī ), the Urva ( urvaδā , 'liquid'), the Erezi ( Ǝrəzī ), and the Zurenumaiti ( zurənumaitī ). None of these names relate directly to known Sistani rivers but a number of studies have tried to establish such connections.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] These attempts rely on parallels in Pahlavi literature like the Bundahishn and the Tarikh-i Sistan , where a number of Sistani rivers are mentioned. Further features of Sistani geography recur in the same verses, like the Kansayoya sea or Mount Ushada , both of which are closely connected to Zoroastrian eschatology . Together with the description in the Vendidad, these passages make Sistan the best described region in the Avesta.

[ 80 ] Conclusion [ edit ] Overview over the geographical horizon of the Young Avestan period A comparison of the first chapter of the Vendidad with the passages of geographical interest in the great Yashts shows that the geographical area of interest for the people of the Avesta was centered around the Hindu Kush range. To the north, it included Sogdiana , Bactria , Aria , Margiana and Chorasmia ; an area later known as Greater Khorasan under the Sassanians. To the south, it included Arachosia , Drangiana , Gandara and the upper Punjab up to the Indus River ; an area known as Ariana , the land of the Arya, to the Greeks. This strong focus on Eastern Iran has also implication for the time of composition of the text. Starting with the rise of the Achaemenid Empire , the political focus of the Iranian world shifted decidedly to the West. The near-total absence of western Iranians place names, with the possible exception of Rey and Hyrcania , makes it unlikely that the composition of these texts happened after the rise of the Acheminids. Modern scholarship therefore finds a date of composition prior to the 6th century most likely.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] See also [ edit ] Ariana Greater Khorasan Bharata Khanda , its Hindu counterpart Seven Old Iranian climes References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Sources for the different localizations are provided in the description of the image.

Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Gnoli 2011 .

^ Eilers 1980 .

^ Kreyenbroek 2011 .

^ a b Grenet 2015 .

^ Witzel 2013 .

^ Skjaervø 1995 , p. 158 "In view of the dearth of historical sources it is of paramount importance that one should evaluate the evidence of the Avesta, the holy book of the Zoroastrians, parts at least of which antedate the Old Persian inscriptions by several centuries.".

^ Vogelsang 2000 , p. 50 "While many of the names in the list can be compared with names that occur in other sources (e.g. the Achaemenid inscriptions and classical sources), others remain to be convincingly identified.".

^ Yarshater 1983 , p. 352: "[L]ike most migrants, the early Iranians seem to have applied old names to new places".

^ Darmesteter 1880 , pp. 5–9.

^ Grenet 2005 , p. 32 "It is only possible to draw the Iranian plateau into the picture of early Zoroastrianism by recognising one or several of its regions in the remaining countries on the list. This has been the regular tendency of Zoroastrian scholarship since the Sasanian commentators of the Avesta and all modern scholars have followed suit, up until Arthur Christensen (1943).".

^ a b c Gnoli 1980 .

^ Vogelsang 2000 , p. 58 "The list describes the lands which are located to the north, west, south and east of the mountains of modern Afghanistan.".

^ Witzel 2000 , p. 19 "Differently from the previously mentioned Iranian lists, this one is not arranged in pradakshina but in counter-clockwise (apasalavi) fashion".

^ Grenet 2005 , pp. 39-40 "There are neither to-and-fro movements nor important gaps, but rather several continuous sequences arranged in an anticlockwise order.".

^ Darmesteter 1898 , p. 26.

^ (Henning, Zoroaster, pp. 41ff) ^ Markwart 1901 .

^ Witzel 2000 , p. 48: "The Vīdẽvdaδ list obviously was composed or redacted by someone who regarded Afghanistan and the lands surrounding it as the home of all Aryans ( airiia ), that is of all (eastern) Iranians, with Airiianem Vaẽjah as their center." ^ Witzel 2000 , p. 46: " Airiianəm Vaẽjah signifies the central Afghan highlands. This includes the Ghorat-Hazarajat highlands south, and the highlands north of the Qasa Murg, Bayan and Baba ranges (the Paropanisus); it probably includes some areas north and south of the actual Hindukush Range as well." ^ (Markwart, Ērānšahr, p. 155) ^ Gnoli 1980 , p. 227.

^ Skjaervø 1995 , p. 166: "I regard the question of the identity of airiianam vaëjô "the Aryan expanse" as insoluble" ^ a b Grenet 2015 , p. 25.

^ Vogelsang 2000 , p. 51: "If Gava and Gabae refer to an identical place, then the present text appears to refer to a situation whereby the center of Sogdia was to lie, not at Samarkand, but further to the west, perhaps at or near Bukhara." ^ Christensen 1943 , p. 25: "Môurum est une forme dialectale qui a remplacé un *margum du texte original1. C’est la Margiane.".

^ Darmesteter 1898 , p. 65.

^ Geiger 1979 , p. 31.

^ Levi 1915 , p. 67ff.

^ Christensen 1943 , p. 28.

^ Grenet 2005 , p. 39: "In a decisive article, Sylvain Lévy showed a long time ago that this identification is mirrored by the Mahāmāyūrī, a Buddhist list of countries considered an excellent source, which gives Vaikrtika as the name of the spirit (yaksa) of Gandhāra." ^ Witzel 2000 ^ Gnoli 1980 , p. 26–39.

^ Darmesteter 1898 , p. 68.

^ Darmesteter 1898 .

^ a b c Witzel 2000 .

^ Gnoli 1980 , p. 39–42: "Ctesias' Barkanioi might in fact be the same people as Herodotus' Parikanioi." ^ Grenet 2015 , p. 40: "Vehrkāna, ultimately from vrk, "wolf", undoubtedly underlies "Hyrcania". But it is also attested in Waziristān, a hilly region on the Indo-Afghan border, with the town Urgūn (Pashtun Wergūn < Vehrkāna)" ^ Parpola 2015 , p. 97: "It is widely accepted that the Sarasvatī mentioned here is the river that gave the name Harakhvaiti".

^ Schmitt 2000 , p. 41: "Dies gilt zum Beispiel für den Namen Arachosiens (der Landschaft um das heutige Qandahar), dessen avestische Form Akk. Haraxᵛaitīm nämlich eine lautgeschichtliche Sonderentwicklung aufweist, -xᵛ - statt normalem -nᵛh- als Fortsetzer von iran. *-hv-. An diese Form, die zuerst Karl Hoffmann als einen in die Avesta-Überlieferung eingedrungenen Arachotismus zu verstehen gelehrt hat, sind vermutungsweise weitere Zeugnisse und Dialektmerkmale des Arachotischen angekoppelt worden, die aber nicht ebensolche Beweiskraft besitzen.".

^ G. Gnoli, Ricerche storiche sul Sīstān antico, Rome, 1967, p. 78 and n. 3 ^ Vogelsang 2000 .

^ Darmesteter, J. The Zend Avesta, Vol, Second Edition, London, 1895, pp. 253–8 ^ Grenet 2005 , pp. 42: "Between Ragha and Varena comes Chakhra, which in this perspective would probably correspond to Chitrāl." ^ Darmesteter 1898 , p. 72.

^ Grenet 2005 , pp. 34: "[T]he countries Varena and Hapta Hendu, which are held by all modern scholars (and, in the case of Hapta Hendu, even by the Iran-centred Pahlavi tradition) to be in northwest India." ^ Markwart 1938 , pp. 132–133: "Das mit diesem Lande das Sapta Sindhawas des Rgweda gemeint ist, kann keinem Zweifel unterliegen." ^ Gnoli 1980 , pp. 50–53.

^ Witzel 2000 , pp. 28: "Finally, there remains the area called Upa Aodaẽšu Rahaii on the waters(?) of the River Rahå . This is, without doubt, the Vedic Raså, ..." ^ Grenet 2005 , pp. 43: "In any case the list eventually ends up near its starting point with the last country, Ranhā, Sanskrit Rasā, where winter lasts ten months like in the Airyanem Vaējah. This country is endowed with mythological features but also, as Witzel rightly argued, it has some basis in reality, namely some upper tributary of the Indus." ^ Grenet 2005 , pp. 30: "Of a total of sixteen countries, seven have always been identified beyond doubt, as they kept their name until historical times or even to the present day." ^ Vogelsang 2000 , pp. 49: "An additional problem is the question whether all the lands that are mentioned in the list refer to an actual geographical location, or whether in at least some cases we are dealing with mythical names that bear no direct relationship to a specific area. Such a point has often been brought forward as regards the first and the last names in the list: Airyanem Vaejah (No. 1) and Upa Aodaeshu Rahnghaya (No. 16)." ^ Schwartz 1985 , pp. 640: "... this whole area is framed by two mythological rivers the Vanhgvi Daitya and the Rangha, on which more will be said below." ^ Markwart 1938 , pp. 135: "Auch hier ist die Ranha als ein ferner, dabei reissender und schwer passierbarer Strom vorgestellt und erscheint als Vorbild der verhängnisvollen Chinwatbrücke (der Milchstraße), worin sie sich mit dem Wanuhi Daitja berührt." ^ Witzel 2000 , pp. 29: "The Rangha could also be entirely mythological at this passage, as she often is; the same applies to her Vedic counterpart, the Rasā (and the sindhu/Sindhu)." ^ Spiegel 1887 , p. 123.

^ von Prášek 1906 , p. 29.

^ Gershevitch 1967 , pp. 79–80.

^ R. Schmitt. ISHKATA ^ Gershevitch 1967 .

^ Schwartz 1985 , pp. 641: "... and the Parutian overlords were probably the Paroutai which Ptolemy reports as having occupied the part of Areia (Haravia) near the Hindu-Kush (Ghor)." ^ Vogelsang 2000 , p. 62 "The same observations, combined with what was said as regards the Mihr Yasht, would indicate that the geographical names contained in the Mihr Yasht would reflect a time which predates the composition of the Videdat list, since no mention is made of the lands south and east of the Hindu Kush.".

^ Darmesteter 1882 , pp. 226–227.

^ Gnoli 2006 .

^ Bailey 2011 .

^ Boyce 1996 , pp. 104: "In the Farvadin Yasht, 143-4, five divisions are recognized among the Iranians, namely the Airya (a term which the Avestan people appear to use of themselves), Tuirya, Sairima, Sainu and Dahi" ^ Schmitt 2011 , pp. 684–687: "The linguistic history and the history of their religion and culture indicate that the Aryans (Indo-Iranians) must originally have formed one single people. Only about the beginning of the 2nd millennium B.C. did their unity split up, when Indo-Aryans and Iranians went separate ways." ^ Yarshater 2014 , pp. 570–576: "The identification of the Turanians, a rival Iranian tribe, with the Turks, and Afrāsīāb with their king, is a late development, possibly made in the early 7th century, the Turks having first come into contact with the Iranians only in the 6th century." ^ Boyce 1996 , pp. 104–105: "The eponymous founders of the second and third groups figure with "Airya" in the Pahlavi tradition as Erec (older *Airyaeca), Tuc (*Tur(a)ca) and Sarm, who are represented as the three sons of Faredon among whom he divided the world. In the Book of Kings they appear as :Eraj, Tur and Salm, of whom Eraj received the realm of Iran itself, Tur the lands to north and east, and Salm those to the west; and ultimately the people of Tur, the Turanians, were identified with the alien Turks, who came to replace the Iranians in those lands." ^ Bailey 1985 , pp. 65: "In the Scythian field there are two names to be mentioned. The Sarmatai are in the Avesta Sairima-, and there are also the Sauromatai. The etyma of these two names are somewhat complex. The Sarmatai survived in the Zor. Pahl. slm *salm (the -l- is marked for -l-, not -r-, Bundashin TD 2, 106.15)." ^ Bailey 1959 , pp. 109: "A people called by the ethnic name Iran. daha-, now found in Old Persian daha placed before saka in an inscription of Xerxes (Persopolis h 26) has long been known. The Akkadian form is da-a-an for *daha-. The Avestan *daha- attested in the fem. dahi;- is an epithet of lands. Yasht 13.143-4 has the list airyanam ... tūiryanam ... sairimanam ... saininam ... dahinam ... From this we get : Arya-, Turiya-, Sarima-, Saini-, Daha-, as names of peoples known to the early litany of Yasht 13." ^ Bailey 1959 , pp. 112: "Though a people called *Dasa, whence the adjective dhasa-, was not known or at least remembered in India, the Iranian evidence of the identical words makes it reasonable that some group did call themselves *Dasa, although the name need not have meant the Daha known to the Achaemenian kings." ^ Daniel 2012 , p. 52: "They also included tales of the Kayanian kings, culminating in the reign of Kavi Vishtaspa (Goshtasp) and the warfare between the Iranians and their natural enemies, the Turanians (probably nomadic peoples to the north of Iran, later identified with the Turks).".

^ Kuz'mina 2007 , p. 174 "In Iranian texts, the idea about the kinship of all Iranian-speaking languages is reflected in a legend of how the ancestor of the Iranians divided the land between three sons: Sairima, the forefather of Sauromatians (who dwelt in the historic period from the Don to the Urals), Tur, from whom the Turians originated (the northern part of Central Asia was called Turan), and the younger son Iraj, the ancestor of the Iranian population (Christensen 1934).".

^ Ichaporia 2006 : "The existing Zamyād Yašt consists of two parts. The first is the geographical fragment, a list of the eminent mountains of the Young Avestan world (secs. 1-8), whose tops are, as it suggests itself, closest to the celestial bodies, to heaven and paradise." ^ Humbach 1998 , pp. 49–50.

^ Stein 1886 , p. 21-33.

^ Herzfeld 1930 , pp. 49–98.

^ Markwart 1938 , pp. 17–24.

^ Monchi-Zadeh 1975 .

^ Gnoli 2012 , pp. 171-172 "It must also be acknowledged that Yašt 19 supplies a singularly detailed description of a specific territory, the only such case to be found throughout the entire Avesta. As seen in the first chapter of the Widēwdād, the country of the Haētumant seems to have had a privileged position (Vd. 1.13-14); because, compared to the other fourteen countries also mentioned in the text, its description occupies twice as much space, with the exception of Airyana Vaēǰah (Vd. 1.1-2).".

^ Vogelsang 2000 , p. 62 "All of the above observations would indicate a date for the composition of the Videvdat list which would antedate, for a considerable time, the arrival in Eastern Iran of the Persian Acheamenids (ca. 550 B.C.).".

^ Grenet 2005 , pp. 44-45 "It is difficult to imagine that the text was composed anywhere other than in South Afghanistan and later than the middle of the 6th century BCE.".

^ Skjaervø 1995 , p.166 "The fact that the oldest Young Avestan texts apparently contain no reference to western Iran, including Media, would seem to indicate that they were composed in eastern Iran before the Median domination reached the area.".

^ Gnoli 2011 , pp.44-47 "It seems likely that this geographical part of the Avesta was intended to show the extent of the territory that had been acquired in a period that can not be well defined but that must at any rate have been between Zoroaster's reforms and the beginning of the Achaemenian empire. The likely dating is therefore between the ninth and seventh centuries B.C., starting from the period of the domination of the Aryan followers of Ahura Mazdā (Gnoli, De Zoroastre à Mani, pp. 24ff.).".

Bibliography [ edit ] Bailey, Harold W.

(2011).

"Arya" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. II. Iranica Foundation.

Bailey, Harold Walter (1985).

Khotanese Text . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521257794 .

Bailey, Harold Walter (1959). "Iranian Arya and Daha".

Transactions of the Philological Society .

58 : 71– 115.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-968X.1959.tb00300.x .

H. W. Bailey, "Iranian Studies I & IV," BSOAS 6, 1930–32.

W. Barthold, Istoriko-geograficheskiĭ obzor Irana, Moscow, 1971; E. Benveniste, "L’Ērān-vḕ et l’origine legendaire des iraniens," BSOAS 7, 1933–35, pp. 269f.

G. M. Bongard-Levin and E. A. Grantovskij, De la Scythie à l’Inde. Ēnigmes de l’histoire des anciens Aryens, French tr. Ph. Gignoux, Paris, 1981.

Boyce, Mary (1996).

A History Of Zoroastrianism: The Early Period . Brill.

T. Burrow, "The Proto-Indoaryans," JRAS, 1973.

Christensen, Arthur (1943).

Le premier chapitre du Vendidad et l'histoire primitive des tribus iraniennes (PDF) . Historisk-filologiske meddelelser (in French). Ejnar Munksgaard.

Daniel, Elton L.

(2012).

The History of Iran . Greenwood.

ISBN 978-0313375095 .

Darmesteter, James (1880).

The Zend-Avesta Part 1 The Vendidad . Oxford at the Clarendon Press.

Darmesteter, James (1882).

The Zend-Avesta Part 2 . Oxford at the Clarendon Press.

Darmesteter, James (1898).

Avesta Vendidad . Kessinger Publishing, LLC.

ISBN 9781161422948 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Eilers, Wilhelm (1980).

Geographische Namengebung in und um Iran . C.H. Beck Verlag.

R. N. Frye, The History of Ancient Iran, Munich, 1984.

Geiger, Wilhelm (1979).

Ostiranische Kultur im Altertum . Scientia.

W. Geiger, "Geographie von Iran," in Geiger and Kuhn, Grundr. Ir. Phil. II, 3, pp. 371–94.

Gershevitch, Ilya (1967).

The Avestan Hymn to Mithra . Cambridge University Press.

I. Gershevitch, "Zoroaster's Own Contribution," JNES 23, 1964.

G. Gnoli, "Airyō.šayana," RSO 41, 1966.

Gnoli, Gherardo (1980).

Zoroaster's time and homeland: a study on the origins of Mazdeism and related problems . Istituto universitario orientale.

G. Gnoli, Ricerche storiche sul Sīstān antico, Rome, 1967.

Gnoli, Gherardo (2011).

"AVESTAN GEOGRAPHY" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. III. Iranica Foundation.

Gnoli, Gherardo (2012).

"Helmand River ii. In Zoroastrian Tradition" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. 12. Iranica Foundation.

Gnoli, Gherardo (2006).

"Iranian Identity ii. Pre-Islamic Period" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. 13. Iranica Foundation.

G. Gnoli, De Zoroastre à Mani. Quatre leçons au Collège de France, Paris, 1985.

G. Gnoli, "ʾAριανη′. Postilla ad Airyō.šayana," RSO 41, 1966, pp. 329–34. Idem, "More on the Sistanic Hypothesis," East and West 27, 1977, pp. 309–20.

Grenet, Frantz (2005). "An Archaeologist's Approach to Avestan Geography". In Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh; Stewart, Sarah (eds.).

Birth of the Persian Empire Volume I . I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 978-0-7556-2459-1 .

Grenet, Frantz (2015). "Zarathustra's Time and Homeland - Geographical Perspectives". In Stausberg, Michael; Vevaina, Yuhan S.-D.; Tessmann, Anna (eds.).

The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Zoroastrianism . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

ISBN 9781118785539 .

W. B. Henning, "Two Manichaean Magical Texts," BSOAS 12, 1947, pp. 52f.

W. B. Henning, "The Book of the Giants," BSOAS 11, 1943, pp. 68f.

E. Herzfeld, Zoroaster and His World, Princeton, 1947.

Herzfeld, Ernst (1930).

Zarathustra. Teil V. Awestische Topographie . AMI.

K. Hoffmann, "Altiranisch," in HO I, 4: Iranistik 1, Linguistik, Leiden and Cologne, 1958, p. 6.

H. Humbach, "Al-Bīrunī und die sieben Strome [sic] des Awesta," Bulletin of the Iranian Culture Foundation I, 2, 1973.

H. Humbach, "Die awestische Landerliste," Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens 4, 1960, pp. 34–46. Idem, "Ptolemaios-Studien," 5, 1961, pp. 68–74.

H. Humbach, "A Western Approach to Zarathushtra," Journal of the K. R. Cama Oriental Institute 51, Bombay, 1984, pp. 15–32.

Humbach, Helmut (1998).

Zamyad Yasht - Yasht 19 of the Younger Avesta. Text, Translation, Commentary . Harrassowitz Verlag - Wiesbaden.

Ichaporia, Pallan (2006).

"ZAMYĀD YAŠT" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Iranica Foundation.

A. V. W Jackson, Zoroastrian Studies, New York, 1928.

F. Justi, Beiträge zur alten Geographie Persiens, Marburg, 1869.

W. Kirfel, Die Kosmographie der Inder nach den Quellen dargestellt, Bonn and Leipzig, 1920, pp. 1ff., 178ff., 208ff.

Kreyenbroek, Philip G.

(2011).

"Cosmogony and Cosmology i. In Zoroastrianism/Mazdaism" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. V. Iranica Foundation.

Kuz'mina, Elena E. (2007).

The Origin of the Indo-Iranians . Leiden.

Levi, Sylvain (1915).

Le catalogue géographique des Yakṣa dans la Mahāmāyūrī . Journal asiatique.

H. Lommel, "Anahita-Sarasvati," in Asiatica. Festschrift Friedrich Weller, Leipzig, 1954, pp. 15–32.

J. Markwart, A Catalogue of the Provincial Capitals of Ērānshahr, ed. G. Messina, Rome, 1931.

Markwart, Josef (1938). Schaeder, Hans Heinrich (ed.).

Wehrot und Arang - Untersuchungen zur mytischen und geschichtlichen Landeskunde vonOstiran . E. J. Brill.

Markwart, Josef (1901).

Ērānšahr nach der Geographie des Ps. Moses Xorenacʿi. Mit historisch-kritischem Kommentar und historischen und topographischen Excursen . Schwabenverlag.

ISSN 0342-1430 .

J. Marquart, Ērānšahr nach der Geographie des Ps. Moses Xorenacʿi, Berlin, 1901.

J. Marquart, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte von Eran I, Göttingen, 1896, II, Göttingen, 1905.

J. Marquart, Die Assyriaka des Ktesias, Göttingen, 1892.

Monchi-Zadeh, Davoud (1975).

Topographisch-historische Studien zum iranischen Nationalepos . Steiner.

M. Molé, "La structure du premier chapitre du Videvdat," JA 229, 1951, pp. 283–98.

G. Morgenstierne, Report on a Linguistic Mission to Afghanistan, Oslo, 1926, pp. 29f.

H. S. Nyberg, Die Religionen des alten Iran, German tr. H. H. Schaeder, Leipzig, 1938, pp. 324ff.

Parpola, Asko (2015).

The Roots of Hinduism: The Early Aryans and the Indus Civilization . Oxford University Press.

von Prášek, Justin Václav (1906).

Geschichte der Meder und Perser bis zur makedonischen Eroberung I . F.A. Perthes.

Schmitt, Rüdiger (2000).

Die iranischen Sprachen in Geschichte und Gegenwart . Reichert, L. p. 116.

ISBN 978-3895001505 .

Schmitt, Rüdiger (2011).

"ARYANS" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. II. Iranica Foundation.

Schwartz, Martin (1985). "The old Eastern Iranian World View According to the Avesta". In Gershevitch, I. (ed.).

The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 2: The Median and Achaemenian Periods . Cambridge University Press. pp.

640– 663.

doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521200912.014 .

ISBN 9781139054935 .

Spiegel, Friedrich (1887).

Die arische Periode und ihre Zustände . Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich.

Skjaervø, P. Oktor (1995). "The Avesta as source for the early history of the Iranians". In Erdosy, George (ed.).

The Indo-Aryans of Ancient South Asia . De Gruyter.

ISBN 9783110144475 .

Skjaervø, P. Oktor (2011). "Avestan Society". In Daryaee, Touraj (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Iranian History . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199390427 .

Stein, Aurel (1886).

Afghanistan in Avestic Geography . Indian Antiquary.

Eng. tr. S. Soucek, An Historical Geography of Iran, Princeton, New Jersey, 1984.

P. Tedesco, Dialektologie der westiranischen Turfantexte," Le Monde Oriental 15, 1921, pp. 184ff.

W. Tomaschek, "Zur historischen Topographie von Persien," Sb. d. Wiener Akad. d. Wiss., Phil.-hist. Kl., 102, 1883, pp. 146–231; 108, 1885, pp. 583–652 (repr. Osnabrück, 1972).

B. Utas, "The Pahlavi Treatise Avdēh u sahīkēh ī Sakistān," Acta Antiqua Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 28, 1983, pp. 259–67.

Vayu I, Lund, 1942, pp. 202ff.

Vogelsang, Willem (2000). "The sixteen lands of Videvdat - Airyanem Vaejah and the homeland of the Iranians".

Persica .

16 .

doi : 10.2143/PERS.16.0.511 .

M. Witzel, "Early Eastern Iran and the Atharvaveda," Persica 9, 1980.

Witzel, Michael (2000). "The Home of the Aryans". In Hinze, A.; Tichy, E. (eds.).

Festschrift fuer Johanna Narten zum 70. Geburtstag . J. H. Roell.

Witzel, Michael (2013). "Iranian Migration". In Potts, Daniel T. (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Iran . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199733309 .

Yarshater, Ehsan (2014).

"AFRĀSĪĀB" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. I. Iranica Foundation.

Yarshater, Ehsan (1983). "Iranian Common Beliefs and World-View". In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Vol. 3(1). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-24693-4 .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Avestan geography .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Avestan_geography&oldid=1305798035 " Categories : Iranian plateau Avesta Historical geography of Iran Historiography of Afghanistan Nomadic groups in Eurasia Historiography of Iran Historical geography of Afghanistan Historiography of religion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Avestan-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 04:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Avestan geography 4 languages Add topic

