Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Categories Toggle Categories subsection 2.1 Current awards 2.2 Retired or merged awards 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Aurealis Award 5 languages Deutsch Français Frysk Magyar Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Aurealis Award" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Annual literary award Aurealis Award Awarded for Excellence in speculative fiction Location Australia Country Australia Presented by Chimaera Publications Conflux Inc First award 1996 (for 1995) [ 1 ] Website Aurealisawards.org The Aurealis Award for Excellence in Speculative Fiction is an annual literary award for Australian science fiction , fantasy and horror fiction . Only Australians are eligible for the award.

History [ edit ] The Aurealis Award was established in 1995 by Chimaera Publications , the publishers of Aurealis Magazine . Unlike the other major Australian speculative fiction award, the Ditmar Award , it divides work into subgenre and age categories, and is judged as such.

[ citation needed ] The award was originally given out in the following divisions: Science Fiction, Fantasy, Horror, and Young Adult . Two separate awards are given in each of those divisions, one for novels and one for short stories. A fifth division for Children's books was added in 2001 for fiction for 8-12 year olds, with separate awards for "Short Fiction" and "Long Fiction". With the 2008 Awards the "Short Fiction" children's fiction category became a category for "Illustrated Work/Picture Book". For the 2010 Awards, the two categories became one for children's fiction told primarily through pictures and another for children's fiction told primarily through words. For the 2013 Awards, the two categories were merged into a single category for children's books. The Young Adult and Children's categories cover books in all three speculative fiction genres.

[ citation needed ] Submissions within a division are reviewed by a judging panel of at least three members, which selects each year's finalists and winners for their respective division. One of the judges on each panel is also the panel Convenor .

[ citation needed ] Two changes to the award structure were introduced in 2004. The awards became administered by Fantastic Queensland, a volunteer group that promotes Australian speculative fiction. A new division was added, Golden Aurealis , for both short stories and books, drawn from the winners of the other divisions.

[ citation needed ] There is also an associated Peter McNamara Conveners' Award for Excellence for "a particular achievement in speculative fiction or related areas in the relevant year, but may also take into account achievements over a number of years. This may also be for a non-fiction work, a collection or anthology, an art work, or for a body of work that brings credit and/or attention to the speculative fiction genre in that year". The award was originally known as the Convenors' Award for Excellence and was renamed in 2002 after Peter McNamara (d. 2004), the original award Convenor, shortly after he was diagnosed with an incurable disease. It is given out at the discretion of the Convenors.

[ citation needed ] After six years of being the administrator, Fantastic Queensland ended their partnership with Chimaera Publications. On 18 May 2010 it was announced that Chimaera had entered a new deal with SpecFaction NSW who would administer the awards for 2010.

[ 2 ] Later in 2010 SpecFaction NSW announced that they reached a deal with HarperVoyager to be the exclusive sponsor for the 2010 Awards which would be held in May 2011.

[ 3 ] After three years of running the awards, SpecFaction NSW, decided they would not continue hosting the awards. On 7 May 2013 it was announced that Chimaera Publications had reached an agreement with Conflux Inc, who will host the awards for the next two years.

[ 4 ] In addition, the awards ceremony would be held in Canberra .

[ 4 ] In May 2015 it was announced that the Western Australian Science Fiction Foundation (WASFF) would be overseeing the awards for the next three years.

[ 5 ] Following WASFF's tenure, the Awards moved to be hosted by the Continuum Foundation (ConFound), a Melbourne based group, from 2018 to 2020, before moving back to Canberra from 2021, this time overseen by the Canberra Speculative Fiction Guild (CSFG).

[ 6 ] In 2016, the short story categories for science fiction, fantasy, and horror were subdivided into categories for short story and novella.

[ 7 ] Categories [ edit ] Current awards [ edit ] Best anthology : 2008 to present Best children’s fiction : 2013 to present (merging two previous categories) Best collection : 2008 to present Best fantasy novel : 1995 to present Best fantasy novella : 2016 (for 2015 awards) Best fantasy short story : 1995 to present Best horror novel : 1995 to present Best horror novella : 2016 (for 2015 awards) Best horror short story : 1995 to present Best illustrated book/graphic novel : 2008 to present Best science fiction novel : 1995 to present Best science fiction novella : 2016 (for 2015 awards) Best science fiction short story : 1995 to present Best young adult novel : 1995 to present Best young adult short story : 1995 to present Convenors' Award for excellence : 1998 to present Sara Douglass Book Series Award : 2015 Also presented at Aurealis Awards ceremonies since the 2009 awards, although not officially an Aurealis Award, is the Kris Hembury Encouragement Award.

During the years 2001 to 2007 the category "best children’s illustrated work/picture book" was simply known as "best children’s short fiction" and "best children's novel" was known as "best children's long fiction". From 1998 to 2000 the Peter McNamara Convenors' Award for excellence was known simply as the Convenors' Award for excellence but was changed in honour of Peter McNamara the original convenor.

[ 8 ] In earlier years the eligibility period was 1 November to 31 October, rather than the current 1 January to 31 December. The transitional period was the 2010 Awards for which the eligibility period was 1 November 2009 to 31 December 2010.

Retired or merged awards [ edit ] Golden Aurealis for best novel: 2004 to 2007 Golden Aurealis for best short story: 2004 to 2007 Aurealis Award for best children's fiction (told primarily through words) : 2001 to 2012 Aurealis Award for best children's fiction (told primarily through pictures) : 2001 to 2012 References [ edit ] ^ "AUREALIS", The Australian Science Fiction Bullsheet #51 -- 29 March 1996 ^ "2010 and beyond..." Chimaera Publications . Archived from the original on 15 August 2010 . Retrieved 18 May 2010 .

^ "HarperVoyager Sponsor the 2010 Aurealis Awards" (PDF) . Aurealis Awards. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 21 March 2011 .

^ a b "Aurealis Awards going to Canberra" . Archived from the original on 11 May 2013 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ "We welcome our new Aurealis Awards overlords!" . Retrieved 8 June 2015 .

^ "About the Awards" .

Aurealis Awards . 27 July 2014 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ "Exciting Announcement: three new categories for the Aurealis Awards!" . 11 February 2016 . Retrieved 14 March 2015 .

^ "aurealis awards, previous years' results" (PDF) . Aurealis Awards. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2010 . Retrieved 3 February 2010 .

External links [ edit ] Official Aurealis Awards Web site The Aurealis Award listings at the Locus Index to SF Awards v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aurealis_Award&oldid=1285672410 " Categories : Australian science fiction awards Fantasy awards Aurealis Awards Science fiction awards Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from December 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from December 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 01:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aurealis Award 5 languages Add topic

