Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works Toggle Works subsection 1.1 Ṣaḥīfat al-nāẓirīn 1.1.1 Editions 2 Further reading 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Husayni Isfahani 4 languages العربية فارسی Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Тоҷикӣ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other people named Al-Isfahani, see Al-Isfahani (disambiguation) .

The Prophet and the Persian physician , miniature by ‛Abid .

Mughal India, ca. 1645.

Freer Gallery of Art Ghiyāth al-Dīn ʿAlī ibn Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī Amīrān Iṣfahānī ( Arabic : غياث الدين على ابن حسينى ابن على اميرا الاصفهاني )  was a fifteenth-century Persian physician and scientist from Isfahan , Iran . He was, in the words of Daniel Beben, 'a polymath in the service of several of the Timurid governors of Badakhshān in the second half of the 15th century' CE.

[ 1 ] : 377 Little is known of him beyond the works attributed to him.

Works [ edit ] Asrār al-ḥurūf (870 AH/1465–1466 CE), dedicated to then governor of Badakhshān Abū Bakr, son of the Timurid ruler Abū Saʿīd Mirza .

Dānish-nāma-i jahān , dedicated to Sulṭān Maḥmūd Mirza , also a son of Abū Saʿīd Mirza, governor of Badakhshān from 873/1469.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This is Ghiyāth al-Dīn's best known work, a Persian encyclopedia of the natural sciences, concerned with meteorology , mineralogy , botany , and anatomy .

Durrat al-misāḥa (890 AH/1485 CE), on measurements and geometry, likewise dedicated to Sulṭān Maḥmūd Mirza.

Khulāṣat al-tanjīm va burhān al-taqvīm , on astronomy.

Maʿārif al-taqvīm , also known as Nujūm , also on astronomy.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] A small treatise on foodstuffs, in table format, is preserved in the National Library of Medicine collection.

Ṣaḥīfat al-nāẓirīn [ edit ] According to one recension of Ṣaḥīfat al-nāẓirīn ('pages for the readers'), also known as Tuḥfat al-nāẓirīn ('gift for the readers') and Sī ū shish ṣaḥīfa ('thirty-six chapters'), Ghiyāth al-Dīn also composed that text; Daniel Beben has accepted this attribution, arguing that its explicit Ismailism, which would have been unacceptable to the Timurids, implies that this text was composed before their conquest of Badakhshān.

[ 1 ] In Beben's assessment, 'the Ṣaḥīfat al-nāẓirīn is an important yet understudied work covering a series of topics related to Ismaili theology and doctrine, and is noteworthy for being the first Ismaili text known to have been composed within Badakhshān after Nāṣir-i Khusraw (d. after 462/1070)', who seems to have been the person who introduced Ismailism to that region.

[ 1 ] : 369 Most manuscripts of the Ṣaḥīfat al-nāẓirīn attribute the text to the legendary pīr Sayyid Suhrāb Walī , though Beben has suggested that the original person behind this figure might himself have been Ghiyāth al-Dīn.

The date of composition of the work is usually stated to be 856/857 AH/1452–1453 CE. As of 2022, thirteen manuscripts of the text were known (two copied from the 1960 printed edition); the oldest manuscript was copied in dated 1137/1725.

[ 1 ] : 372–73, 376–77 Editions [ edit ] Sayyid Suhrāb Walī, Tuḥfat al-nāẓirīn , ed. by Qudratullāh Beg (1960) Sayyid Suhrāb Walī Badakhshānī, Sī ū shish ṣaḥīfa , ed. by Hūshang Ujāqī and Wladimir Ivanow (Tehran, 1961).

Further reading [ edit ] For his writings and the date of composition his encyclopedia, see: Fateme Keshavarz, A Descriptive and Analytical Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the Library of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine (London: Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, 1986), pp 386–7.

Storey PL II,3 C.A. Storey, Persian Literature: A Bio-Bibliographical Survey. Volume II, Part 3: F. Encyclopaedias and Miscellanies, G. Arts and Crafts, H. Science, J. Occult Arts (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1977), pp 357–8 no. 595.

See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Daniel Beben, 'The Ṣaḥīfat al-nāẓirīn : Reflections on Authorship and Confessional Identity in a 15th-Century Central Asian Text', in Texts, Scribes and Transmission: Manuscript Cultures of the Ismaili Communities and Beyond , ed. by Wafi A. Momin (London: I.B. Tauris, 2022), pp. 369–88; doi : 10.5040/9780755645411.ch-015 .

^ Wladimir Ivanow, ‘The Date of the Dānish-nāma-i-jahān ’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , 1 (1927), 95–96.

^ Lutz Richter-Bernburg, ‘Medical and Veterinary Sciences. Part One: Medicine, Pharmacology and Veterinary Science in Islamic Eastern Iran and Central Asia’, in History of Civilizations of Central Asia, vol. 4, part 2: The Age of Achievements: A.D. 750 to the End of the Fifteenth Century , ed. by M. S. Asimov and C. E. Bosworth (Paris, 1998), p. 314.

^ Karim-Aly Kassam, Umed Bulbulshoev, and Morgan Ruelle, ‘Ecology of Time: Calendar of the Human Body in the Pamir Mountains’, Journal of Persianate Studies , 4 (2011), 146–70.

^ Ed. by Umed Mamadsherzodshoev (Khorogh, 1995).

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Husayni_Isfahani&oldid=1253067415 " Categories : 15th-century Iranian physicians Ismailism in Afghanistan 15th-century Ismailis Ismaili literature Hidden category: Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 24 October 2024, at 05:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Husayni Isfahani 4 languages Add topic

