Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Awards and recognitions 4 Personal life 5 Selected bibliography 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Jayati Ghosh 19 languages অসমীয়া Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം मराठी مصرى ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian economist This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Jayati Ghosh" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Jayati Ghosh" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jayati Ghosh Ghosh in 2012 Born ( 1955-09-16 ) 16 September 1955 (age 69) Spouse Abhijit Sen Academic background Alma mater University of Delhi ( BA ) Jawaharlal Nehru University ( MA , MPhil ) University of Cambridge ( PhD ) Doctoral advisor Terence J. Byres , Geoffrey C. Harcourt Academic work Discipline Development economics Institutions Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi University of Massachusetts Amherst Jayati Ghosh (born 16 September 1955) is an Indian development economist . She taught economics at Jawaharlal Nehru University , New Delhi for nearly 35 years, and since January 2021 she has been Professor of Economics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst , USA. Her core areas of study include international economics and globalisation, employment patterns in developing countries , macroeconomic policy , and gender and development .

Early life [ edit ] Jayati Ghosh was born on 16 September 1955.

[ 1 ] Ghosh attended Miranda House , Delhi University for her undergraduate and got her MA in economics from Jawaharlal Nehru University . She joined Cambridge University for her MPhil and PhD after winning the Inlaks Scholarship .

[ 2 ] Her 1984 doctoral thesis at Cambridge University was entitled The Non capitalist Land Rent: Theories and the Case of North India under the supervision of Dr. Terence J. Byres , Geoffrey C. Harcourt and Suzanne Paine .

Career [ edit ] In addition to her teaching, Ghosh has authored and/or edited 21 books and more than 220 scholarly articles. Recent books include The making of a catastrophe: Covid-19 and the Indian economy , Aleph Books 2022; When governments fail: Covid-19 and the economy , Tulika Books and Columbia University Press 2021 (co-edited); Women workers in the informal economy , Routledge 2021 (edited); Never Done and Poorly Paid: Women’s Work in Globalising India , Women Unlimited, New Delhi 2009; co-edited Elgar Handbook of Alternative Theories of Economic Development , 2014; co-edited After Crisis , Tulika 2009; co-authored Demonetisation Decoded , Routledge 2017.

Ghosh has advised governments in India and other countries, including as Chairperson of the Andhra Pradesh Commission on Farmers’ Welfare in 2004, and Member of the National Knowledge Commission of India (2005–09). She was the Executive Secretary of International Development Economics Associates, an international network of heterodox development economists, from 2002 to 2021. She has consulted for international organizations including ILO , UNDP , UNCTAD , UN-DESA , UNRISD and UN Women and is member of several international boards and commissions, including the UN High-Level Advisory Board on Economic and Social Affairs, the Commission on Global Economic Transformation of INET, and the International Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation ( ICRICT ). In 2021 she was appointed to the WHO Council on the Economics of Health for All, chaired by Mariana Mazzucato . She's a member of the Club of Rome . In March 2022, she was appointed to the UN Secretary General's High-Level Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism, mandated to provide a vision for international cooperation to deal with current and future challenges. She also writes regularly for popular media, including newspapers, journals and blogs, including Project Syndicate , Frontline , The Guardian and Hindu BusinessLine .

Awards and recognitions [ edit ] Ghosh has received a number of awards, including: John Kenneth Galbraith award, 2023 from the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association, "in recognition of breakthrough discoveries in economics and outstanding contributions to humanity through leadership, research and service." International Economic Association Fellow Award, 2023.

Adiseshaiah Award for distinguished contributions to the social sciences in India, 2015.

Conference President, Indian Society for Labour Economics, 2013.

[ 3 ] Satyendranath Sen Award, Asiatic Society, Kolkata , 2012.

ILO Decent Work Research Prize , Geneva , 2011.

NordSud Prize for Research in Social Sciences, Fondazione Pescarabruzzo, Italy, 2010.

Ava Maiti Memorial Prize, Asiatic Society , Kolkata 2006.

UNDP Award for Excellence in Analysis, (for West Bengal Human Development Report), New York 2006.

Personal life [ edit ] Ghosh was married to Abhijit Sen , an economist who was a member of the disbanded Planning Commission . He died in 2022. She has one daughter, Jahnavi Sen.

[ 4 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] Ghosh, Jayati.

The making of a catastrophe: the disastrous economic fallout of the Covid-19 pandemic in India . Aleph Books (2022).

Dixson-Declève, Sandrine, Owen Gaffney, Jayati Ghosh, Jorgen Randers, Johan Rockstrom, and Per Espen Stoknes.

Earth for All: A survival guide for humanity . New Society Publishers, 2022.

Rawal, Vikas, Jayati Ghosh, and C. P. Chandrasekhar.

When governments fail: a pandemic and its aftermath . Tulika (2021).

Ghosh, Jayati, ed.

Informal women workers in the Global South: Policies and practices for the formalisation of women's employment in developing economies . Routledge, 2021.

Reinert, Erik S., Jayati Ghosh, and Rainer Kattel, eds.

Handbook of alternative theories of economic development .

Edward Elgar Publishing, 2016.

Ghosh, Jayati (ed.), Economics: Volume 2: India and the International Economy , ICSSR Research Surveys and Explorations (Delhi, 2015).

Ghosh, Jayati; Chandrasekhar, C.P. (2001).

Crisis as conquest: learning from East Asia . New Delhi: Orient Longman .

ISBN 9788125018988 .

Ghosh, Jayati; Chandrasekhar, C.P. (2004) [1st. pub. LeftWord Books:2002].

The market that failed: neoliberal economic reforms in India (2nd ed.). New Delhi: LeftWord Books .

ISBN 9788187496458 .

Also reprinted January 2008, January 2009, July 2011.

Ghosh, Jayati (2009).

Never done and poorly paid: women's work in globalising India . New Delhi: Women Unlimited .

ISBN 9788188965441 .

Ghosh, Jayati (2009).

After crisis: adjustment, recovery, and fragility in East Asia . New Delhi: Tulika Books .

ISBN 9788189487584 .

See also [ edit ] Feminist economics List of feminist economists References [ edit ] ^ "Curriculum Vitae" (PDF) .

Jawaharlal Nehru University . Retrieved 14 October 2019 .

^ "Jayati Ghosh" .

Jawaharlal Nehru University . Retrieved 14 October 2019 .

^ "Jayati Ghosh" .

www.jnu.ac.in . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ Nandy, Chandan (30 August 2022).

"Saluting Abhijit Sen, one of India's greatest experts on rural economy" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 20 August 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Faculty profile at Jawaharlal Nehru University Profile at National Knowledge Commission Column archive Archived 6 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine at The Asian Age Column archive at The Guardian AP implements Jayati Ghosh suggestions , The Hindu Business Line , 23 September 2006 Jayati Ghosh awarded ILO prize , The Hindu , 12 February 2011 Videos on YouTube v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Portals : Biography Economics Feminism Education India Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Australia Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jayati_Ghosh&oldid=1259472993 " Categories : 1955 births Living people Bengali people Alumni of the University of Cambridge Feminist economists Indian columnists 20th-century Indian economists Indian women columnists Indian women academics Jawaharlal Nehru University alumni Academic staff of Jawaharlal Nehru University Indian women economists 20th-century Indian women scientists Indian feminist writers 20th-century Indian women writers 20th-century Indian non-fiction writers 21st-century Indian economists 21st-century Indian women writers 21st-century Indian writers 21st-century Indian non-fiction writers 21st-century Indian women scientists Women writers from Delhi Scientists from Delhi People from New Delhi Women scientists from Delhi Women educators from Delhi Educators from Delhi Miranda House alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from September 2024 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles lacking reliable references from September 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use British English from February 2018 Use dmy dates from February 2018 Articles with hCards Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 25 November 2024, at 10:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jayati Ghosh 19 languages Add topic

