Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Locations Toggle Locations subsection 1.1 Charlottesville, Virginia 1.2 Green Bank, West Virginia 1.3 Socorro, New Mexico 1.4 Tucson, Arizona 1.5 San Pedro de Atacama, Chile 2 Jansky Prize 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents National Radio Astronomy Observatory 18 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lëtzebuergesch 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°02′12″N 78°31′05″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.0368°N 78.5181°W ﻿ / 38.0368; -78.5181 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Federally funded research and development center for radio astronomy Observatory National Radio Astronomy Observatory Alternative names NRAO Organization Associated Universities, Inc.

Location United States Coordinates 38°02′12″N 78°31′05″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.0368°N 78.5181°W ﻿ / 38.0368; -78.5181 Established 1959 Website public .nrao .edu Telescopes Atacama Large Millimeter Array Green Bank Interferometer Green Bank Telescope Very Large Array Very Long Baseline Array Location of National Radio Astronomy Observatory Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] The National Radio Astronomy Observatory ( NRAO ) is a federally funded research and development center of the United States National Science Foundation operated under cooperative agreement by Associated Universities, Inc . for the purpose of radio astronomy . NRAO designs, builds, and operates its own high-sensitivity radio telescopes for use by scientists around the world.

[ 1 ] Locations [ edit ] Charlottesville, Virginia [ edit ] The NRAO headquarters is located on the campus of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Virginia . The North American ALMA Science Center and the NRAO Technology Center and Central Development Laboratory are also in Charlottesville.

[ 2 ] Green Bank, West Virginia [ edit ] The 100-meter Green Bank Telescope NRAO was, until October 2016, the operator of the world's largest fully steerable radio telescope , the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope , which stands near Green Bank, West Virginia .

[ 3 ] The observatory contains several other telescopes, among them the 140-foot (43 m) telescope that utilizes an equatorial mount uncommon for radio telescopes, three 85-foot (26 m) telescopes forming the Green Bank Interferometer , a 40-foot (12 m) telescope used by school groups and organizations for small scale research, a fixed radio " horn " built to observe the radio source Cassiopeia A, as well as a reproduction of the original antenna built by Karl Jansky while he worked for Bell Labs to detect the interference that was discovered to be previously unknown natural radio waves emitted by the universe.

[ 4 ] Green Bank is in the National Radio Quiet Zone , which is coordinated by NRAO for protection of the Green Bank site as well as the Sugar Grove Station monitoring site operated by the NSA . The zone consists of a 13,000-square-mile (34,000 km 2 ) piece of land where fixed transmitters must coordinate their emissions before a license is granted. The land was set aside by the Federal Communications Commission in 1958. No fixed radio transmitters are allowed within the area closest to the telescope. All other fixed radio transmitters including TV and radio towers inside the zone are required to transmit such that interference at the antennas is minimized by methods including limited power and using highly directional antennas. With the advent of wireless technology and microprocessors in everything from cameras to cars, it is difficult to keep the sites free of radio interference. To aid in limiting outside interference, the area surrounding the Green Bank Observatory was at one time planted with pines characterized by needles of a certain length to block electromagnetic interference at the wavelengths used by the observatory. At one point, the observatory faced the problem of North American flying squirrels tagged with United States Fish and Wildlife Service telemetry transmitters. Electric fences, electric blankets, faulty automobile electronics, and other radio wave emitters have caused great trouble for the astronomers in Green Bank. All vehicles on the premises are powered by diesel motors to minimize interference by ignition systems.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The 300-foot telescope after collapsing on November 15th, 1988 Until its collapse on November 15, 1988, a 300 ft radio telescope [ 7 ] stood at the Green Bank Observatory's unique site. It was the largest radio telescope on Earth when it was brought online for its first observation at 12:42 am on September 21, 1962. The telescope's first observation was of the remnants of Tycho's supernova that had exploded 11 November 1572. Two major overhauls installed a new surface in 1970 to correct for maintenance, snow damage, and warping from its sheer size; then a new, bigger project building was constructed in 1972 that incorporated a Faraday cage around the control room itself. The telescope stood at 240 ft in height, weighed 600 tons, had a 2-minute arc accuracy, and had a surface accuracy of ~1 inch. The collapse in 1988 was found to be due to unanticipated stresses which cracked a hidden, yet weight- and stress-supporting steel connector plate, in the support structure of the massive telescope. A cascade failure of the structure occurred at 9:43 pm, causing the entire telescope to implode. The debris from the collapse was cleared by June 1989, and West Virginia Senator Robert C. Byrd would pioneer a campaign in Congress to replace it with the Green Bank Telescope , construction for which began in 1990.

Socorro, New Mexico [ edit ] The Very Large Array (VLA), an array of 27 dish antennas The NRAO's facility in Socorro is the Pete Domenici Array Operations Center (AOC). Located on the New Mexico Tech university campus, the AOC serves as the headquarters for the Very Large Array (VLA), which was the setting for the 1997 movie Contact , and is also the control center for the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA). The ten VLBA telescopes are in Hawaii , the U.S. Virgin Islands , and eight other sites across the continental United States.

[ 8 ] Tucson, Arizona [ edit ] Offices were located on the University of Arizona campus. NRAO formerly operated the 12-Meter Telescope on Kitt Peak . NRAO suspended operations at this telescope and funding was rerouted to the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) instead.

[ 9 ] The Arizona Radio Observatory now operates the 12-Meter Telescope.

[ 10 ] San Pedro de Atacama, Chile [ edit ] The Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) site in Chile is at ~5,000 m (16,000 ft) altitude near Cerro Chajnantor in northern Chile.

[ 11 ] This is about 40 km (25 miles) east of the historic village of San Pedro de Atacama , 130 km (81 miles) southeast of the mining town of Calama, and about 275 km (171 miles) east-northeast of the coastal port of Antofagasta .

[ 12 ] On 12 May 2012, another Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) antenna was carried up to the 5,000-metre plateau of Chajnantor, bringing the total on the plateau to 33.

[ 13 ] Jansky Prize [ edit ] The Karl G. Jansky Lectureship is a prestigious lecture awarded by the board of trustees of the NRAO. The Lectureship is awarded "to recognize outstanding contributions to the advancement of radio astronomy".

[ 14 ] Recipients have included Fred Hoyle , Charles Townes , Edward M. Purcell , Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar , Philip Morrison , Vera Rubin , Jocelyn Bell Burnell , Frank J. Low , and Mark Reid.

[ 15 ] The lecture is delivered in Charlottesville , Green Bank , and in Socorro .

See also [ edit ] List of astronomical observatories National Optical Astronomy Observatory References [ edit ] ^ "National Radio Astronomy Observatory" .

National Radio Astronomy Observatory . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "Maps & Directions" .

Nrao.edu . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "NRAO Structural Changes: Announcing the Separation of the Green Bank Observatory and the Long Baseline Observatory" .

Associated Universities, Inc . 29 March 2016 . Retrieved May 20, 2019 .

^ "Other Telescopes at Green Bank" .

Gb.nrao.edu . Retrieved May 20, 2019 .

^ "National Radio Quiet Zone — Science Website" .

Science.nrao.edu . Retrieved May 20, 2019 .

^ "NRAO Green Bank Site RFI Regulations for Visitors" (PDF) .

Gb.nrao.edu . Retrieved May 20, 2019 .

^ "300-ft telescope at Green Bank Site" .

Gb.nrao.edu . Retrieved August 17, 2022 .

^ "NRAO: Socorro, New Mexico" .

Aoc.nrao.edu . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "National Radio Astronomy Observatory – Legacy Content – Tucson" .

Legacy.nrao.edu . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "Arizona Radio Observatory" .

Aro.as.arizona.edu . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "ALMA" .

Almaobservatory.org . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "ALMA Location" .

Almaobservatory.org . Archived from the original on 10 July 2017 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "Halfway There: 33 ALMA Antennas on Chajnantor" .

ESO Announcement . Retrieved 15 May 2012 .

^ "Jansky Lecture Redirect" .

Nrao.edu . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "2012 Jansky Lecturer" .

Nrao.edu . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Radio Astronomy Observatory .

Official website v t e Radio astronomy Concepts Units ( watt and jansky ) Radio telescope ( Radio window ) Astronomical interferometer ( History ) Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Astronomical radio source Radio telescopes ( List ) Individual telescopes 500 meter Aperture Spherical Telescope (FAST, China ) Arecibo Telescope (Puerto Rico, US) Caltech Submillimeter Observatory (CSO, US ) Effelsberg Telescope (Germany) Galenki RT-70 (Russia) Green Bank Telescope (West Virginia, US) Large Millimeter Telescope (Mexico) Lovell Telescope (UK) Ooty Telescope (India) Qitai Radio Telescope (China) RATAN-600 Radio Telescope ( Russia ) Sardinia Radio Telescope (Italy) Suffa RT-70 (Uzbekistan) Usuda Telescope (Japan) UTR-2 decameter radio telescope (Ukraine) Yevpatoria RT-70 (Ukraine) Southern Hemisphere HartRAO (South Africa) Parkes Observatory (Australia) Warkworth Radio Astronomical Observatory (NZ) Interferometers Allen Telescope Array (ATA, California, US ) Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA, Chile ) Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA, Australia ) Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder (ASKAP, Australia ) Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME, Canada ) Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-wave Astronomy (CARMA, California, US ) European VLBI Network (Europe) Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope (GMRT, India ) Green Bank Interferometer (GBI, West Virginia, US ) Korean VLBI Network (KVN, South Korea ) Large Latin American Millimeter Array (LLAMA, Argentina/Brazil ) Long Wavelength Array (LWA, New Mexico, US ) Low-Frequency Array (LOFAR, Netherlands ) MeerKAT ( South Africa ) Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope (MOST, Australia ) Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN, UK ) Murchison Widefield Array (MWA, Australia ) Northern Cross Radio Telescope ( Italy ) Northern Extended Millimeter Array ( France ) One-Mile Telescope (UK) Primeval Structure Telescope (PaST, China ) Square Kilometre Array (SKA, Australia, South Africa ) Submillimeter Array (SMA, US ) Very Large Array (VLA, New Mexico, US ) Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA, US ) Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT, Netherlands ) Space-based HALCA ( Japan ) Spektr-R ( Russia ) Observatories Algonquin Radio Observatory (Canada) Arecibo Observatory (Puerto Rico, US) Green Bank Observatory (US) Haystack Observatory (US) Jodrell Bank Observatory (UK) Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory (UK) National Radio Astronomy Observatory (US) Nançay Radio Observatory (France) Onsala Space Observatory (Sweden) Pushchino Radio Astronomy Observatory (PRAO ASC LPI, Russia ) Special Astrophysical Observatory of the Russian Academy of Science (SAORAS, Russia ) Vermilion River Observatory (US) Multi-use DRAO (Canada) ESA New Norcia (Australia) PARL (Canada) People Elizabeth Alexander John G. Bolton Edward George Bowen Ronald Bracewell Jocelyn Bell Burnell Arthur Covington Nan Dieter-Conklin Frank Drake Cyril Hazard Antony Hewish Sebastian von Hoerner Karl Guthe Jansky Kenneth Kellermann Frank J. Kerr John D. Kraus Bernard Lovell Christiaan Alexander Muller Jan Oort Joseph Lade Pawsey Ruby Payne-Scott Arno Penzias Grote Reber Martin Ryle Govind Swarup Gart Westerhout Paul Wild Robert Wilson Astronomy by EM methods Submillimetre astronomy Infrared astronomy Optical astronomy High-energy astronomy Gravitational-wave astronomy Related articles Aperture synthesis Cosmic microwave background radiation Interferometry Odd radio circle Pulsar timing array Radio propagation SETI Wow! signal HD 164595 signal Solar radio emission Category Commons Portals : Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Education Science Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Australia Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Radio_Astronomy_Observatory&oldid=1305021595 " Categories : Radio observatories Astronomy institutes and departments Federally Funded Research and Development Centers University of Virginia National Science Foundation Radio astronomy research institutes Research institutes in Virginia Science and technology in Virginia Research institutes established in 1956 Scientific organizations established in 1956 1956 establishments in Virginia Organizations based in Virginia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using Infobox observatory using locally defined parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 15:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Radio Astronomy Observatory 18 languages Add topic

