Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Social corporatism 3 languages Português Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic corporatism based upon a partnership between capital and labour Corporatism Concepts Body politic Brotherhood economics Family as model for the state Consociationalism Corporation (feudal Europe) Corporate group Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft Guild Guild socialism Livery company New State Organicism Proprietary Corporation Solidarism Solidarity Schools Christian Conservative Fascist Liberal Nationalistic Social Solidarist Sosist Statist Tripartite Wandervogel People Agar Belloc Blüher Cole Doboszyński Douglas Dreher Durkheim Fernandes Hegel Khaldūn MacIntyre Manoilescu Minguijón Minville Müller Mussolini Orage Penty Pesch Pradera Larumbe Paul the Apostle Plato Reckitt Le Roy Ladurie Salazar Leo XIII Salleron Schurtz Spann Tönnies Vargas Volpi Weaver Literature The Republic (375 BC) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Rerum novarum (1891) The Servile State (1912) Preussentum und Sozialismus (1919) New State (1935) Common Organization of the Society (1935–1936) Organizations Acción Legionaria Blue Labour Camp of Great Poland Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Democratic Nationalist Party (Romania) Estado Novo Fatherland League Liberal Party National Agrarian Party National Assembly National Corporate Party National-Radical Movement "Falanga" National Union Romanian Front United Party Related articles Catholic social teaching Economics of fascism Social democracy Syndic Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Social corporatism , also called social democratic corporatism , [ 1 ] is a form of economic tripartite corporatism based upon a social partnership between the interests of capital and labour , involving collective bargaining between representatives of employers and of labour mediated by the government at the national level. Social corporatism is present to a lesser degree in the Western European social market economies .

[ 2 ] It is considered a compromise to regulate the conflict between capital and labour by mandating them to engage in mutual consultations that are mediated by the government.

[ 3 ] Generally supported by nationalist [ 4 ] and/or social-democratic political parties, social corporatism developed in the post- World War II period, influenced by Christian democrats and social democrats in Western European countries such as Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden.

[ 5 ] Social corporatism has also been adopted in different configurations and to varying degrees in various Western European countries.

[ 2 ] The Nordic countries have the most comprehensive form of collective bargaining, where trade unions are represented at the national level by official organizations alongside employers' associations . Together with the welfare state policies of these countries, this forms what is termed the Nordic model. Less extensive models exist in Austria and Germany which are components of Rhine capitalism .

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Some controversy has existed in the political left over social corporatism, where it has been criticized for abandoning the concept of class struggle in favour of class collaboration and compromise, legitimizing privately owned enterprise and for lending credence to a form of regulated capitalism .

[ 6 ] Others on the left counter these criticisms by claiming that social corporatism has been progressive in providing institutional legitimacy to the labour movement that recognizes the existence of ongoing class conflict between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat , but they seek to provide peaceful resolutions to disputes arising from the conflict based on moderation rather than revolution .

[ 7 ] Proponents of social corporatism consider it a class compromise within the context of existing class conflict .

[ 8 ] In the 1930s, social democracy was labeled social fascism by the Communist International which maintained that social democracy was a variant of fascism because in addition to their shared corporatist economic model they stood in the way of transitioning to communism and socialism .

[ 9 ] The development of social corporatism began in Norway and Sweden in the 1930s and was consolidated in the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 10 ] The system was based upon the dual compromise of capital and the labour as one component and the market and the state as the other component.

[ 10 ] Social corporatism developed in Austria under the post-World War II coalition government of the Social Democratic Party of Austria and the Austrian People's Party .

[ 11 ] Social corporatism in Austria protects private property in exchange for allowing the labour movement to have political recognition and influence in the economy—to avoid the sharp class conflict that plagued Austria in the 1930s.

[ 12 ] J. Barkley Rosser Jr.

and Marina V. Rosser wrote: Liberal corporatism is largely self-organized between labor and management, with only a supporting role for government. Leading examples of such systems are found in small, ethnically homogeneous countries with strong traditions of social democratic or labor party rule, such as Sweden's Nordic neighbors. Using a scale of 0.0 to 2.0 and subjectively assigning values based on six previous studies, Frederic Pryor in 1988 found Norway and Sweden the most corporatist at 2.0 each, followed by Austria at 1.8, the Netherlands at 1.5, Finland, Denmark, and Belgium at 1.3 each, and Switzerland and West Germany at 1.0 each.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Preussentum und Sozialismus Third Position Third Way Welfare capitalism References [ edit ] ^ Hicks 1988 .

^ a b c d Rosser & Rosser 2003 , p. 226.

^ Katzenstein 1987 , pp. 74–75; Moschonas 2002 , pp. 63–69.

^ Overy 2004 , p. 614.

^ Moschonas 2002 , p. 64.

^ Moschonas 2002 , pp. 65–69.

^ Moschonas 2002 , p. 69.

^ Moschonas 2002 , p. 70.

^ Haro 2011 ; Hoppe 2011 .

^ a b Moschonas 2002 , p. 65.

^ Katzenstein 1987 , p. 73.

^ Katzenstein 1987 , p. 75.

Bibliography [ edit ] Hicks, Alexander (1988). "Social Democratic Corporatism and Economic Growth".

The Journal of Politics .

50 (3). Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press: 677– 704.

doi : 10.2307/2131463 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

JSTOR 2131463 .

S2CID 154785976 .

Haro, Lea (2011). "Entering a Theoretical Void: The Theory of Social Fascism and Stalinism in the German Communist Party".

Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory .

39 (4). Glasgow, Scotland: Glasgow University Press: 563– 582.

doi : 10.1080/03017605.2011.621248 .

S2CID 146848013 .

Hoppe, Bert (2011).

In Stalins Gefolgschaft: Moskau und die KPD 1928–1933 (in German). Munich, Germany: R. Oldenbourg Verlag.

ISBN 9783486711738 .

Katzenstein, Peter J. (1987) [1984].

Corporatism and Change: Austria, Switzerland, and the Politics of Industry (1st reprinted ed.). Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801494673 .

Moschonas, Gerassimos (2002).

In the Name of Social Democracy: The Great Transformation, 1945 to the Present . Translated by Elliott, Gregory. London, England: Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1-85984-639-1 .

Overy, Richard (2004).

The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia (illustrated, reprinted ed.). London, England: Allen Lane.

ISBN 9780713993097 .

Rosser, J. Barkley; Rosser, Marina V. (2003).

Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-18234-8 .

v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_corporatism&oldid=1266792843 " Categories : Comparative politics Corporatism Nordic model Social democracy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from April 2016 CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 2 January 2025, at 06:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social corporatism 3 languages Add topic

