Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 Species 3 Types of containers 4 Planting 5 Re-potting 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Container garden 7 languages Español فارسی Français Bahasa Melayu Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practice of growing plants exclusively in containers "Pot farm" redirects here. For marijuana farming, see Cannabis cultivation .

Container garden on front porch Container gardening or pot gardening/farming is the practice of growing plants, including edible plants, exclusively in containers instead of planting them in the ground.

[ 1 ] A container in gardening is a small, enclosed and usually portable object used for displaying live flowers or plants. It may take the form of a pot , box , tub, basket, tin, barrel or hanging basket .

Methods [ edit ] Pots, traditionally made of terracotta but now more commonly plastic, and window boxes are the most commonly seen. Small pots are called flowerpots .

[ 2 ] In some cases, this method of growing is used for ornamental purposes. This method is also useful in areas where the soil or climate is unsuitable for the plant or crop in question. Using a container is also generally necessary for houseplants .

Limited growing space , or growing space that is paved over, can also make this option appealing to the gardener .

[ 2 ] Additionally, this method is popular for urban horticulture on balconies of apartments and condominiums where gardeners lack the access to the ground for a traditional garden.

[ 3 ] Species [ edit ] Many types of plants are suitable for the container, including decorative flowers, herbs , cacti , vegetables, and small trees and shrubs.

[ 4 ] Herbs and small edible plants such as chili peppers and arugula can be grown inside the house, if there is adequate light and ventilation, and on outdoor terraces, larger vegetables may be planted.

[ citation needed ] Types of containers [ edit ] A wide variety of containers can be used in container gardens, each offering unique benefits and aesthetic qualities. Among the most popular types from a 2024 survey are: Hanging baskets Suitable for trailing plants, hanging baskets can be suspended from ceilings, walls, or specially designed stands, adding vertical interest and maximizing space in small gardens.

Window boxes These containers fit on windowsills, and are suitable for flowers, herbs, and small vegetables.

Wall planters Mounted on walls, these planters can be used for vertical gardening . They come in various designs, including pockets and shelves, making them suitable for a range of plant types.

Other common container options include traditional pots, which vary in material from terracotta to plastic, and sub-irrigated planters . Containers can also be repurposed items such as barrels and tins, allowing for creative and personalized garden designs.

Planting [ edit ] An ornamental planter at Regent's Park , Inner London , England Containers range from simple plastic pots, to teacups, to complex automatically watered irrigation systems. This flexibility in design is another reason container gardening is popular with growers. They can be found on porches, front steps, and—in urban locations—on rooftops.

Sub-irrigated planters (SIP) are a type of container that may be used in container gardens.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Re-potting [ edit ] Re-potting is the action of placing an already potted plant into a larger or smaller pot.  A pot that fits a plant's root system better is normally used.  Plants are usually re-potted according to the size of their root system.  Most plants need to be re-potted every few years because they become "pot-" or "root-bound".  A plants' roots can sense its surroundings , including the size of the pot it is in, and increasing the pot size allows plant size to increase proportionally.

[ 6 ] Gallery [ edit ] Balcony gardening at night Tomato plants growing in a pot farm alongside a small house in fifteen garbage cans filled with soil Senecio angulatus growing in clay and plastic pots on a veranda See also [ edit ] Gardening portal Gardens portal Dutch flower bucket List of garden types Seedling Urban compost References [ edit ] ^ Mills, Linn (29 January 2012).

"Reap Benefits Of Container Gardening" .

Las Vegas Review Journal . Retrieved 1 January 2013 .

^ a b "Welcome To The World Of Container Gardening" . University of Illinois . Retrieved 1 January 2013 .

^ Neville, Jayne (2008).

Flowerpot farming : creating your own urban kitchen garden . Preston: Good Life.

ISBN 978-1904871316 .

^ a b Thompson, Al (18 December 2012).

"Container Gardening Offers Many Benefits" .

Santa Maria Times . Retrieved 1 January 2013 .

^ Note: SIP simply means watering from below, in large commercial applications it would not be strictly a container garden.

^ Society for Experimental Biology (1 July 2012).

"Want bigger plants? Get to the root of the matter" . (e) Science News . Retrieved 18 July 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Potted plants .

University of Illinois Container Gardening Guide Container Vegetable Gardening v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Container_garden&oldid=1296994532 " Categories : Types of garden Horticultural techniques Garden features Urban agriculture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 15:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Container garden 7 languages Add topic

