Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Influences 3 Reception 4 Legacy 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mona Lisa Overdrive 14 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1988 science fiction novel by William Gibson This article is about the novel. For the Buck-Tick album, see Mona Lisa Overdrive (album) . For the Don Davis and Juno Reactor song, see Mona Lisa Overdrive (song) .

Mona Lisa Overdrive Cover of first edition (hardcover) Author William Gibson Series Sprawl trilogy Genre Science fiction , cyberpunk Publisher Victor Gollancz Ltd Publication date 1988 Media type Print (hardcover and paperback) Pages 251 ISBN 0-553-05250-0 OCLC 17876008 Dewey Decimal 813/.54 19 LC Class PS3557.I2264 M65 1988 Preceded by Count Zero Mona Lisa Overdrive is a science fiction novel by American-Canadian writer William Gibson , published in 1988. It is the final novel of the cyberpunk Sprawl trilogy , following Neuromancer and Count Zero , taking place eight years after the events of the latter. The novel was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel , the Hugo Award for Best Novel , and the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 1989.

[ 1 ] Plot [ edit ] Taking place eight years after the events of Count Zero and fifteen years after Neuromancer , the story is formed from several interconnecting plot threads, and also features characters from Gibson's previous works (such as Molly Millions , the razor-fingered mercenary from Neuromancer ).

Thread one :  concerns Mona, a teen prostitute who has a more-than-passing resemblance to famed Simstim superstar Angie Mitchell (one of the characters featured in Count Zero ). Mona is hired by shady individuals for a "gig" which later turns out to be part of a plot to abduct Angie.

Thread two : focuses on a young half-Japanese girl named Kumiko Yanaka, daughter of a yakuza boss, who is sent to London to keep her safe while her father engages in a gang war with other top yakuza leaders. In London, she is cared for by one of her father's retainers, who is also a powerful member of the London Mob. She meets Molly Millions (having altered her appearance and now calling herself "Sally Shears", in order to conceal her identity from hostile parties who are implied to be pursuing her), who takes the girl under her wing.

Thread three : follows a reclusive artist named Slick Henry, who lives in a place named Factory in the Dog Solitude; a large, poisoned expanse of deserted factories and dumps, probably in southern New Jersey. Slick Henry is a convicted car thief whose punishment consisted of having his short-term memory erased every five minutes, leading to continuous confusion and dissociation. Following the end of his sentence, he spends his days creating large robotic sculptures and periodically suffers episodes of time loss, returning to consciousness afterward with no memory of what he did during the blackout. He is coerced by an acquaintance to look after the comatose "Count" ( Bobby Newmark , the titular character of Count Zero , who has hooked himself into a super-capacity cyber-bio hard drive called an Aleph).

Thread four : follows Angie, who can access cyberspace directly without the use of any computer hardware thanks to brain alterations made by her father when she was a child. Her production company has provided her with drugs that severely impede this ability, but she decides to break her addiction as a means of reinvigorating her career.

The four plotlines merge when Sally foils the abduction attempt and takes both Angie and Mona to Factory, where Angie and Bobby permanently upload their consciousnesses into the Aleph (now connected to the matrix) and leave their bodies to die. Having already undergone cosmetic surgery to make herself appear identical to Angie, Mona takes her place as a simstim star, while Sally gets her entire criminal past wiped out. The Aleph is on the verge of making contact with an alien artificial intelligence located near Alpha Centauri , detected by the matrix when it attained sentience at the end of Neuromancer .

Influences [ edit ] The story of the reclusive artist who makes cybernetic sculptures is a reference to Mark Pauline of Survival Research Labs .

[ 2 ] The name of the dense lump of cybernetic hardware that Bobby Newmark's consciousness is jacked into is a direct reference to the short story " The Aleph " by Argentinian author Jorge Luis Borges . The titular Aleph is a point in space which contains all other points, and if one were to gaze into the Aleph one would be able to see or experience the entirety of existence.

Reception [ edit ] Thomas M. Disch reviewed the novel for the New York Times , giving it a mixed review: "Only in retrospect, however, is Mona Lisa Overdrive a disappointment. Zing by zing, its 45 chapters provide a sufficiency of non-nutritive fun." [ 3 ] It received positive reviews in Kirkus Reviews [ 4 ] and Publishers Weekly .

[ 5 ] Legacy [ edit ] A track of the score for the film The Matrix Reloaded by Juno Reactor and Don Davis was named " Mona Lisa Overdrive ".

The Matrix trilogy was heavily influenced by Gibson's writing. A different version of the song is on Juno Reactor's album Labyrinth .

[ 6 ] A track in the album Mista Thug Isolation by Lil Ugly Mane is titled "Mona Lisa Overdrive".

[ 7 ] Japanese rock band Buck-Tick 's album of the same name was mistakenly named as such, since Hisashi Imai confused it with Robert Longo 's 1986 wall sculpture Samurai Overdrive [ 8 ] when naming the album.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ "1989 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved July 17, 2009 .

^ Queen Victoria's Personal Spook, Psychic Legbreakers, Snakes and Catfood: An Interview with William Gibson and Tom Maddox ^ Disch, Thomas M. (December 11, 1988).

"LOST IN CYBERSPACE" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 20, 2024 .

^ MONA LISA OVERDRIVE | Kirkus Reviews .

^ "Mona Lisa Overdrive by William Gibson" .

www.publishersweekly.com . Retrieved February 20, 2024 .

^ " "Juno Reactor - Labyrinth" complete track list from the official website" . Archived from the original on May 29, 2016 . Retrieved March 14, 2014 .

^ "MONA LISA OVERDRIVE, by LIL UGLY MANE" .

^ [1] Robert Longo 1986 Samurai Overdrive wall sculpture purchased by Alexander Grey Associates and Société Générale in Paris ^ "BUCK-TICK" .

Ongaku to Hito (in Japanese) (2). 2003.

External links [ edit ] An in-depth analysis v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mona_Lisa_Overdrive&oldid=1297868927 " Categories : 1988 American novels Sprawl trilogy 1988 science fiction novels Cyberpunk novels Dystopian novels Novels by William Gibson Works about the Yakuza Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 01:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mona Lisa Overdrive 14 languages Add topic

