Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Planetary model 3 Works 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Nur ad-Din al-Bitruji 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català الدارجة Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Slovenščina کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Al-Bitruji ) 12th-century Iberian Arab astronomer and Qadi "Alpetragius" redirects here. For the lunar crater, see Alpetragius (crater) .

Nur ad-Din al-Bitruji Born 12th century Died c. 1204 Academic background Influences Avempace , Ibn Tufail , al-Zarqali Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age Main interests Astronomy Notable works Kitāb al-Hayʾah Notable ideas First non‐Ptolemaic astronomical system; physical cause of celestial motions Influenced Grosseteste , Albertus Magnus , Roger Bacon , Regiomontanus , Copernicus [ 1 ] Nūr al-Dīn ibn Isḥaq al-Biṭrūjī ( Arabic : نور الدين ابن إسحاق البطروجي , died c. 1204), known in the West by the Latinized name of Alpetragius , was an Arab [ 2 ] [ 3 ] astronomer and qadi in al-Andalus .

[ 4 ] Al-Biṭrūjī was the first astronomer to present the concentric spheres model as an alternative to the Ptolemaic system, with the planets borne by geocentric spheres . Another original aspect of his system was proposing a physical cause of celestial motions.

[ 4 ] His alternative system spread through most of Europe during the 13th century.

[ 1 ] The crater Alpetragius on the Moon is named after him.

Life [ edit ] Almost nothing about his life is known, except that his name probably derives from Los Pedroches (al-Biṭrawsh), a region near Cordoba .

[ 4 ] He was a disciple of Ibn Tufail (Abubacer) and was a contemporary of Averroes .

Planetary model [ edit ] Al-Bitruji proposed a theory on planetary motion in which he wished to avoid both epicycles and eccentrics , [ 5 ] and to account for the phenomena peculiar to the wandering stars, by compounding rotations of homocentric spheres. This was a modification of the system of planetary motion proposed by his predecessors, Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) and Ibn Tufail (Abubacer). He was unsuccessful in replacing Ptolemy 's planetary model, as the numerical predictions of the planetary positions in his configuration were less accurate than those of the Ptolemaic model, [ 6 ] because of the difficulty of mapping Ptolemy's epicyclic model onto Aristotle 's concentric spheres.

It was suggested based on the Latin translations that his system is an update and reformulation of that of Eudoxus of Cnidus combined with the motion of fixed stars developed by al-Zarqālī . However, it is not known whether the Andalusian cosmologists had access or knowledge of Eudoxus works.

[ 4 ] One original aspect of al-Biṭrūjī's system is his proposal of a physical cause of celestial motions. He combines the idea of " impetus " (first proposed by John Philoponus ) and the concept of shawq ("desire"), of Abū al‐Barakāt al‐Baghdādī , to explain how energy is transferred from a first mover placed in the 9th sphere to other spheres, explaining the other spheres' variable speeds and different motions. He contradicts the Aristotelian idea that there is a specific kind of dynamics for each world, applying instead the same dynamics to the sublunar and the celestial worlds.

[ 4 ] His alternative system spread through most of Europe during the 13th century, with debates and refutations of his ideas continued up to the 16th century.

[ 1 ] Copernicus cited his system in the De revolutionibus while discussing theories of the order of the inferior planets.

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Al-Bitruji wrote Kitāb al-Hayʾah (Arabic: 'كتاب الهيئة , romanized: Book of the Structure ), which presented criticism of Ptolemy's Almagest from a physical point of view. It was well known in Europe between the 13th and the 16th centuries and was regarded as a valid alternative to Ptolemy's Almagest in scholastic circles.

[ 4 ] This work was translated into Latin by Michael Scot in 1217 as De motibus celorum [ 7 ] (first printed in Vienna in 1531).

Moses ibn Tibbon translated it into Medieval Hebrew in 1259.

[ 4 ] There is also an anonymous treatise on the tides (Escorial MS 1636, dated 1192), which contains material seemingly borrowed from al-Bitruji.

[ 4 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Samsó 1980 .

^ Vernet.

"al-Biṭrūd̲j̲ī" .

^ Salim Ayduz, Caner Dagli (2014).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Science, and Technology in Islam . Oxford University Press. p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-19-981257-8 .

^ a b c d e f g h Samsó 2007 .

^ Bernard R. Goldstein (March 1972). "Theory and Observation in Medieval Astronomy", Isis 63 (1), p. 39-47 [41].

^ Ptolemaic Astronomy, Islamic Planetary Theory, and Copernicus's Debt to the Maragha School , Science and Its Times , Thomson Gale .(inaccessible document) ^ Pederson, Olaf. (1978) Science in the Middle Ages. ed. by David Lindberg. Chicago: Chicago University Press. p. 321 References [ edit ] Samsó, Julio (2007).

"Biṭrūjī: Nūr al‐Dīn Abū Isḥāq [Abū Jaʿfar] Ibrāhīm ibn Yūsuf al‐Biṭrūjī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

133– 4.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) Samsó, Julio (1980) [1970-80].

"Al-Bitruji Al-Ishbili, Abu Ishaq" .

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Helaine Selin , Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non western cultures , p. 160 v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Vatican Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nur_ad-Din_al-Bitruji&oldid=1295153285 " Categories : 12th-century births 1204 deaths 12th-century Arab people 13th-century Arab people Astronomers from al-Andalus Scholars from al-Andalus 12th-century Spanish philosophers Medieval Islamic philosophers 12th-century astronomers Philosophers from al-Andalus 12th-century writers from al-Andalus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nur ad-Din al-Bitruji 27 languages Add topic

