Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Comparative religion 2 Abrahamic religions Toggle Abrahamic religions subsection 2.1 Judaism 2.2 Christianity 2.3 Islam 2.4 Baháʼí Faith 3 Other religions Toggle Other religions subsection 3.1 Hinduism 3.2 Zoroastrianism 3.3 Gnosticism 4 See also 5 Further reading 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Holy Spirit 105 languages Afrikaans العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Iñupiatun IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Reo tahiti Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Twi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 IsiNdebele seSewula Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religious concept with varied meanings For other uses, see Holy Spirit (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on the Philosophy of religion Religious concepts Afterlife Apophatism Cataphatism Eschatology Enlightenment Intelligent design Liberation Miracle Mysticism Religious belief Reincarnation Religious faith Scripture (religious text) Soul Spirit Theological veto God Conceptions Anthropopathism Brahman Demiurge Divinely simple Form of the Good Holy Spirit Maltheist Occasionalism Pandeist Personal Process-theological Summum bonum Supreme Being Unmoved mover Existence Arguments for Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Arguments against 747 gambit Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistency Nonbelief Noncognitivism Omnipotence paradox Poor design Russell's teapot By religion Abrahamic Baháʼí Christianity Islam Judaism Mormonism Mandaeism Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Wicca Theories of religion Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism atheist Christian Feminist Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Christian religious secular Inclusivism Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism humanistic metaphysical religious New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Process Secular Shrine Theory Shendao shejiao Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Al-Ghazali Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 19th-century Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir Usman dan Fodio Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal Contemporary George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber Sergei Bulgakov René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Pavel Florensky Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J. L. Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I. Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew Kurt Gödel Graham Oppy J. L. Schellenberg Paul Draper William L. Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Cornel West Loyal Rue Herman Philipse Kai Nielsen Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Yujin Nagasawa Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Ethics in religion Exegesis Faith and rationality History of religions Natural theology Religion and science Religious philosophy Theology v t e The Holy Spirit , otherwise known as the Holy Ghost , is a concept within the Abrahamic religions . In Judaism , the Holy Spirit is understood as the divine quality or force of God manifesting in the world, particularly in acts of prophecy , creation and guidance. In Nicene Christianity , this conception expanded in meaning to represent the third person of the Trinity , co-equal and co-eternal with God the Father and God the Son . In Islam , the Holy Spirit acts as an agent of divine action or communication. In the Baha’i Faith , the Holy Spirit is seen as the intermediary between God and man and "the outpouring grace of God and the effulgent rays that emanate from His Manifestation".

[ 1 ] Comparative religion [ edit ] The Hebrew Bible contains the term " spirit of God " ( ruach elochim ) which by Jews is interpreted in the sense of the might of a unitary God .

[ citation needed ] This interpretation is different from the Nicene Christian conception of the Holy Spirit as one person of the Trinity .

[ 2 ] The Christian concept tends to emphasize the moral aspect of the Holy Spirit as a common expression in the New Testament .

[ 3 ] For instance, the book of Acts emphasizes the power of ministry aspect of the Holy Spirit.

[ 4 ] In general, Jews reject any conception of a co-equal, multi-person godhead ; anything but an absolute monotheism is contrary to the Shema . They do not consider the Hebrew word for "one" (Hebrew: אחד, ekhad ) as meaning anything other than a simple numerical one .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The rabbinical understanding of the Holy Spirit has a certain degree of personification , but it remains, "a quality belonging to God, one of his attributes".

[ 7 ] The idea of God as a duality or trinity is considered shituf (or "not purely monotheistic").

According to theologian Rudolf Bultmann , there are two ways to think about the Holy Spirit: "animistic" and "dynamistic". In animistic thinking, he is "an independent agent, a personal power which (...) can fall upon a man and take possession of him, enabling him or compelling him to perform manifestations of power" while in dynamistic thought it "appears as an impersonal force which fills a man like a fluid".

[ 8 ] Both kinds of thought appear in Jewish and Christian scripture, but animistic is more typical of the Old Testament whereas dynamistic is more common in the New Testament.

[ 9 ] The distinction coincides with the Holy Spirit as either a temporary or permanent gift. In the Old Testament and Jewish thought, it is primarily temporary with a specific situation or task in mind, whereas in the Christian concept the gift resides in persons permanently.

[ 10 ] On the surface, the Holy Spirit appears to have an equivalent in non-Abrahamic Hellenistic mystery religions . These religions included a distinction between the spirit and psyche , which is also seen in the Pauline epistles . According to proponents [ who?

] of the History of religions school , the Christian concept of the Holy Spirit cannot be explained from Jewish ideas alone without reference to the Hellenistic religions.

[ 11 ] But according to theologian Erik Konsmo, the views "are so dissimilar that the only legitimate connection one can make is with the Greek term πνεῦμα [ pneuma , Spirit] itself".

[ 12 ] Another link with ancient Greek thought is the Stoic idea of the spirit as anima mundi – or world soul – that unites all people.

[ 12 ] Some [ by whom?

] believe that this can be seen in Paul's formulation of the concept of the Holy Spirit that unites Christians in Jesus Christ and love for one another, but Konsmo again thinks that this position is difficult to maintain.

[ 13 ] In his Introduction to the 1964 book Meditations , the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth wrote: Another Stoic concept which offered inspiration to the Church was that of "divine Spirit". Cleanthes, wishing to give more explicit meaning to Zeno's "creative fire", had been the first to hit upon the term pneuma , or "spirit", to describe it. Like fire, this intelligent "spirit" was imagined as a tenuous substance akin to a current of air or breath, but essentially possessing the quality of warmth; it was immanent in the universe as God, and in man as the soul and life-giving principle. Clearly it is not a long step from this to the "Holy Spirit" of Christian theology, the "Lord and Giver of life", visibly manifested as tongues of fire at Pentecost and ever since associated – in the Christian as in the Stoic mind – with the ideas of vital fire and beneficent warmth.

[ 14 ] Abrahamic religions [ edit ] Judaism [ edit ] Main article: Holy Spirit in Judaism The Hebrew language phrase ruach ha-kodesh ( Hebrew : רוח הקודש , "holy spirit" also transliterated ruaḥ ha-qodesh ) is used in the Hebrew Bible and Jewish writings to refer to the spirit of YHWH (רוח יהוה).

[ 15 ] The Hebrew terms ruacḥ qodshəka , "thy holy spirit" ( רוּחַ קָדְשְׁךָ ), and ruacḥ qodshō , "his holy spirit" ( רוּחַ קָדְשׁוֹ ), also occur (when a possessive suffix is added the definite article ha is dropped).

The Holy Spirit in Judaism generally refers to the divine aspect of prophecy and wisdom. It also refers to the divine force, quality, and influence of the Most High God, over the universe or over his creatures, in given contexts.

[ 16 ] Christianity [ edit ] Main article: Holy Spirit in Christianity For the large majority of Christians , the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost , from Old English gast , "spirit") is the third [ 17 ] person of the Trinity: The "Triune God" manifested as Father , Son , and Holy Spirit; each Person being God.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Two symbols from the New Testament canon are associated with the Holy Spirit in Christian iconography : a winged dove, and tongues of fire.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Each depiction of the Holy Spirit arose from different accounts in the Gospel narratives; the first being at the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan River where the Holy Spirit was said to descend in the form of a dove as the voice of God the Father spoke as described in Matthew , Mark , and Luke ; [ 21 ] the second being from the day of Pentecost , fifty days after Passover where the descent of the Holy Spirit came upon the Apostles and other followers of Jesus Christ , as tongues of fire as described in the Acts of the Apostles , [ 23 ] as promised by Jesus in his farewell discourse.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Called "the unveiled epiphany of God ", [ 26 ] the Holy Spirit is the One who empowers the followers of Jesus with spiritual gifts [ 27 ] [ 28 ] and power [ 29 ] [ 30 ] that enables the proclamation of Jesus Christ, and the power that brings conviction of faith.

[ 31 ] Depiction of the Christian Holy Spirit as a dove , by Gian Lorenzo Bernini , in the apse of Saint Peter's Basilica A depiction of the Trinity consisting of God the Holy Spirit along with God the Father and God the Son Pentecost icon depicting the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles and Mary in the form of tongues of flame above their heads Islam [ edit ] Main article: Holy Spirit in Islam The Holy Spirit ( Arabic : روح القدس , romanized : Ruh al-Qudus , "the Spirit of Holiness") is mentioned four times in the Qur'an , [ 32 ] where it acts as an agent of divine action or communication. The Muslim interpretation of the Holy Spirit is generally consistent with other interpretations based upon the Old and the New Testaments. On the basis of narrations in certain Hadith , some Muslims identify it with the angel Gabriel (Arabic Jibrāʾīl ).

[ 33 ] The Spirit ( الروح al-Ruh , without the adjective "holy" or "exalted") is described, among other things, as the creative spirit from God by which God enlivened Adam , and which inspired in various ways God's messengers and prophets, including Jesus and Abraham . The belief in a "Holy Trinity", according to the Qur'an, is forbidden and deemed to be blasphemy . The same prohibition applies to any idea of the duality of God ( Allah ).

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] Main article: Maid of Heaven The Baháʼí Faith has the concept of the Most Great Spirit , seen as the bounty of God .

[ 36 ] It is usually used to describe the descent of the Spirit of God upon the messengers/prophets of God who include, among others, Jesus, Muhammad and Bahá'u'lláh .

[ 37 ] In Baháʼí belief, the Holy Spirit is the conduit through which the wisdom of God becomes directly associated with his messenger, and it has been described variously in different religions such as the burning bush to Moses, the sacred fire to Zoroaster, the dove to Jesus, the angel Gabriel to Muhammad, and the Maid of Heaven to Bahá'u'lláh (founder of the Baháʼí Faith).

[ 38 ] The Baháʼí view rejects the idea that the Holy Spirit is a partner to God in the Godhead, but rather is the pure essence of God's attributes.

[ 39 ] Other religions [ edit ] Hinduism [ edit ] See also: Shakti The theologian Raimon Panikkar believed the Hindu concept of Advaita was linked to the Trinity. He stated that the Holy Spirit, as one of the Three Persons of the Trinity of "father, Logos and Holy Spirit", was a bridge-builder between Christianity and Hinduism, despite Shiva and the Holy Spirit occupying vastly different roles in their respective religions. He explains that: "The meeting of spiritualistic can take place in the Spirit. No new 'system' has primarily to come of this encounter, but a new and yet old spirit must emerge." [ 40 ] Atman is Vedic terminology elaborated in Hindu scriptures such as Upanishads and Vedanta signifies the Ultimate Reality and Absolute .

[ 41 ] Zoroastrianism [ edit ] In Zoroastrianism , the Holy Spirit, also known as Spenta Mainyu , is a hypostasis of Ahura Mazda , the supreme Creator God of Zoroastrianism; the Holy Spirit is seen as the source of all goodness in the universe, the spark of all life within humanity, and is the ultimate guide for humanity to righteousness and communion with God. The Holy Spirit is put in direct opposition to its eternal dual counterpart, Angra Mainyu , who is the source of all wickedness and who leads humanity astray.

[ 42 ] Gnosticism [ edit ] The ancient Gnostic text known as the Secret Book of John refers to the supreme female principle Barbelo as the Holy Spirit.

[ 43 ] See also [ edit ] Avatar Baptism with the Holy Spirit Barakah Chaplet of the Holy Spirit and His Seven Gifts Cult of the Holy Spirit Deity Gender of the Holy Spirit God in Abrahamic religions Great Spirit Intercession of the Spirit Parable of the Leaven Pneumatology Further reading [ edit ] Bellarmine, Robert (1902).

"The Holy Ghost." .

Sermons from the Latins . Benziger Brothers.

Council of Trent (1829).

"Part 1: Article 8 "I Believe in the Holy Ghost." " .

The catechism of the Council of Trent . Translated by James Donovan. Lucas Brothers.

Deharbe, Joseph (1912).

"Eighth Article: 'I believe in the Holy Ghost.' " .

A Complete Catechism of the Catholic Religion . Translated by Rev. John Fander. Schwartz, Kirwin & Fauss.

Forget, Jacques (1910).

"Holy Ghost" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Swete, Henry Barclay (1912).

The Holy Spirit in the Ancient Church: a Study of Christian Teaching in the Age of the Fathers .

ISBN 0342946455 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Some Answered Questions: The Holy Spirit" .

www.bahai.org . Retrieved January 31, 2022 .

^ Espín, Orlando O. (2007).

"Holy Spirit" . In Espín, Orlando O.; Nickoloff, James B. (eds.).

An Introductory Dictionary of Theology and Religious Studies . Collegeville: Liturgical Press. p. 576.

ISBN 978-0-8146-5856-7 .

^ Dunn, James D. G. (2006).

"Towards the Spirit of Christ: The Emergence of the Distinctive Features of Christian Pneumatology" . In Welker, Michael (ed.).

The Work of the Spirit: Pneumatology and Pentecostalism . Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-8028-0387-0 .

^ Menzies, William W. and Robert P. "Spirit and Power." Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2000.

^ Zukeran, Dr. Patrick (June 14, 2005).

"Judaism Viewed from a Christian Perspective" .

Probe Ministries . Retrieved September 4, 2024 .

^ The Trinity and Deity of Jesus: What the Bible Really Teaches – Retrieved 21 June 2013.

^ Joseph Abelson, The Immanence of God in Rabbinical Literature (London:Macmillan and Co., 1912).

^ Bultmann 2007 , p. 155.

^ Bultmann 2007 , pp. 156–157.

^ Bultmann 2007 , pp. 157.

^ Konsmo 2010 , p. 2.

^ a b Konsmo 2010 , p. 5.

^ Konsmo 2010 , p. 6.

^ Aurelius, Marcus (1964).

Meditations . London: Penguin Books . p.

25 .

ISBN 0-14044140-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Singer, Isidore ; et al., eds. (1901–1906).

"Holy Spirit" .

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

Cf. also the term ruaḥ Elohim (Hebrew: רוח אלהים, "spirit/wind of God"). See, for example, Guy Darshan, "Ruaḥ ’Elohim in Genesis 1:2 in Light of Phoenician Cosmogonies: A Tradition's History," Journal of Northwest Semitic Languages 45,2 (2019), 51–78.

^ Alan Unterman and Rivka Horowitz, Ruah ha-Kodesh, Encyclopaedia Judaica (CD-ROM Edition, Jerusalem: Judaica Multimedia/Keter, 1997).

^ Gilles Emery (2011).

The Trinity: An Introduction to Catholic Doctrine on the Triune God . Catholic University of America Press.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1864-9 .

^ Erickson, Millard J. (1992).

Introducing Christian Doctrine . Baker Book House. p. 103.

^ Hammond, T. C. (1968). Wright, David F. (ed.).

In Understanding be Men: A Handbook of Christian Doctrine (6th ed.).

Inter-Varsity Press . pp.

54– 56, 128– 131.

^ Grudem, Wayne A. (1994).

Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine.

Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press; Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan . p. 226.

^ a b Bible , Luke 3:22, NIV ^ Bible , Acts 2:3, NIV ^ Bible , Acts 2:1–31 ^ Bible , John 14-16 ^ Williams, Charles (1950).

The descent of the Dove : a short history of the Holy Spirit in the church . London: Faber.

^ Kasemann, Ernst (1960).

The Beginnings of Christian Theology [ W.J. Montague, New Testament Questions of Today ] (in German). Philadelphia: Fortress.

ISBN 978-1-316-61990-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Bible , I Corinthians 13:4-11, NIV ^ Wesley, John (2003).

The Holy Spirit and power . Keefauver, Larry., Weakley, Clare G. ([Rev. and updated ed.] ed.). Gainesville, Fla.: Bridge-Logos. p. 107.

ISBN 088270947X .

OCLC 53143450 .

^ Bible Acts 1:8 ^ Johnson, Bill.

When Heaven Invades Earth . Destiny Image, 2005 ^ Fee, Gordon D. (1994). "God's empowering presence: the Holy Spirit in the letters of Paul." Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson.

^ Qur'an search: روح القدس.

searchtruth.com.

^ "What Is Meant by the Holy Spirit in the Qur'an?" .

Islam Awareness . Sheikh Ahmad Kutty . Retrieved November 14, 2018 .

^ Griffith, Sidney H.

Holy Spirit , Encyclopaedia of the Quran .

^ Thomas Patrick Hughes , A Dictionary of Islam , p. 605.

^ `Abdu'l-Bahá (1981) [1904–06].

"The Holy Spirit" .

Some Answered Questions . Wilmette, Illinois, USA: Baháʼí Publishing Trust. pp.

108– 109.

ISBN 0-87743-190-6 .

^ Taherzadeh, Adib (1976).

The Revelation of Bahá'u'lláh, Volume 1: Baghdad 1853–63 . Oxford, UK: George Ronald. p. 10.

ISBN 0-85398-270-8 .

^ Abdo, Lil (1994).

"Female Representations of the Holy Spirit in Baháʼí and Christian writings and their implications for gender roles" .

Baháʼí Studies Review .

4 (1).

^ `Abdu'l-Bahá (1981) [1904–06].

"The Trinity" .

Some Answered Questions . Wilmette, Illinois, USA: Baháʼí Publishing Trust. pp.

113– 115.

ISBN 0-87743-190-6 .

^ Camilia Gangasingh MacPherson (1996).

A Critical Reading of the Development of Raimon Panikkar's Thought on the Trinity . University Press of America. pp.

41– 32.

ISBN 978-0-7618-0184-9 .

^ Veli-Matti Kärkkäinen (2010).

Holy Spirit and Salvation . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 431.

ISBN 978-0-664-23136-1 .

^ Mary Boyce (1990).

Textual Sources for the Study of Zoroastrianism . University of Chicago Press. p. 12.

ISBN 978-0-22606-930-2 .

^ Marvin Meyer ; Willis Barnstone (June 30, 2009). "The Secret Book of John".

The Gnostic Bible .

Shambhala . Retrieved October 15, 2021 .

Works cited [ edit ] Bultmann, Rudolf (2007) [1951].

Theology of the New Testament . Vol. 1. Translated by Grobel, Kendrick. Waco: Baylor University Press. § 14. The Spirit: 1.

ISBN 978-1-932792-93-5 .

Konsmo, Erik (2010).

The Pauline Metaphors of the Holy Spirit: The Intangible Spirit's Tangible Presence in the Life of the Christian . New York: Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-1-4331-0691-0 .

Marcus Aurelius (1964).

Meditations . London: Penguin Books .

ISBN 0-14044140-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Portal : Religion Holy Spirit at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Names of God In Hinduism In Zoroastrianism Abrahamic In Chinese In Christianity In Judaism In Islam In Mandaeism Adonai Ahura Mazda Khuda Parvardigar Allah Amun Aten Atum Bathala Brahman Bhagavan Mahadevi Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Kali Durga Deva Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Rama Krishna Shiva Hiranyagarbha Ishvara Om Tad Ekam Purusha Svayam Bhagavan Caodaism Chukwu Deus Devla Ein Sof El Elohim El Elyon El Shaddai God God the Father God the Son God the Holy Spirit Great Spirit Manitou / Gitche Manitou Wakan Tanka Haneunim Hayyi Rabbi Holy Spirit Huwa Hyang Acintya Sanghyang Adi Buddha Hypsistos I Am that I Am Jahbulon Jehovah 1 Kami Lord Mawu Mulungu Ngai Nyame Nzambi a Mpungu Olodumare Ọlọrun Olofi Osanobua Roog Shen Shangdi Tian Tianzhu Sol Invictus Elagabalus Tenri-Ō-no-Mikoto The One Umvelinqangi Unkulunkulu Waheguru Ik Onkar YHWH Jehovah Jah Yahweh v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Argentina Poland Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐rxtqm
Cached time: 20250814215918
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.839 seconds
Real time usage: 1.008 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4307/1000000
Revision size: 22984/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 244040/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4265/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 171001/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.514/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24720962/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  803.494      1 -total
 21.54%  173.079     22 Template:Cite_book
 16.99%  136.498      1 Template:Reflist
 10.11%   81.234      7 Template:Transliteration
  9.93%   79.792      1 Template:Subject_bar
  9.69%   77.832      1 Template:Philosophy_of_religion_sidebar
  9.51%   76.378      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.71%   53.893      3 Template:Sidebar
  6.27%   50.389      1 Template:Short_description
  5.35%   43.003      1 Template:Christianity_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14379:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215918 and revision id 1301967923. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holy_Spirit&oldid=1301967923 " Categories : Holy Spirit Conceptions of God Knowledge deities Names of God Theology Wisdom deities Knowledge gods Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2019 Use American English from September 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2023 Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Holy Spirit 105 languages Add topic

