Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Schulze's skepticism 3 Reactions 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Aenesidemus (book) 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1792 book by Gottlob Ernst Schulze Aenesidemus is a German book published anonymously by Professor Gottlob Ernst Schulze of Helmstedt in 1792. Schulze attempted to refute the principles that Karl Leonhard Reinhold established in support of Immanuel Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason (1781). The title is a reference to Aenesidemus , an ancient Greek Pyrrhonist philosopher. Its complete title, in English translation, was Aenesidemus or Concerning the Foundations of the Philosophy of the Elements Issued by Professor Reinhold in Jena Together with a Defense of Skepticism against the Pretensions of the Critique of Reason ( German : Aenesidemus oder über die Fundamente der von dem Herrn Professor Reinhold in Jena gelieferten Elementar-Philosophie. Nebst einer Vertheidigung des Skepticismus gegen die Anmassungen der Vernunftkritik ).

Summary [ edit ] The book was supposed to be a written correspondence between Hermias ( Greek : "a follower of Hermes "), who believes in the Kantian critical philosophy, and Aenesidemus (Greek: "he who praises the people"), who is skeptical about that philosophy.

David Hume 's skepticism about induction , according to this book, was not disproved by Kant.  As Hume had asserted, the existence of causality , the soul , or the thing-in-itself cannot be proved.

Schulze's skepticism [ edit ] Philosophy cannot establish the existence or non-existence of the thing-in-itself. By establishing general principles, we can't know the limits of our ability to know. Progressive development, however, can approach complete knowledge.

[ 1 ] No skeptic can doubt the reality and certainty of mental representations and mental events that are immediately given through consciousness.

Skepticism doubts the possibility of knowledge about the existence or non-existence of the thing-in-itself. Kant, however, was guilty of begging the question in that he presupposed that the thing-in-itself exists and causally interacts with observing subjects.

Kant and Reinhold claimed that the reality of objects can be known from the representations in the mind of the observing subject. This is inferring objective reality from subjective thought. Such an inference is the fallacy of drawing existential conclusions from logical premises.

Kant's critical philosophy is self-contradictory.  He said that things-in-themselves cause sensations in an observer 's mind . Kant applied causality to noumena . But, in his critique, he had claimed that causality is a category of the understanding that can only be applied to phenomena .

Kant posited real existence to the postulates of God , Free Will , and Immortal Souls . But this is more than is necessary for moral theology , which only requires belief in them as Ideas of Reason .

The science of psychology does not require that the soul have faculties. Rather, psychology is a detailed description and systematic classification of actual mental events.

[ 2 ] If we were to take critical philosophy seriously, we would commit ourselves to resolving experiences into two parts — a system of universal subjective forms on one side, and a mass of amorphous, meaningless objective matter on the other.

[ 3 ] How can we be sure that Kant's obligation to be moral is the result of freedom? It might be the result of some irrational natural force.

Reactions [ edit ] Kant's response was indicated in his letter to Jakob Sigismund Beck , December 4, 1792: "Under the assumed name of Aenesidemus, an even wider skepticism has been advanced, namely, that we cannot know at all whether our representations correspond to anything else (as object), which is as much as to say: whether a representation is a representation (stands for anything).  For 'representation' means a determination in us that we relate to something else (whose place the representation takes in us)..." [ 4 ] Reinhold wrote that true skepticism rested on the fact that only the observing subject felt what was in its consciousness. The only truth is the subject's notion that there is an object that agrees with its internal mental representation.

Johann Gottlieb Fichte agreed with Reinhold's subjectivity. He based his own idealism on the observing subject's internal forms of knowledge.

Arthur Schopenhauer agreed with Schulze: ["Therefore the world as [REPRESENTATION], in which aspect alone we are here considering it, has two essential, necessary, and inseparable halves. The one half is the object, whose forms are space and time, and through these plurality. But the other half, the subject, does not lie in space and time, for it is whole and undivided in every representing being. Hence a single one of these beings with the object completes the world as representation just as fully as do the millions that exist. And if that single one were to disappear, then the world as representation would no longer exist. Therefore these halves are inseparable even in thought, for each of the two has meaning and existence only through and for the other; each exists with the other and vanishes with it."].

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Vol. 7,  New York: Macmillan, 1972.

^ Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy , Cambridge University Press, 1996, ISBN 0-521-48328-X .

^ Between Kant and Hegel , trans. and ed. George Di Giovanni and H. S. Harris, Indianapolis, Hackett, 2000, ISBN 0-87220-504-5 .

^ Di Giovanni and Harris 2000, p. 25.

^ The World as Will and Representation , Volume I, Book 2.

External links [ edit ] Influence of Schulze's Aenesidemus on Fichte and Schopenhauer v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aenesidemus_(book)&oldid=1301439546 " Categories : 1792 non-fiction books Books about Immanuel Kant Works about skepticism Epistemology books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 21:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aenesidemus (book) 1 language Add topic

