Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Role and powers 2 History 3 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 3.1 Party 3.2 Tenure 3.3 Age 3.4 Gender 3.5 LGBTQ status 3.6 Race and ethnicity 3.7 Birthplace 3.8 Physical disability 4 Salary 5 Gubernatorial election timeline Toggle Gubernatorial election timeline subsection 5.1 Gubernatorial primaries 5.2 Comparison with other U.S. general elections 6 Term limits 7 Relationship with lieutenant governor 8 Constitutional gubernatorial qualifications by state 9 See also 10 Footnotes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Governor (United States) 21 languages Български Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ქართული Polski Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heads of government of each U.S. state and territory See also: List of current United States governors This article is part of a series on the State governments of the United States State constitution Comparison Statehouse Executive State executives Governor ( List ) Other common officials: Attorney general Auditor/Comptroller Lieutenant governor ( List ) Secretary of state Treasurer Agriculture commissioner List of statewide elected officials Legislative State representatives ( Alabama to Missouri , Montana to Wyoming ) State senators List of legislatures Judiciary State supreme court State court Local offices District attorney Politics portal United States portal v t e In the United States , a governor serves as the chief executive and commander-in-chief in each of the fifty states and in the five permanently inhabited territories , functioning as head of state and head of government therein.

[ nb 1 ] While like all officials in the United States, checks and balances are placed on the office of the governor, significant powers may include ceremonial head of state (representing the state), executive (overseeing the state's government), legislative (proposing, and signing or vetoing laws), judicial (granting state law pardons or commutations), and military (overseeing the militia and organized armed forces of the state).

[ 1 ] As such, governors are responsible for implementing state laws and overseeing the operation of the state executive branch . As state leaders, governors advance and pursue new and revised policies and programs using a variety of tools, among them executive orders , executive budgets, and legislative proposals and vetoes. Governors carry out their management and leadership responsibilities and objectives with the support and assistance of department and agency heads, many of whom they are empowered to appoint. A majority of governors have the authority to appoint state court judges as well, in most cases from a list of names submitted by a nominations committee.

[ 2 ] All with the exception of five states and one territory ( Arizona , [ nb 2 ] Maine , New Hampshire , Oregon , Puerto Rico , and Wyoming ) have a lieutenant governor . The lieutenant governor succeeds to the gubernatorial office (the powers and duties but not the office, in Massachusetts and West Virginia ), if vacated by impeachment, death, or resignation of the previous governor. Lieutenant governors also serve as unofficial acting state governors in case the incumbent governors are unable to fulfill their duties, and they often serve as presiding officers of the upper houses of state legislatures. In such cases, they cannot participate in political debates, and they have no vote whenever these houses are not equally divided.

Role and powers [ edit ] States are semi-sovereign republics sharing sovereignty with the federal government of the United States, and possess a number of powers and rights under the United States Constitution , such as regulating intrastate commerce, holding elections , creating local governments , and ratifying constitutional amendments . Each state has its own constitution , grounded in republican principles , and government, consisting of three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.

[ 3 ] Also, due to the shared sovereignty between each state and the federal government , Americans are citizens of both the federal republic and of the state in which they reside .

[ 4 ] The governor heads the government's executive branch in each state or territory and, depending on the individual jurisdiction, may have considerable control over government budgeting, the power of appointment of many officials (including many judges), and a considerable role in legislation. The governor may also have additional roles, such as that of commander-in-chief of the state's National Guard (when not federalized) and of that state's respective defense force (which is not subject to federalization). In many states and territories the governor also has partial or absolute power to commute or pardon a criminal sentence . All U.S. governors serve four-year terms except those in New Hampshire and Vermont , who serve two-year terms.

In all states, the governor is directly elected, and in most cases has considerable practical powers, though this may be moderated by the state legislature and in some cases by other elected executive officials. In the five extant U.S. territories, all governors are now directly elected as well, though in the past many territorial governors were historically appointed by the President of the United States. Governors can veto state bills, and in all but seven states they have the power of the line-item veto on appropriations bills (a power the President does not have). In some cases legislatures can override a gubernatorial veto by a two-thirds vote, in others by three-fifths.

In Alabama , Indiana , Kentucky , and Tennessee , the governor's veto can be overridden by a simple majority vote. In Arkansas , a gubernatorial veto may be overridden by an absolute majority . The governor of North Carolina had no veto power until a 1996 referendum. In 47 of the 50 states, whenever there is a vacancy of one of the state's U.S. Senate seats, that state's governor has the power to appoint someone to fill the vacancy until a special election is held; the governors of Oregon , Alaska , and Wisconsin do not have this power.

[ 5 ] A state governor may give an annual State of the State address in order to satisfy a constitutional stipulation that a governor must report annually (or in older constitutions described as being "from time to time") on the state or condition of the state. Governors of states may also perform ceremonial roles, such as greeting dignitaries, conferring state decorations, issuing symbolic proclamations or attending the state fair . The governor may also have an official residence (see Governor's Mansion ).

In a ranking of the power of the governorship in all 50 states, University of North Carolina political scientist Thad Beyle makes the distinction between "personal powers" of governors, which are factors that vary from person to person, season to season – and the "institutional powers" that are set in place by law. Examples of measurable personal factors are how large a governor's margin of victory was on election day, and standing in public opinion polls. Whether a governor has strong budget controls, appointment authority, and veto powers are examples of institutional powers.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Main article: Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies In colonial North America, governors were chosen in a variety of ways, depending on how the colony was organized. In the crown colonies of Great Britain, France, and Spain, the governor was chosen by the ruling monarch of the colonizing power, or his designees; in British colonies, the Board of Trade was often the primary decision maker. Colonies based on a corporate charter, such as the Connecticut Colony and the Massachusetts Bay Colony , elected their own governors based on rules spelled out in the charter or other colonial legislation. In proprietary colonies , such as the Province of Carolina before it became a crown colony (and was divided into North and South ), governors were chosen by the Lords Proprietor who controlled the colony. In the early years of the American Revolutionary War , eleven of the Thirteen Colonies evicted (with varying levels of violence) royal and proprietary governors. The other two colonies ( Connecticut and Rhode Island ) had corporate charters; Connecticut Governor Jonathan Trumbull was governor before and during the war period, while in Rhode Island, Governor Joseph Wanton was removed from office in 1775 for failing to support the rebel war effort.

Before achieving statehood, many of the 50 states were territories or parts of territories. Administered by the federal government, they had governors who were appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate rather than elected by the resident population. Election of territorial governors began in Puerto Rico in 1948. The last appointed territorial governor, Hyrum Rex Lee in American Samoa , left office in 1978.

Demographics [ edit ] Party [ edit ] Party affiliation of current United States state and territorial governors as of July 2025: Democratic (23 states, 2 territories, and 1 district) Republican (27 states) Independent (1 territory) New Progressive (Republican affiliated) (1 territory) Non-partisan (Republican affiliated) (1 territory) As of July 2025, there are 27 states with a Republican governor and 23 states with a Democratic governor. Four Democrats (including the Mayor of the District of Columbia ), one Independent, and one New Progressive also occupy territorial governorships or mayorships. No independent and other third parties currently hold a state governorship.

[ 7 ] Tenure [ edit ] Main article: List of longest-serving governors of U.S. states Governors' terms by state: No limit No limit, two-year terms One; re-eligible after 4 years Two; re-eligible after 4 years Two; re-eligible after 8 years Two, life For each term, governors serve four years in office. The exceptions are Vermont and New Hampshire where tenures are two years long.

The longest-serving current governor is Greg Abbott of Texas , who was re-elected to his third term in 2022 and seeking re-election to a fourth term in 2026.

The longest-serving governor of all time was Terry Branstad of Iowa , who was elected to his sixth (non-consecutive) term in 2014 . Governor Branstad resigned on May 24, 2017, to become the United States Ambassador to China. He held the title of Governor of Iowa for 22 years. On December 14, 2015, he became the longest-serving governor in US history, breaking the record held by George Clinton of New York , who served 21 years from 1777 to 1795 and from 1801 to 1804.

In the majority of states and territories, term limit laws officially cap a governor's tenure.

Age [ edit ] The oldest current state governor is Kay Ivey of Alabama , who was born on ( 1944-10-15 ) October 15, 1944 (age 80) . The youngest current state governor is Sarah Huckabee Sanders of Arkansas , who was born on ( 1982-08-13 ) August 13, 1982 (age 43) . Among territorial governors, Lou Leon Guerrero of Guam , born on ( 1950-11-08 ) November 8, 1950 (age 74) , is the oldest, and Jenniffer González-Colón of Puerto Rico , born on ( 1976-08-05 ) August 5, 1976 (age 49) , is the youngest.

The youngest person to ever serve as a governor in the United States was Stevens T. Mason of the Michigan Territory , first elected in 1835 having just turned 24. Mason would later become the first governor of the state of Michigan when it was admitted to the Union in January 1837, when he was 25. Mason was re-elected in November 1837, then age 26.

[ 8 ] The second youngest governor ever elected was Henry C. Warmoth of Louisiana , who was elected during reconstruction in 1868 at the age of 26. The third youngest governor was William Sprague IV of Rhode Island , who was elected in 1860 at the age of 29. When future President Bill Clinton was elected Governor of Arkansas in 1978 at age 32, he became the youngest governor since Harold Stassen of Minnesota , elected in 1938 at age 31.

[ 9 ] In 35 states, the minimum age requirement of the governor is age 30 years old or older, though in some it is age 25 years old or older (7), age 21 years old or older (1), or age 18 years old or older (5). Oklahoma is the only state with an older minimum age requirement, age 31 years old or older. Some states require the governor to be a qualified elector/voter, implying a minimum age of 18. Vermont requires candidates to be residents of the state for at least four years as of Election Day, which would preclude small children from running, but has no other implicit or explicit age limit.

[ 10 ] Gender [ edit ] Main article: List of female governors in the United States State and territorial governors, colored as male (blue) and female (pink) As of January 2025, there are 38 male state governors. The 12 female governors are: Kay Ivey of Alabama , Katie Hobbs of Arizona , Sarah Huckabee Sanders of Arkansas , Kim Reynolds of Iowa , Laura Kelly of Kansas , Janet Mills of Maine , Maura Healey of Massachusetts , Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan , Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire , Michelle Lujan Grisham of New Mexico , Kathy Hochul of New York , and Tina Kotek of Oregon . Of those, Ayotte, Huckabee Sanders, Ivey, and Reynolds are Republicans , while Healey, Hobbs, Hochul, Kelly, Kotek, Lujan Grisham, Mills, and Whitmer are Democrats .

4 territorial governors are male; one territorial governor and the mayor of Washington, D.C. are female.

43 women have served or are currently serving as state or territorial governors, including two in an acting capacity.

The first female governor was Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming (widow of the late Wyoming Governor William B. Ross ) who was elected on November 4, 1924, and sworn in on January 5, 1925, succeeding Frank Lucas . Also elected on November 4, 1924, was Miriam A. Ferguson of Texas (wife of former Texas Governor James E. Ferguson ), succeeding Pat Morris Neff on January 21, 1925. The first female governor elected without being the wife or widow of a past state governor was Ella T. Grasso of Connecticut , elected in 1974 and sworn in on January 8, 1975.

Connecticut , Arizona , and New Mexico are the only three states to have elected female governors from both major parties.

New Hampshire has also had female governors from two parties, but Republican Vesta M. Roy served only in the acting capacity for a short time. Arizona was the first state where a woman followed another woman as governor (they were from different parties). Arizona also has had the most female governors with a total of five, and is the first state to have three women in a row serve as governor.

Washington was the first state to have both a female governor and female U.S. Senators serving at the same time ( Christine Gregoire ; Patty Murray ; Maria Cantwell , respectively), from 2005 to 2013.

New Hampshire was the first and currently only state to have a female governor and entirely female Congressional delegation serving at the same time, from 2013 to 2015.

13 women have been serving as chief executive of their states since January 21, 2025, when Bethany Hall-Long left office as governor of Delaware . The previous record of 14 was set just days earlier following Kelly Ayotte 's inauguration as Governor of New Hampshire on January 9, 2025.

LGBTQ status [ edit ] There are currently three governors from the LGBTQ community: Jared Polis (Colorado), who is gay, and Tina Kotek (Oregon) and Maura Healey (Massachusetts) who are lesbians.

[ 11 ] Race and ethnicity [ edit ] Main article: List of minority governors and lieutenant governors in the United States Ethnic minorities as defined by the United States Census currently constitute 38.9% of the total population of the U.S. as of 2018.

[ 12 ] There are currently 47 state governors who are non-Hispanic whites of European American background. There are 3 minority governors: Wes Moore of Maryland , who is black, Michelle Lujan Grisham of New Mexico , who is of Hispanic descent; and Kevin Stitt of Oklahoma , who is a member of the Cherokee Nation . Stitt is a Republican , while Grisham and Moore are Democrats .

Among the five U.S. territories, one Hispanic ( Jenniffer González-Colón of Puerto Rico ), one Black ( Albert Bryan of the U.S. Virgin Islands ), and three Pacific Islander Americans ( Lou Leon Guerrero of Guam , Pula Nikolao Pula of American Samoa , and Arnold Palacios of the Northern Mariana Islands ) currently serve as governor. African-American Muriel Bowser is the current Mayor of the District of Columbia , an office equivalent to a governor.

In 1990, Douglas Wilder of Virginia became the first African-American governor of any state since the Reconstruction era .

Birthplace [ edit ] Main article: List of United States governors born outside the United States Sixteen of the current state governors were born outside the state they are serving: Mike Dunleavy of Alaska (born in Pennsylvania), Ned Lamont of Connecticut (born in Washington, D.C.), Josh Green of Hawaii (born in New York), J. B. Pritzker of Illinois (born in California), Laura Kelly of Kansas (born in New York), Maura Healey of Massachusetts (born in Maryland), Tim Walz of Minnesota (born in Nebraska), Greg Gianforte of Montana (born in California), Joe Lombardo of Nevada (born in Japan), Phil Murphy of New Jersey (born in Massachusetts), Kevin Stitt of Oklahoma (born in Florida), Tina Kotek of Oregon (born in Pennsylvania), Josh Shapiro of Pennsylvania (born in Missouri), Mark Gordon of Wyoming (born in New York), and Patrick Morrisey of West Virginia (born in New York City). One governor, Joe Lombardo of Nevada, was born outside the United States (born in Sapporo, Japan).

State constitutions have varying requirements for the length of citizenship and residency of the governor but unlike the President, state governors do not need to be natural-born citizens . There is some ambiguity in some state constitutions if a governor must be a citizen or just a resident.

Physical disability [ edit ] Two legally blind governors have served: Bob C. Riley , who was acting governor of Arkansas for 11 days in January 1975, and David Paterson , who was governor of New York from 2008 until 2011.

The current governor of Texas, Greg Abbott , has been paraplegic since an accident in 1984; he has used a wheelchair ever since. Governor of New York Franklin D. Roosevelt was paraplegic; he later became the first wheelchair-using president. Governor of Alabama George Wallace was paralyzed from the waist down after being shot in 1972. He never walked again.

Salary [ edit ] The average salary of a state governor in 2009 was $124,398. The highest salary currently being accepted is that of New York Governor Kathy Hochul at $225,000. The lowest salaries are those of Maine Governor Janet Mills and Jenniffer González-Colón of Puerto Rico at $70,000 each.

[ 13 ] There have been several instances where the governor of a state has either refused their salary in its entirety or instead only taken $1.00 per year. Alabama Governor Robert J. Bentley refused his yearly salary of $119,950.00 until the state reached full employment. Michigan Governor Rick Snyder took a $1.00 yearly salary. Texas Governor Greg Abbott has returned his salary to the state during each year he has held office. During his tenure as Governor of California , Arnold Schwarzenegger also did not accept his salary of $170,000 per year. However, several governors instead have decided to take a reduction in their salary instead of refusing it entirely. New York Governor Andrew Cuomo took a 5% reduction in his salary in 2015, and Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear reduced his salary by 10% during the same year.

Only nine states (Massachusetts, [ 14 ] California, Illinois, New York, New Jersey, Michigan, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, [ 15 ] and Virginia) currently offer their governors a higher salary than the $174,000 paid to members of Congress. In many states, the governor is not the highest-paid state employee; most often, that distinction is held by the head football or men's basketball coach at a major state university.

[ citation needed ] Gubernatorial election timeline [ edit ] All states except for Louisiana hold gubernatorial elections on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November. The earliest possible date for the election is therefore November 2 (if that date falls on a Tuesday), and the latest possible date is November 8 (if November 1 falls on a Tuesday). Louisiana holds its gubernatorial primary on the third or fourth Saturday of October and the general election (commonly referred to as the runoff within the state) on the third Saturday of November, but the general election is canceled if one candidate wins the primary outright (see primary section below).

2 states hold their gubernatorial elections every even-numbered year . Recent years are 2014 , 2016 , 2018 , 2020 , 2022 , 2024 .

New Hampshire and Vermont The other 48 states hold gubernatorial elections every four years.

34 states and 3 territories hold their gubernatorial elections during a midterm election year. Washington D.C. also holds its mayoral election during a midterm election year.

Recent years are 2006 , 2010 , 2014 , 2018 , and 2022 .

Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Wisconsin, Wyoming, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, and Washington, D.C.

9 states and 2 territories hold their gubernatorial elections during a presidential election year (although Puerto Rico and American Samoa do not hold an election for president). Recent years are 2008 , 2012 , 2016 , 2020 , and 2024 .

Delaware, Indiana, Missouri, Montana, North Carolina, North Dakota, Utah, Washington, West Virginia, American Samoa, and Puerto Rico.

3 states hold their gubernatorial elections the year before a presidential election year.

Recent years are 2007 , 2011 , 2015 , 2019 , and 2023 .

Kentucky, Louisiana, and Mississippi 2 states hold their gubernatorial elections the year after a presidential election year.

Recent years are 2005 , 2009 , 2013 , 2017 , and 2021 .

New Jersey and Virginia Gubernatorial primaries [ edit ] All states except for California, Louisiana, and Washington hold primaries in which each political party holds a primary election, and the winner of the primary election moves on to compete in a general election. In California, Louisiana, and Washington, all the candidates run in a blanket primary against each other. Regardless of political party, the top two candidates move on to the general election. In Louisiana, the general election occurs between the top two candidates if no candidate obtains more than 50% of the votes cast, and is canceled if one of the candidates receives more than 50%. In California and Washington, the top two vote getters proceed to the general election regardless of how many votes the top vote getter received in the primary, and California prohibits write-in candidates from competing in the general election.

Comparison with other U.S. general elections [ edit ] See also: List of elections in the United States Basic rotation of U.S. general elections ( fixed terms only [1] ) Year 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 Type Presidential Off-year Midterm Off-year Presidential President Yes No Yes Senate Class I (33 seats) No Class II (33 seats) No Class III (34 seats) House All 435 seats [3] No All 435 seats [2] No All 435 seats [3] Gubernatorial 11 states, 2 territories DE , IN , MO , MT , NH , NC , ND , UT , VT , WA , WV , AS , PR 2 states NJ , VA 36 states, DC, & 3 territories [4] AL , AK , AZ , AR , CA , CO , CT , FL , GA , HI , ID , IL , IA , KS , ME , MD , MA , MI , MN , NE , NV , NH , NM , NY , OH , OK , OR , PA , RI , SC , SD , TN , TX , VT , WI , WY , DC (Mayor) , GU , MP , VI 3 states KY , LA , MS 11 states, 2 territories DE , IN , MO , MT , NH , NC , ND , UT , VT , WA , WV , AS , PR Lieutenant gubernatorial [5] 5 states, 1 territory DE , MO , NC , VT , WA , AS 1 state VA 10 states [6] AL , AR , CA , GA , ID , NV , OK , RI , TX , VT 2 states LA , MS 5 states, 1 territory DE , MO , NC , VT , WA , AS Secretary of state 7 states MO , MT , NC , OR , VT , WA , WV None 26 states AL , AZ , AR , CA , CO , CT , GA , ID , IL , IN , IA , KS , MA , MI , MN , NE , NV , NM , ND , OH , RI , SC , TX , VT , WI , WY 3 states KY , LA , MS 7 states MO , MT , NC , OR , VT , WA , WV Attorney general 10 states IN , MO , MT , NC , OR , PA , UT , VT , WA , WV 1 state VA 30 states, DC, & 2 territories AL , AZ , AR , CA , CO , CT , DE , FL , GA , ID , IL , IA , KS , MD , MA , MI , MN , NE , NV , NM , NY , ND , OH , OK , RI , SC , SD , TX , VT , WI , DC , GU , MP 3 states KY , LA , MS 10 states IN , MO , MT , NC , OR , PA , UT , VT , WA , WV State treasurer [7] 9 states MO , NC , ND , OR , PA , UT , VT , WA , WV None 23 states AL , AZ , AR , CA , CO , CT , FL (CFO) , ID , IL , IN , IA , KS , MA , NE , NV , NM , OH , OK , RI , SC , VT , WI , WY 3 states KY , LA , MS 9 states MO , NC , ND , OR , PA , UT , VT , WA , WV State comptroller/controller None None 7 states CA , CT , IL , MD , NV , NY , SC None None State auditor 9 states MT , NC , ND , PA , UT , VT , WA , WV , GU None 15 states AL , AR , DE , IN , IA , MA , MN , MO , NE , NM , OH , OK , SD , VT , WY 2 states KY , MS 9 states MT , NC , ND , PA , UT , VT , WA , WV , GU Superintendent of public instruction 4 states MT , NC , ND , WA 1 state WI 8 states AZ , CA , GA , ID , OK , SC , SD (incl. Land) , WY None 4 states MT , NC , ND , WA Agriculture commissioner 2 states NC , WV None 6 states AL , FL , GA , IA , ND , SC 3 states KY , LA , MS 2 states NC , WV Insurance commissioner 3 states NC , ND , WA , None 5 states DE , CA GA , KS , OK , 2 states LA , MS 3 states NC , ND , WA , Other commissioners & elected officials 1 state NC (Labor) None 8 states AZ (Mine Inspector) , AR (Land) , GA (Land) , NM (Land) , ND (Tax) , OK (Labor) , OR (Labor) , TX (Land) None 1 state NC (Labor) State legislatures [8] 44 states, DC, & 5 territories AK, AZ, AR, CA, CO, CT, DE, FL, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, ME, MA, MI, MN, MO, MN, NE, NV, NH, NM, NY, NC, ND, OH, OK, OR, PA, RI, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VT, WA, WV, WI, WY, DC, AS, GU, MP, PR, VI 2 states VA, NJ 46 states, DC, & 4 territories AK, AL, AZ, AR, CA, CO, CT, DE, FL, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, ME, MA, MD, MI, MN, MO, MN, NE, NV, NH, NM, NY, NC, ND, OH, OK, OR, PA, RI, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VT, WA, WV, WI, WY, DC, AS, GU, MP, VI 4 states LA, MS, NJ, VA 44 states, DC, & 5 territories AK, AZ, AR, CA, CO, CT, DE, FL, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, ME, MA, MI, MN, MO, MN, NE, NV, NH, NM, NY, NC, ND, OH, OK, OR, PA, RI, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VT, WA, WV, WI, WY, DC, AS, GU, MP, PR, VI State boards of education [9] 8 states, DC, & 3 territories AL , CO , KS , MI , NE , OH , TX , UT , DC , GU, MP, VI None 8 states, DC, & 3 territories AL , CO , KS , MI , NE , OH , TX , UT , DC , GU, MP, VI None 8 states, DC, & 3 territories AL , CO , KS , MI , NE , OH , TX , UT , DC , GU, MP, VI Other state, local, and tribal offices Varies 1 This table does not include special elections , which may be held to fill political offices that have become vacant between the regularly scheduled elections.

2 As well as all six non-voting delegates of the U.S. House.

3 As well as five non-voting delegates of the U.S. House. The resident commissioner of Puerto Rico instead serves a four-year term that coincides with the presidential term.

4 The governors of New Hampshire and Vermont are each elected to two-year terms. The other 48 state governors and all five territorial governors serve four-year terms.

5 In 26 states and 3 territories the lieutenant governor is elected on the same ticket as the governor: AK, CO, CT, FL, HI, IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, MD, MA, MI, MN, MT, NE, NJ, NM, NY, ND, OH, PA, SC, SD, UT, WI, GU, MP, VI.

6 Like the governor, Vermont's other officials are each elected to two-year terms. All other state officers for all other states listed serve four-year terms.

7 In some states, the comptroller or controller has the duties equivalent to a treasurer. There are some states with both positions, so both have been included separately.

8 This list does not differentiate chambers of each legislature. Forty-nine state legislatures are bicameral; Nebraska is unicameral. Additionally, Washington, DC, Guam, and the US Virgin Islands are unicameral; the other territories are bicameral. All legislatures have varying terms for their members. Many have two-year terms for the lower house and four-year terms for the upper house. Some have all two-year terms and some all four-year terms. Arkansas has a combination of both two- and four-year terms in the same chamber.

9 Most states not listed here have a board appointed by the governor and legislature. All boards listed here have members that serve four-year staggered terms, except Colorado, which has six-year terms, and Guam, which has two-year terms. Most are elected statewide, some are elected from districts. Louisiana, Ohio, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands have additional members who are appointed.

view talk edit Term limits [ edit ] Further information: Term limits in the United States § Gubernatorial term limits In most states, governors can serve two four-year terms.

Relationship with lieutenant governor [ edit ] See also: Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States Position nonexistent Title given to the leader of state senate Separate election Same ticket in the general election, separate election in the primaries Same ticket The type of relationship between the governor and the lieutenant governor greatly varies by state. In some states the governor and lieutenant governor are completely independent of each other, while in others the governor gets to choose (prior to the election) who would be their lieutenant governor.

Five states do not have a lieutenant governor . In those states, a different constitutional officer assumes the office of the governor should there be a vacancy in the office. Those states are Arizona, Oregon, and, Wyoming where the Secretary of State is next in line, and Maine and New Hampshire, where the President of the Senate is next in line. This may exactly lead to the constitutional officers sometimes occasionally originating from the different political parties.

Two states have the State Senate appoint the lieutenant governor , which may sometimes occasionally mean that the governor and the lieutenant governor may be from different parties. Those states are Tennessee and West Virginia.

Seventeen states have the separate elections for the governor and the lieutenant governor , which may lead to the governor and the lieutenant governor being from very different political parties. Those states are Alabama, Arkansas, California, Delaware, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Nevada, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, and Washington.

Seven states have the governor and the lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket, but the governor does not get to choose their own running mate . In those states, the primaries for governor and lieutenant governor are held separately, and the winners run together as a joint ticket in the general election. The governor and lieutenant governor would therefore be from the same party, but not necessarily political allies. Those states are Connecticut, Hawaii, Massachusetts, New Mexico, New York, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.

Twenty states have the governor and the lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket, where the gubernatorial candidate gets to choose their running mate similar to the President and Vice President of the United States. In nine of those states, Alaska, Arizona, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, North Dakota, Ohio, and Utah, the gubernatorial candidates pick their running mates before the primaries. In the other ten states, Colorado, Florida, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, South Carolina, and South Dakota, the running mate is chosen after the primary. The latter system allows the nominee to potentially select a defeated primary competitor.

Constitutional gubernatorial qualifications by state [ edit ] Citizenship requirements to become Governor of a US State. States with Numbers are of US states with Citizenship requirements by Years.

With the notable exception of Kansas, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] each of the states specifies in its constitution its qualifications for Governor.

State and statute Minimum age Residency U.S. citizenship Registered voter/elector Sole employment Sole office Notes Alabama: Article V, Section 116 [ 18 ] 30 For at least seven years by the date of the election For at least ten years by the date of the election Yes Federal positions and any other state positions are precluded Alaska: Article III, Section 2 [ 19 ] 30 At least seven years prior to filing At least seven years prior to filing Yes Yes "qualified voter of the State..." "The governor shall not hold any other office or position of profit under the United States, the State, or its political subdivisions." Arizona: Article V, Section 2 : [ 20 ] 25 Five years by election day Five years by election day Yes Arkansas: Article 6, Section 11 [ 21 ] 30 By at least seven years on election day Yes Yes "May not hold any federal office, any civil or military commission, any office in another state, or any other office in Arkansas." California: Article 5, Section 2 [ 22 ] 18 (by virtue that the candidate must be a registered voter) For five years immediately preceding the Governor's election For five years immediately preceding the Governor's election Yes Yes Colorado: Article IV, Section 4 [ 23 ] 30 For at least two years on the day of the election Yes Any legislative or judicial office is precluded The standard for residency is not affected by time out of the state due to civil or military service Connecticut: Article IV, Section 5 [ 24 ] 30 On election day On election day On election day Delaware: Article III, Section 1 [ 25 ] 30 Six years on election day 12 years on election day "...and have been a citizen and inhabitant of the United States twelve years next before the day of his election, and the last six years of that term an inhabitant of this State, unless he shall have been absent on public business of the United States or of this State." Florida: Article IV, Section 5 [ 26 ] 30 Seven years Seven years Georgia: Article V, Section 1, Paragraph IV [ 27 ] 30 Six years immediately preceding the election Fifteen years immediately preceding the election Yes Hawaii: Article V, Section 1 [ 28 ] 30 Five years consecutive years previous to election Yes "The governor shall not hold any other office or employment of profit under the State or the United States during the governor's term of office." Idaho: Article IV, Section 3 30 At least two years prior to the election Yes Illinois: Article V, Section 3 25 Three years preceding his election Yes Indiana: Article 5, Section 1 30 Five consecutive years before the election Five consecutive years before the election Yes The governor may not hold any other state or federal office during his term Iowa: Article IV, Section 6 30 At least two years before the election Yes Kansas: Constitution of Kansas 18 No requirements set forth in the Constitution, however a law was passed in 2018 requiring gubernatorial candidates to be residents of the state and at least 18 years of age.

Kentucky: Article IV, Section 72 [ 29 ] 30 At least six years preceding the general election Louisiana: Article IV, Section 2 [ 30 ] 25 Must have been a citizen of Louisiana for at least the preceding five years Yes Yes Yes Maine: Article IV, Part 1 [ 31 ] 30 A resident for at least five years At least fifteen years Yes Yes During his/her tenure in office, a statewide elected official shall hold no other public office Maryland: Article II, Section I [ 32 ] 30 For five years preceding the election For five years preceding the election Massachusetts: Section I, Article II [ 33 ] 30 Seven years Michigan: Section 22 [ 34 ] 30 For at least four years preceding the election Minnesota: Article V, Section 2 [ 35 ] 25 At least two years before the election Yes Mississippi: Article V [ 36 ] 30 Five years Twenty years Missouri: Article IV [ 37 ] 30 For at least ten years For at least fifteen years Montana: Article VI [ 38 ] 25 For least two years at his election Yes Nebraska: Article IV [ 39 ] 30 For at least five years Yes Nevada: Article V, Section I [ 40 ] 25 For at least two years Yes Yes While in office, the governor may not hold any federal level office.

New Hampshire: Constitution of New Hampshire [ 41 ] 30 For at least seven years on election day Yes New Jersey: Article V [ 42 ] 30 For at least seven years For at least twenty years Yes No governor shall hold office in any other state or under the federal government, nor shall a sitting governor be elected to any legislative seat. Governors who accept any state or federal position or profit are considered to have vacated their seat.

New Mexico: Article V, Section 3 [ 43 ] 30 Must have been a resident of New Mexico continuously for five years on the day of the election Yes New York: Article IV [ 44 ] 30 For at least five years prior to the election Yes North Carolina: Article III [ 45 ] 30 For at least two years For at least five years North Dakota: Constitution of North Dakota [ 46 ] 30 For at least five years Yes Ohio: Constitution of Ohio [ 47 ] 18 A candidate for the governor's office may not hold any congressional or federal office or any other state office.

Oklahoma: Constitution of Oklahoma [ 48 ] 31 For at least ten years Yes Oregon: Constitution of Oregon [ 49 ] 30 For at least three years Yes The age requirements do not apply to someone who succeeds to office under Section 8a of Article V.

Pennsylvania: Constitution of Pennsylvania [ 50 ] 30 For at least seven years Yes Yes The governor may not hold Congressional office, any other office under the Commonwealth, or any federal office. The exception is that the governor may be a reserve member of the National Guard .

Rhode Island: Article III, Of Qualification of Office [ 51 ] Yes Yes Governors shall not be serving a sentence for, on probation for, or on parole for any felony.

South Carolina: Article IV [ 52 ] 30 For at least five years Yes Yes The statute that a candidate for the governor must believe in the existence of the "Supreme Being" was declared unconstitutional by the South Carolina Supreme Court in 1996; although it has not been repealed, it is unenforceable. Furthermore, the Governor may not hold office or a commission under any other power, excepting that of a militia .

South Dakota: Article IV [ 53 ] 21 For at least two years as of the election Yes Tennessee: Article III [ 54 ] 30 For at least seven years upon his election Yes Texas : Article 4, Section 4 [ 55 ] 30 For at least five years immediately preceding his election Yes Yes Yes The Governor... shall not hold any other of­fice: civ­il, mili­tary or corpor­ate; nor shall he prac­tice any profes­sion, and re­ceive compen­sation, re­ward, fee, or the prom­ise there­of for the same; nor receive any sal­ary, reward or compen­sation or the promise there­of from any per­son or corpor­ation, for any service rend­ered or performed dur­ing the time he is Gover­nor, or to be there­after rendered or performed.

Utah: Article VII [ 56 ] 30 For at least five years on the day of the election Yes Yes Yes Sitting Governors may not hold any federal office, any state office other than the governorship, or be elected to the United States Senate during his term.

Vermont: Chapter II [ 57 ] A candidate for governor must be a resident of Vermont for at least four years on the day of the election Yes Governors may not hold any legislative office or any other constitutional office. Excepting positions in military reserves , they also may not hold any office under the federal government. Nor is the governor eligible for any appointed position made by any branch of the Vermont government.

Virginia: Article VI, Section 1 [ 58 ] 30 For at least five years at the time of the election Yes For at least one year preceding the election Washington: Article III, Section 2 [ 59 ] Yes Yes West Virginia: Article VII 30 For at least five years preceding the election Yes Yes Yes Under Article IV, Section 10, no individual who has fought a duel with deadly weapons, sent a challenge for such a duel, or knowingly acted as a second in such a duel in West Virginia or in any other state may hold any office in West Virginia.

Wisconsin: Constitution of Wisconsin [ 60 ] 18 [ 61 ] Yes Yes Partially No gubernatorial may hold any office, honor or profit under any foreign power, nor hold any federal office, be a convicted felon, or be convicted of any misdemeanor involving a violation of the public trust.

Wyoming: Article 4 [ 62 ] 30 For at least five years preceding the election Yes On the day of the election Yes Any governor who asks for, receives, or agrees to receive a bribe automatically forfeits his office and his right to hold any other office in Wyoming upon his conviction.

See also [ edit ] The flags and seals of governors of the U.S. states Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States Governor and lieutenant governor (non-U.S.) List of U.S. state governors born outside the United States Mexican state governors Premier (Australia) – similar position of state/territorial government in Australia Premier (Canada) – similar position of provincial/territorial government in Canada Footnotes [ edit ] ^ The federal district of Washington, D.C.

has been led by a chief executive officer of varying titles , including governor. The current governor-equivalent of D.C. is the Mayor of the District of Columbia .

^ Following the passage of 2022 Arizona Proposition 131, the state will have a lieutenant governor after January 4, 2027, following the 2026 Arizona gubernatorial election .

References [ edit ] ^ Ferguson, Margaret R. (2006). "ch. 1 and 2". In Ferguson, Margaret R. (ed.).

The Executive Branch of State Government: People, Process and Politics (chapters reprinted in full) . university webpage reprint with permission: ABC-CLIO , Inc . Retrieved August 2, 2024 – via Center on the American Governor – Rutgers University.

^ "Governors' Powers and Authority" .

Nga.org . Washington, D.C.: National Governors Association . 2011.

^ "Frequently Asked Questions About the Minnesota Legislature" .

Minnesota State Legislature .

^ Erler, Edward.

"Essays on Amendment XIV: Citizenship" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012.

^ "CRS Report for Congress" (PDF) .

Senate.gov . January 22, 2003 . Retrieved October 4, 2017 .

^ Swanson, Stevenson (September 2, 2001).

"Governors' powers ranked" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved November 4, 2014 .

^ "2020 State & Legislative Partisan Composition" (PDF) .

National Conference of State Legislatures . April 1, 2020 . Retrieved September 16, 2020 .

^ "Stevens Thomson Mason – Background Reading" .

Michigan.gov . Retrieved October 4, 2017 .

^ Staff, MNHS Reference.

"LibGuides: Harold E. Stassen" .

Mnhs.org . Retrieved October 4, 2017 .

^ "Candidates" .

Vermont Secretary of State . Archived from the original on April 11, 2019 . Retrieved February 25, 2019 .

^ Schneier, Matthew (January 9, 2019).

"Colorado's Got a Gay Governor. Who Cares?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 10, 2019 .

^ "ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates" .

U.S. Census Bureau . December 2019 . Retrieved March 4, 2020 .

^ "Governors' Salaries Range From $70,000 to $187,256" .

Pewtrusts.org . June 25, 2013 . Retrieved October 4, 2017 .

^ "Statewide Payroll" . Retrieved June 5, 2019 .

^ Hyland, Michael (September 22, 2023).

"Elected officials getting bigger pay raises than teachers, state workers in budget" .

CBS17 . Nexstar Media . Retrieved December 5, 2023 .

^ Woodall, Hunter (September 28, 2017).

"As third teen joins Kansas governor race, consider this: No rule says a dog can't run" .

The Kansas City Star . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

^ Paiella, Gabriella (September 28, 2017).

"Kansas Gubernatorial Race Flooded With Teen Candidates" .

The Cut . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Alabama" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

^ "Article III, Alaska Constitution" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Arizona" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved September 29, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Arkansas" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved September 30, 2017 .

^ "Governor of California" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved September 30, 2017 .

^ "Covernor of Colorado" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 1, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Connecticut" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 1, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Delaware" . Retrieved October 1, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Florida" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 1, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Georgia" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 5, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Hawaii" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 2, 2017 .

^ "The Executive Department, Kentucky Constitutions" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 2, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Louisiana" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 4, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Maine" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 5, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Maryland" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ "Chapter 2, Massachusetts Constitution" .

Ballotpedia .

^ "Governor of Michigan" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Minnesota" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 7, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Mississippi" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 8, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Missouri" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 8, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Montana" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 8, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Nebraska" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Nevada" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of New Hampshire" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of New Jersey" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of New Mexico" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of New York" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of North Carolina" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of North Dakota" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Ohio" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Oklahoma" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Oregon" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Pennsylvania" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Rhode Island" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of South Carolina" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of South Dakota" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Tennessee" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Texas" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Utah" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Vermont" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Virginia" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Washington" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Wisconsin" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

^ "Governor of Wisconsin" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved December 9, 2023 .

^ "Governor of Wyoming" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved October 9, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] constitution at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity The Green Papers: Constitutions of the states The Green Papers: State constitutions, an explanation The Green Papers: Links to state constitutions Citings of Religious Influence in First State Constitutions Rutgers Program on the Governor v t e Chief executives of the United States Federal President of the United States list State governors ( current list ) Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California list Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida list Georgia list Hawaii list Idaho Illinois list Indiana list Iowa Kansas Kentucky list Louisiana list Maine list Maryland list Massachusetts Michigan list Minnesota list Mississippi list Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire list New Jersey list New Mexico list New York list North Carolina list North Dakota list Ohio Oklahoma list Oregon list Pennsylvania Rhode Island list South Carolina list South Dakota list Tennessee list Texas list Utah Vermont list Virginia list Washington West Virginia Wisconsin list Wyoming Territorial ( current list ) American Samoa District of Columbia list Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico list United States Virgin Islands Defunct Cuba Dakota Territory Panama Canal Zone Philippine Islands (until 1935) Philippine Commonwealth (until 1946) Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands Santo Domingo v t e Governors and executives of U.S. states and territories President of the United States : ▌ Donald Trump (R) AL ▌ Ivey (R) AK ▌ Dunleavy (R) AZ ▌ Hobbs (D) AR ▌ Huckabee Sanders (R) CA ▌ Newsom (D) CO ▌ Polis (D) CT ▌ Lamont (D) DE ▌ Meyer (D) FL ▌ DeSantis (R) GA ▌ Kemp (R) HI ▌ Green (D) ID ▌ Little (R) IL ▌ Pritzker (D) IN ▌ Braun (R) IA ▌ Reynolds (R) KS ▌ Kelly (D) KY ▌ Beshear (D) LA ▌ Landry (R) ME ▌ Mills (D) MD ▌ Moore (D) MA ▌ Healey (D) MI ▌ Whitmer (D) MN ▌ Walz (DFL) MS ▌ Reeves (R) MO ▌ Kehoe (R) MT ▌ Gianforte (R) NE ▌ Pillen (R) NV ▌ Lombardo (R) NH ▌ Ayotte (R) NJ ▌ Murphy (D) NM ▌ Lujan Grisham (D) NY ▌ Hochul (D) NC ▌ Stein (D) ND ▌ Armstrong (R) OH ▌ DeWine (R) OK ▌ Stitt (R) OR ▌ Kotek (D) PA ▌ Shapiro (D) RI ▌ McKee (D) SC ▌ McMaster (R) SD ▌ Rhoden (R) TN ▌ Lee (R) TX ▌ Abbott (R) UT ▌ Cox (R) VT ▌ Scott (R) VA ▌ Youngkin (R) WA ▌ Ferguson (D) WV ▌ Morrisey (R) WI ▌ Evers (D) WY ▌ Gordon (R) Federal districts: DC ▌ Bowser (D), Mayor Territories: AS ▌ Pula (R) GU ▌ Guerrero (D) MP ▌ Apatang (I) PR ▌ González-Colón (PNP/R) VI ▌ Bryan (D) ▌ Republican : 28 (27 states, 1 territory) ▌ Democratic : 26 (23 states, 2 territories, 1 district) ▌ Independent : 1 (1 territory) ▌ New Progressive : 1 (1 territory) v t e U.S. state cabinets By state Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California ( more ) Colorado Connecticut ( more ) Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas ( more ) Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York ( more ) North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma ( more ) Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee ( more ) Texas ( more ) Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin ( more ) Wyoming Elected officials Territories and insular areas American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands By officer Governor ( more ) Lieutenant governor ( more ) Secretary of state ( more ) Attorney general ( more ) Treasurer ( more ) Auditor ( more ) Agriculture commissioner ( more ) Surgeon general State education agency/superintendent v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e State constitutions (United States) States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district Washington, D.C.

Territories American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands v t e United States state-related lists List of states and territories of the United States Demographics Population African American Amish Asian birth and death rates density Hispanic and Latino historical household income immigration LGBT non-Hispanic white Pacific Islander Spanish-speaking Educational attainment Largest cities by population Median age Most popular given names Most populous counties Net migration Populated places Population density (cities) Race/ethnicity Religiosity irreligion Economy Billionaires Budgets Companies Credit ratings Employment rates Exports and imports Federal tax revenue Federal taxation and spending Gross domestic product growth rate per capita Income inequality Median home prices Median wages Millionaire households Minimum wages Poverty rates R&D spending Sales taxes Savings rate Socioeconomic factors Sovereign wealth funds State income taxes Unemployment rates Union affiliation Vehicles per capita Environment Botanical gardens Carbon dioxide emissions Parks National Natural Landmarks National Wildlife Refuges Nature centers Electricity ( Renewable ) Superfund sites Wilderness areas Geography Area Bays Beaches Coastline Elevation Extreme points Forest Geographic centers Highest cities Islands Lakes Mountains Regions Volcanoes Government Agriculture commissioners Attorneys general Capitals Capitol buildings Comparison Congressional districts members Counties alphabetical list Courts Governors lieutenant governors Legislatures Libraries and archives Official languages Poets laureate Politics by state or territory political party strength State auditors State legislators Alabama–Missouri Montana–Wyoming state senators State secretaries of state State speakers State chief justices State presidents pro tempore State superintendents of education State supreme courts State treasurers Statewide elected executive officials Health Changes in life expectancy, 1985–2010 Fertility rates Hospitals Human Development Index American Human Development Index Life expectancy Infant mortality rates Obesity rates Road deaths Smoking History Date of statehood Name etymologies Historical societies Museums National Historic Landmarks National Register of Historic Places State partitions Historic regions Law Abortion Age of consent Alcohol dry communities Alford plea Cell phone use while driving Constitutions Firearms firearms death rates gun violence Homicide rate Incest Law enforcement agencies Legality of cannabis Marriage cousin polygamy same sex Peace Index Prisons incarceration rate Seat belt laws Self-representation Smoking bans Speed limits ( by jurisdiction ) Statutory codes Violent crime rate Miscellaneous Abbreviations Airports Bus transit systems Casinos Cemeteries Demonyms Flags Hotels Insignia coats of arms License plates Malls Mottos Newspapers Nicknames Numbered highways Quarters 50 states District of Columbia and territories America the Beautiful quarters Snowiest places Symbols Tallest buildings Temperature extremes Time zones Category Commons Portals NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐chj8s
Cached time: 20250817182739
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.450 seconds
Real time usage: 1.853 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14202/1000000
Revision size: 57435/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 443788/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 41165/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 290816/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.663/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11287836/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1352.883      1 -total
 28.18%  381.273      2 Template:Reflist
 18.60%  251.617     59 Template:Cite_web
 14.29%  193.393      4 Template:Navbox
 12.28%  166.076     49 Template:Flagicon
 11.60%  156.871      1 Template:Current_U.S._governors
 10.89%  147.340      1 Template:US_states_navbox_with_columns
  8.26%  111.767     61 Template:Party_stripe
  7.60%  102.853      1 Template:US_state_gov
  7.44%  100.651      1 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10179899:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817182739 and revision id 1304734113. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Governor_(United_States)&oldid=1304734113 " Categories : Government occupations Gubernatorial titles State government in the United States State governors of the United States Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2024 Use American English from October 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Governor (United States) 21 languages Add topic

