Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Kohukohunui 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre-European settlement 2.2 20th century 2.3 21st century 3 Recreation 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Hunua Ranges 4 languages Cebuano Deutsch Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°04′S 175°11′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.07°S 175.18°E ﻿ / -37.07; 175.18 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mountain range and regional park in New Zealand Hunua Ranges Mangatangi Reservoir in the Hunua Ranges Location North Island , New Zealand Coordinates 37°04′S 175°11′E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.07°S 175.18°E ﻿ / -37.07; 175.18 Area Ranges: 250 square kilometres (97 sq mi) Regional park: 178 square kilometres (69 sq mi) Operated by Auckland Council Open Daylight saving: 6 am–9 pm Non-daylight saving: 6 am–7 pm Pedestrian access: 24 hours The Hunua Ranges is a mountain range and regional park to the southeast of Auckland city , in the Auckland and Waikato regions of New Zealand's North Island . The ranges cover some 250 square kilometres (97 sq mi) and rise to 688 metres (2255 ft) at Kohukohunui.

[ 1 ] Auckland Council owns and manages 178 square kilometres (69 sq mi) of the ranges, including part located in the Waikato region, as a regional park open to the public.

[ 2 ] Geography [ edit ] The ranges are located approximately 50 kilometres (30 mi) southeast of the main Auckland urban area, above the western shore of the Firth of Thames .

[ 3 ] They are sparsely populated, and mostly lie within the boundaries of the Waharau and Hunua Ranges Regional Parks. The settlement of Hunua lies at the foot of the Hunua Ranges.

[ 4 ] The ranges are covered by the largest area of native bush in Auckland, [ 5 ] with streams, waterfalls, and hills overlooking the Auckland Region and Hauraki Gulf .

[ 2 ] Auckland gets much of its water from reservoirs sources from rivers and streams, including the Hunua Falls on the Wairoa River.

[ 4 ] The Mangatawhiri Ridge is one of the last remaining breeding grounds of the North Island kōkako .

[ 6 ] Kohukohunui [ edit ] Kohukohunui (688 metres (2,257 ft)) is the highest point in the Hunua Ranges.

[ 7 ] The New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage gives a translation of "great mist" for Kohukohunui .

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Pre-European settlement [ edit ] Tāmaki Māori have traditionally used the ranges for a wide range of resources. The traditional name is Ngāherehere ō Kohukohunui ("The Expansive Forest of Kohukohunui"), named after Kohukohunui, the highest peak of the ranges.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Te Hūnua was a name used to describe the wider country between the Wairoa River valley and Papakura .

[ 9 ] Māori made some use of the ranges and early European visitors found areas of clearing that had been used as gardens.

Ngāi Tai ki Tāmaki are tangata whenua for the ranges, and many archaeological sites are known within the ranges.

[ 1 ] In November 1769, Captain Cook visited the Hauraki Gulf area. Cook gifted pigs and potatoes to senior members of Te Uri ō Pou from Ōrere , who then planted these along the Wairoa River, as one of the first crops of potatoes grown in New Zealand. The pigs were released into the Hunua Ranges, where they were hunted by Ngāi Tai.

[ 11 ] [ 9 ] The main part of the ranges was subject to confiscation after the New Zealand Wars .

[ 1 ] Early European use of the ranges was for timber extraction and for farming but low soil fertility limited success. There has been some mining of Manganese in the past. Gold prospecting for quartz reefs has never found payable reefs.

[ 1 ] 20th century [ edit ] From the 1920s onwards the land was progressively bought by Auckland City Council utilising funds from its water supply operation.

[ 12 ] Development of the water supplies commenced in 1946, with the first of the four dams, Cossey's, completed with a capacity of 11.3 million cubic meters in 1956.

[ 13 ] Three embankment dams were constructed in the area: Upper Mangatāwhiri (1965), Wairoa (1975) and Mangatangi (1977).

[ 13 ] Combined, the dams have a capacity of  77.1 million cubic meters, and supply approximately 68% of Auckland's potable water, through the Ardmore Water Treatment Plant.

[ 14 ] A decision was made to reforest the ranges in the early 1960s, after the area had gradually reverted into farmland.

[ 15 ] The bulk water supply operation and the land passed to the newly formed Auckland Regional Authority in 1964. The Authority completed the water supply development and continued the exotic afforestation on some of the north and western catchment land, started by the City Council, and its Water Department administered the land.

[ 12 ] The ranges were planted with a mix of exotic forest and native species, predominantly rimu . The forestry service nursery was one of the first organisations in New Zealand to propagate native trees through grafting techniques, and were the first to successfully graft kauri trees. The forestry service was shut down in the late 1980s, as the Auckland Regional Authority was replaced with the Auckland Regional Council .

[ 15 ] The water operation was corporatised as Watercare Services in 1992, but the land itself remained with the Auckland Regional Council. Watercare took ownership of the water related assets and took a long term lease from the Auckland Regional Council of the reservoir areas and the operational areas. The exotic forestry land was also leased to another party. The catchment land became regional park land.

[ 16 ] 21st century [ edit ] In November 2010, the southernmost part of the Hunua Ranges were transferred to Waikato region.

[ 17 ] This determines the local government administrative boundaries, but the ownership of the former Auckland Regional Council park land went to the Auckland Council and that of the water assets is unchanged with Watercare Services.

[ 14 ] Extensive flooding in the Hunua Ranges in March 2017 cut off roads.

[ 18 ] People staying on the ranges had to be evacuated.

[ 19 ] In May 2018, parts of the park were closed to stop the spread of Kauri dieback .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Some of the tracks reopened in late 2020.

[ 22 ] In September and October 2018, the entire park was closed during a 1080 pest control programme .

[ 23 ] The programme was subject to an unsuccessful legal challenge.

[ 24 ] Recreation [ edit ] Activities in the regional park include walking, mountain-biking, bird-watching and drone-flying (by permission).

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d " Hunua Ranges ", An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand , edited by A. H. McLintock, originally published in 1966. Te Ara – The Encyclopedia of New Zealand, updated 26 September 2006. Accessed 15 March 2007.

^ a b c "Council profile" .

aucklandcouncil.govt.nz .

Auckland Council .

^ "The Hunua Ranges [...] are bounded on the east by the Firth of Thames, the north by the Tamaki Strait, the west by the Wairoa River , and the south by the lower reaches of the Mangatangi River." Barton, I. L. (March 1972).

"On the Vegetation of the Hunua Ranges, Auckland" (PDF) .

New Zealand Journal of Botany .

10 : 8– 26.

doi : 10.1080/0028825x.1972.10430207 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26 . Retrieved 2007-03-15 .

^ a b Hunua and Waharau Regional Parks, Auckland Regional Council.

^ Thornber, Laura (12 February 2021).

"Suburb spotlight: Why you should visit Clevedon, Auckand [ sic ]" .

stuff.co.nz . Stuff Travel.

^ Monk, Valerie (2015).

A visitor's guide to Auckland regional parks . New Holland Publishers.

^ "Kohukohunui Peak, Waharau Regional Park" .

wildernessmag.co.nz . Wilderness Magazine.

^ "1000 Māori place names" . New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 6 August 2019.

^ a b c Green, Nathew (2011). "From Hawaīki to Howick – A Ngāi Tai History".

Grey's Folly: A History of Howick, Pakuranga, Bucklands-Eastern Beaches, East Tamaki, Whitford, Beachlands and Maraetai . By La Roche, Alan. Auckland: Tui Vale Productions. pp.

16– 33.

ISBN 978-0-473-18547-3 .

OCLC 1135039710 .

^ "Te Ngāherehere-o-Kohukohunui Forest" .

Toitū Te Whenua Land Information New Zealand . Retrieved 10 July 2023 .

^ Green, Nat (2010).

Ōtau: a Ngāi Tai Cultural Heritage Assessment of Clevedon Village, Wairoa Valley (PDF) (Report).

Auckland Council . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

^ a b Barton, Ian L. 1978 "Auckland's south eastern bulwark : a history of the Hunua Ranges" . Privately published.

^ a b La Roche, John (2011). "Auckland's Water Supply". In La Roche, John (ed.).

Evolving Auckland: The City's Engineering Heritage . Wily Publications. pp.

27– 50.

ISBN 9781927167038 .

^ a b [1] Archived 2013-02-10 at the Wayback Machine , Watercare Services Ltd. Retrieved 22 February 2013 ^ a b Barton 2001 , pp. 85–86.

^ Barton 2001 , pp. 94–95.

^ Franklin Ward map , Auckland Council. Retrieved 10 November 2010.

^ "Expect the unexpected as weather wreaks havoc across the top of the North Island" .

stuff.co.nz . 8 March 2017.

^ "Military to help school campsite evacuation in Hunua Ranges" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment .

New Zealand Herald . 8 March 2017.

^ "Keeping kauri standing in the Hunua Ranges" .

Auckland Council . Our Auckland. 4 May 2018.

^ "Protect our kauri trees" .

aucklandcouncil.govt.nz .

Auckland Council .

^ Tokalau, Torika (9 August 2020).

"Kauri dieback: More Auckland regional park tracks to open by end of year" .

stuff.co.nz .

^ "Hunua parks are all open" .

Auckland Council . Our Auckland. 23 October 2018.

^ Neilson, Michael (20 March 2021).

"Council liquidating Friends of Sherwood Trust over legal challenge" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment .

New Zealand Herald .

Bibliography [ edit ] Barton, Ian (2001).

Hunua: the Place and Its People: a View from 2000 . W. J. Deed Printing.

ISBN 0-473-07474-5 .

v t e Wairoa Subdivision - Franklin Local Board Area , Auckland , New Zealand Populated places Ararimu Ardmore Beachlands Bombay Brookby Clevedon Drury Hūnua Kawakawa Bay Maraetai Ōrere Point Ramarama Tuscany Estate Whitford Geographic features Bombay Hills Hauraki Gulf Hunua Ranges Cosseys Reservoir Hūnua Falls Magazine Bay Mangemangeroa Creek Motukaraka Island Ōrere River Pōhutukawa Coast Tūranga Creek Umupuia Beach Wairoa River Facilities and attractions Ardmore Solar Farm Ayrlies Garden Duder Regional Park Hunua Ranges Regional Park Ōmana Regional Park Orere Point Regional Park Southern Line Drury railway station (proposed) Tāpapakanga Regional Park Tawhitokino Regional Park Waitawa Regional Park Government Auckland Council Franklin Local Board Franklin ward Franklin District Council (defunct) Organisations Beachlands Maraetai AFC Franklin United Maraetai Mission Station (defunct) v t e Auckland Council Wards Local Boards Local Subdivisions Albany Ward Hibiscus and Bays Local Board East Coast Bays Subdivision Hibiscus Coast Subdivision Upper Harbour Local Board n/a Albert-Eden-Puketāpapa Ward Albert-Eden Local Board Maungawhau Subdivision Ōwairaka Subdivision Puketāpapa Local Board n/a Franklin Ward Franklin Local Board Pukekohe Subdivision Wairoa Subdivision Waiuku Subdivision Howick Ward Howick Local Board Botany Subdivision Howick Subdivision Pakuranga Subdivision Manukau Ward Māngere-Ōtāhuhu Local Board n/a Ōtara-Papatoetoe Local Board Papatoetoe Subdivision Ōtara Subdivision Manurewa-Papakura Ward Manurewa Local Board n/a Papakura Local Board n/a Maungakiekie-Tāmaki Ward Maungakiekie-Tāmaki Local Board Maungakiekie Subdivision Tāmaki Subdivision North Shore Ward Devonport-Takapuna Local Board n/a Kaipātiki Local Board n/a Ōrākei Ward Ōrākei Local Board n/a Rodney Ward Rodney Local Board Dairy Flat Subdivision Kumeū Subdivision Warkworth Subdivision Wellsford Subdivision Waitākere Ward Henderson-Massey Local Board n/a Waitākere Ranges Local Board n/a Waitematā and Gulf Ward Aotea / Great Barrier Local Board n/a Waiheke Local Board n/a Waitematā Local Board n/a Whau Ward Whau Local Board n/a Regional parks Ambury Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Duder Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Orere Point Pākiri Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Former councils Rodney North Shore City Waitakere City Auckland City Manukau City Papakura Franklin v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Hunua Ranges at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunua_Ranges&oldid=1282517608 " Categories : Mountains of the Auckland Region Mountain ranges of Waikato Mountain ranges of New Zealand Regional parks of the Auckland Region Regional parks of New Zealand Franklin Local Board Area Firth of Thames Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Māori-language text This page was last edited on 26 March 2025, at 22:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunua Ranges 4 languages Add topic

