Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Composition 3 Size 4 Siting 5 Future 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Stevenson screen 19 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hausa Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Enclosure for meteorological devices Exterior of a Stevenson screen A Stevenson screen or instrument shelter is a shelter or an enclosure used to protect meteorological instruments against precipitation and direct heat radiation from outside sources, while still allowing air to circulate freely around them.

[ 1 ] It forms part of a standard weather station and holds instruments that may include thermometers (ordinary, maximum/minimum ), a hygrometer , a psychrometer , a dewcell , a barometer , and a thermograph .

Stevenson screens may also be known as a cotton region shelter, an instrument shelter, a thermometer shelter, a thermoscreen, or a thermometer screen. Its purpose is to provide a standardised environment in which to measure temperature, humidity, dewpoint, and atmospheric pressure. It is white in color to reflect direct solar radiation.

History [ edit ] American variant (Cotton Region shelter) It was designed by Thomas Stevenson (1818–1887), a Scottish civil engineer who designed many lighthouses , and was the father of author Robert Louis Stevenson . The development of his small thermometer screen with double- louvered walls on all sides and no floor was reported in 1864.

[ 2 ] After comparisons with other screens in the United Kingdom , Stevenson's original design was modified.

[ 3 ] The modifications by Edward Mawley of the Royal Meteorological Society in 1884 included a double roof, a floor with slanted boards, and a modification of the double louvers.

[ 4 ] This design was adopted by the British Meteorological Office and eventually other national services, such as Canada . The national services developed their own variations, such as the single-louvered Cotton Region design in the United States .

[ 5 ] Composition [ edit ] The traditional Stevenson screen is a box shape, constructed of wood, in a double-louvered design.

[ 6 ] However, it is possible to construct a screen using other materials and shapes, such as a pyramid. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) agreed standard for the height of the thermometers is between 1.25 and 2 m (4 ft 1 in and 6 ft 7 in) above the ground.

Size [ edit ] Interior of a Stevenson screen The interior size of the screen will depend on the number of instruments that are to be used. A single screen may measure 76.5 by 61 by 59.3 cm (30.1 by 24.0 by 23.3 in) and a double screen 76.5 by 105 by 59.3 cm (30.1 by 41.3 by 23.3 in). The unit is either supported by four metal or wooden legs or a wooden post.

The top of the screen was originally composed of two asbestos boards with an air space between them. These asbestos boards have generally been replaced by a laminate for health and safety reasons. The whole screen is painted with several coats of white to reflect sunlight radiation , and usually requires repainting every two years.

Siting [ edit ] The siting of the screen is very important to avoid data degradation by the effects of ground cover, buildings and trees: WMO 2010 recommendations, if incomplete, are a sound basis.

[ 7 ] In addition, Environment Canada , for example, recommends that the screen be placed at least twice the distance of the height of the object, e.g.

, 20 m (66 ft) from any tree that is 10 m (33 ft) high.

In the northern hemisphere, the door of the screen should always face north so as to prevent direct sunlight on the thermometers. In polar regions with twenty-four-hour sunlight, the observer must take care to shield the thermometers from the sun and at the same time avoiding a rise in temperature being caused by the observer's body heat.

A special type of Stevenson screen with an eye bolt on the roof is used on a ship. The unit is hung from above and remains vertical despite the movement of the vessel.

Future [ edit ] In some areas the use of single-unit automatic weather stations is supplanting the Stevenson screen and other standalone meteorological equipment.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "Stevenson Screen" .

Environment Canada . Archived from the original on 5 March 2008 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 .

^ Thomas C.E. Stevenson (June 1864).

"New Description of Box for Holding Thermometers" .

Journal of Scottish Meteorological Society .

1 : 122.

hdl : 2027/nyp.33433110019654 .

^ Middleton, W.E. Knowles (1966).

A History of the Thermometer and Its Uses in Meteorology . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

ISBN 9780801871535 .

^ Edward Mawley (January 1884).

"Report on Temperatures in Two Different Patterns of Stevenson Screens" .

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society .

X (49): 1– 7.

Bibcode : 1884QJRMS..10....1M .

doi : 10.1002/qj.4970104902 .

^ Sparks, W.R. (1972).

"The Effect of Thermometer Screen Design on the Observed Temperature" .

Wmo-315 . Geneva: World Meteorological Society .

^ "High May Temperatures in London" .

Symons's Meteorological Magazine . Vol. XLVIII, no. 569. June 1913. pp.

88– 90.

(See p. 89.) ^ "Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation" . 2–8 September 2010.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stevenson screen .

Article - Temperature measurement and the Stevenson screen Example of a non-traditional home built Stevenson screen v t e Earth-based meteorological equipment and instrumentation Anemometer Atmometer Barograph Barometer Ceiling balloon Ceiling projector Ceilometer Dark adaptor goggles Dewcell Disdrometer Dropsonde Field mill Heat flux sensor Hygrometer Ice accretion indicator Lidar Lightning detector Nephelometer Nephoscope Pan evaporation Pyranometer Pyrheliometer Present weather sensor Radiosonde Rain gauge Snow gauge Snowboard Snow pillow SODAR Solarimeter Sounding rocket Stevenson screen Sunshine recorder Tethersonde Thermo-hygrograph Thermometer Tide gauge Transmissometer Weather balloon Weather buoy Weather radar Weather vane Whole sky camera Wind profiler Windsock Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stevenson_screen&oldid=1292253189 " Categories : Measuring instruments Meteorological instrumentation and equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 00:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stevenson screen 19 languages Add topic

