Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Biographical details 3 Nilakantha Somayaji as a polymath 4 Astronomy 5 Works 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nilakantha Somayaji 23 languages Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen മലയാളം नेपाल भाषा Norsk bokmål Português Русский संस्कृतम् Slovenščina Suomi தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian mathematician and astronomer (1444–1544) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Nilakantha Somayaji" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Nilakantha Somayaji Born 14 June 1444 Tirur , Vijayanagara Empire Died 1544 [ citation needed ] Other names Kelallur Comatiri Occupation Astronomer-mathematician Known for Authorship of Tantrasamgraha Notable work Golasara, Candrachayaganita, Aryabhatiya-bhashya, Tantrasamgraha Title Somayaji Spouse Arya Children Rama, Dakshinamurti Parent Jatavedan (father) Keļallur Nīlakaṇṭha Somayāji (14 June 1444 – 1544), also referred to as Keļallur Comatiri , [ 1 ] was a mathematician and astronomer of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics . One of his most influential works was the comprehensive astronomical treatise Tantrasamgraha completed in 1501. He had also composed an elaborate commentary on Aryabhatiya called  the Aryabhatiya Bhasya . In this Bhasya, Nilakantha had discussed infinite series expansions of trigonometric functions and  problems of algebra and spherical geometry .

Grahapariksakrama is a manual on making observations in astronomy based on instruments of the time.

Early life [ edit ] Nilakantha was born into a Brahmin family which came from South Malabar in Kerala .

[ 2 ] Biographical details [ edit ] Nilakantha Somayaji was one of the very few authors of the scholarly traditions of India who had cared to record details about his own life and times.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In one of his works titled Siddhanta -star and also in his own commentary on Siddhanta-darpana , Nilakantha Somayaji stated that he was born on Kali-day 1,660,181 which works out to 14 June 1444 CE. A contemporary reference to Nilakantha Somayaji in a Malayalam work on astrology implies that Somayaji lived to a ripe old age even to become a centenarian.

Sankara Variar , a pupil of Nilakantha Somayaji, in his commentary on Tantrasamgraha titled Tantrasamgraha-vyakhya , points out that the first and last verses of Tantrasamgraha contain chronograms specifying the Kali-days of the commencement (1,680,548) and of completion (1,680,553) of Somayaji's magnum opus Tantrasamgraha . Both these days occur in 1500 CE.

In Aryabhatiya -bhashya, Nilakantha Somayaji has stated that he was the son of Jatavedas and he had a brother named Sankara .

[ 5 ] Somayaji has further stated that he was a Bhatta belonging  to the Gargya gotra and was a follower of Asvalayana-sutra of Rigveda . References in his own Laghuramayana indicate that Nilakantha Somayaji was a member of the Kelallur family (Sanskritised as Kerala-sad-grama) residing at Kundagrama, now known as Trikkandiyur in modern Tirur , Kerala . His wife was named Arya and he had two sons Rama and Dakshinamurti.

Nilakantha Somayaji studied vedanta and some aspects of astronomy under one Ravi. However, it was Damodara , son of Kerala-drgganita author Paramesvara , who initiated him into the science of astronomy and instructed him in the basic principles of mathematical computations. The great Malayalam poet Thunchaththu Ramanujan Ezhuthachan is said to have been a student of Nilakantha Somayaji.

The epithet Somayaji is a title  assigned to or assumed by a Namputiri who has performed the vedic ritual of Somayajna .

[ 6 ] So it could be surmised that Nilakantha Somayaji had also performed a Somayajna ritual and assumed the title of a Somayaji in later life. In colloquial Malayalam usage the word Somayaji has been corrupted to Comatiri.

Somayāji’s "Āryabhaṭīyabhāṣya" is the most extensive commentary on Āryabhaṭīya. He takes all pains to expose the rationale and the objective behind the statements and observations made by Āryabhaṭa.

[ 7 ] Nilakantha Somayaji as a polymath [ edit ] Nilakantha's writings substantiate his knowledge of several branches of Indian philosophy and culture. It is said that he could refer to a Mimamsa authority to establish his view-point in a debate and with equal felicity apply a grammatical dictum to the same purpose. 
In his writings he refers to a Mimamsa authority, quotes extensively from Pingala's chandas-sutra, scriptures, Dharmasastras, Bhagavata and Vishnupurana also. Sundararaja, a contemporary Tamil astronomer, refers to Nilakantha as sad-darshani-parangata, one who had mastered the six systems of Indian philosophy.

[ 3 ] Astronomy [ edit ] In his Tantrasangraha , Nilakantha revised Aryabhata 's model for the planets Mercury and Venus . According to George G. Joseph his equation of the centre for these planets remained the most accurate until the time of Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.

[ 8 ] In his Aryabhatiyabhasya , a commentary on Aryabhata's Aryabhatiya , Nilakantha developed a computational system for a partially heliocentric planetary model in which Mercury, Venus, Mars , Jupiter and Saturn orbit the Sun , which in turn orbits the Earth , similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century. Most astronomers of the Kerala school who followed him accepted this planetary model.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Somayaji  time and again advocates the necessity of periodical modification of computation system based on observations and experimentations. One of his works, Jyotirmimamsa , is written exclusively for this purpose. His critical and analytical approach is reflected in all works.

[ 10 ] Works [ edit ] Further information: Tantrasamgraha and Jyotirmimamsa The following is a brief description of the  works by Nilakantha Somayaji dealing with astronomy and mathematics.

[ 3 ] [ 11 ] Tantrasamgraha Golasara : Description of basic astronomical elements and procedures Sidhhantadarpana : A short work in 32 slokas enunciating the astronomical constants with reference to the Kalpa and specifying his views on astronomical concepts and topics.

Candrachayaganita : A work in 32 verses on the methods for the calculation of time from the measurement of the shadow of the gnomon cast by the moon and vice versa.

Aryabhatiya-bhashya : Elaborate commentary on Aryabhatiya.

Sidhhantadarpana-vyakhya : Commentary on his own Siddhantadarapana.

Chandrachhayaganita-vyakhya : Commentary on his own  Chandrachhayaganita.

Sundaraja-prasnottara : Nilakantha's answers to questions posed by Sundaraja, a Tamil Nadu-based astronomer.

Grahanadi-grantha : Rationale of the necessity of correcting old astronomical constants by observations.

Grahapariksakrama : Description of the principles and methods for verifying astronomical computations by regular observations.

Jyotirmimamsa : Analysis of astronomy See also [ edit ] Indian mathematicians Indian astronomy List of astronomers and mathematicians of the Kerala school References [ edit ] ^ K.D. Swaminathan (1972).

"Jyotisa in Kerala" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

8 (1 & 2): 28– 36 . Retrieved 3 February 2010 .

^ "Nilakantha - Biography" .

Maths History . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ a b c K.V. Sarma (ed.).

"Tantrasamgraha with English translation" (PDF) (in Sanskrit and English). Translated by V.S. Narasimhan. Indian National Academy of Science. p. 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 17 January 2010 .

^ Tantrasamgraha , ed.

K.V. Sarma , trans. V. S. Narasimhan in the Indian Journal of History of Science, issue starting Vol. 33, No. 1 of March 1998 ^ K. V. Sarma (1972).

A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy . Vishveshvaranand Institute of Sanskrit and Indological Studies, Panjab University, Hoshiarpur. p. 58 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 .

^ P. Vinod Bhattathiripad; K.D. Nambudripad (3 May 2007).

"Yaagam (Yajnam)" . Namboothiri Websites Trust . Retrieved 4 February 2010 .

^ Nilakantha's critique on Aryabhata's verses on squaring and square rooting , N. K. Sundareswaran, Ganita Bharati , Vol 39, No. 2, 2017 ^ a b George G. Joseph (2000).

The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics , p. 408.

Princeton University Press .

^ K. Ramasubramanian, M. D. Srinivas, M. S. Sriram (1994). " Modification of the earlier Indian planetary theory by the Kerala astronomers (c. 1500 AD) and the implied heliocentric picture of planetary motion ", Current Science 66 , p. 784-790.

^ Kerala School of Mathematics:Trajectories and Impact (2014 ed.). University of Calicut. 2014.

ISBN 9788193116807 .

^ A.K. Bag (1980).

"Indian literature on mathematics during 1400 - 1800 AD" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

15 (1): 79– 93. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2010 .

Further reading [ edit ] N. K. Sundareswaran (2009).

The Contribution of Kelallur Nilakantha Somayaji to Astronomy (2009 ed.). Calicut: University of Calicut.

ISBN 9788177481495 .

R.C. Gupta.

"Second order interpolation in Indian mathematics up to the fifteenth century" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

4 (1 & 2): 87– 98. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012.

K. V. Sarma (2008) "Nilakantha Somayaji", Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures (2nd edition) edited by Helaine Selin , Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 .

Shailesh A Shirali (May 1997).

"Nilakantha, Euler and pi" .

Resonance : 28– 43 . Retrieved 6 September 2016 .

Ranjan Roy (December 1990).

"The discovery of the series formula for π by Leibnitz, Gregory and Nilakantha" .

Mathematics Magazine .

63 (5).

Mathematical Association of America : 291– 306.

doi : 10.2307/2690896 .

JSTOR 2690896 . Retrieved 6 September 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nilakantha Somayaji .

Official Website of Chenthala Vishnu Temple Tantrasamgraha Official Website Official Website of Kelallur Nilakantha Somayaji (archived) v t e Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Astronomers and mathematicians (Complete list) Acyuta Piṣāraṭi Azhvāñceri Taṃprākkaḷ Citrabhānu Dāmodara of Vațaśreņi Devācārya Govinda Bhattathiri Govindasvāmin Haridatta Jyeṣṭhadeva Kochukrishnan Asan Madhava of Sangamagrama Mazhamaṅgalaṃ Nārāyaṇan Naṃpūtiri Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji Nīlakaṇṭha II Parameśvara of Vațaśśeri Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Śaṅkara of Mahiṣamaṅgalam Putumana Somayāji Śankara Vāriyar Śaṅkara Varma of Kaṭattanāṭ Udayadivākara Vararuci I Vidyamadhava Treatises Aryabhatiya-bhashya ( Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji ) Candrachayaganita Dasādhyāyi Drigganita Dṛkkaraṇa Gaṇitayuktayah Golavada Golasara Grahacāraṇinibandhana Jātaka-sāara-saṃgraha Jyotirmimamsa Jyotiśśāstra-saṃgraha Kanakkusāraṃ Karaṇapaddhati Kriyakramakari Laghuvivṛti (commentary on Tantrasamgraha ) Madhyamanayanaprakara Mahābhāskarīya Bhāshya Pañcabodha Sadratnamālā Sidhhantadarpana Spuṭanirṇaya Tantrasamgraha Venvaroha Yuktibhāṣā Concepts/Topics Chandravakyas Drigganita system Kaṭapayādi system Madhava's correction terms Madhava series Madhava's sine table Parahita system Places associated with members of the school Athavanad (Azhvanchery Thamprakkal) Alathiyur (Govinda Bhattathiri, etc) Kadathanadu (Sankara Varman) Mahodayapuram (Kodungallur) (Sankaranarayana) Kudallur (Madhava of Sangamagrama) Peruvanam (Mahishamangalam Sankaran Namputhiri) Thrikkandiyur (Nilakantha Somayaji, etc) Sivapuram (Thrissur) (Putumana Somayaji, etc) Tirunavaya (Haridatta) v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Academics zbMATH Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nilakantha_Somayaji&oldid=1291289540 " Categories : 1444 births 1544 deaths Indian Hindus 16th-century Indian astronomers Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics 15th-century Indian mathematicians 16th-century Indian mathematicians People from Malappuram district Scientists from Kerala 15th-century Indian astronomers Scholars from Kerala Hidden categories: CS1 Sanskrit-language sources (sa) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from August 2019 Use Indian English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 07:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nilakantha Somayaji 23 languages Add topic

