Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Names 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Present morphology 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Ancient Dardanian, Persian, Roman, and Byzantine eras (pre-1454) 3.1.1 Dardanian and Persian history 3.1.2 Byzantine history 3.2 Ottoman era (1354–1922) 3.2.1 Nineteenth century 3.2.2 World War I 3.3 Turkish republican and modern eras (1923–present) 4 Crossings Toggle Crossings subsection 4.1 Maritime 4.2 Land 4.3 Subsea 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Dardanelles 101 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°12′N 26°24′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.2°N 26.4°E ﻿ / 40.2; 26.4 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Narrow strait in northwestern Turkey For other uses, see Dardanelles (disambiguation) .

"Hellespont" redirects here. For the ancient town, see Hellespontine Phrygia . For the Roman province, see Hellespontus (province) .

Dardanelles Strait of Gallipoli Çanakkale Boğazı ( Turkish ) Close-up topographic map of the Dardanelles Dardanelles Show map of Turkey Dardanelles Show map of Europe Coordinates 40°12′N 26°24′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.2°N 26.4°E ﻿ / 40.2; 26.4 Type Strait Part of Turkish Straits Basin countries Turkey Max. length 61 km (38 mi) Min. width 1.2 km (0.75 mi) Location Map showing the location of the Dardanelles (yellow), relative to the Bosporus (red), the Sea of Marmara, the Aegean Sea, and the Black Sea.

View of the Dardanelles taken from the Landsat 7 satellite in September 2006. The body of water on the left is the Aegean Sea, while the one on the upper right is the Sea of Marmara. The Dardanelles is the tapered waterway running diagonally between the two seas, from the northeast to the southwest. The long, narrow upper peninsula on the northern shores of the strait is Gallipoli ( Turkish : Gelibolu ), and constitutes the banks of the continent of Europe, while the lower peninsula is Troad ( Turkish : Biga ) and constitutes the banks of the continent of Asia. The city of Çanakkale is visible along the shores of the lower peninsula, centered at the only point where a sharp outcropping juts into the otherwise-linear Dardanelles.

The Dardanelles ( / ˌ d ɑːr d ə ˈ n ɛ l z / DAR -də- NELZ ; Turkish : Çanakkale Boğazı , lit.

'Strait of Çanakkale '; Greek : Δαρδανέλλια , romanized : Dardanéllia ), also known as the Strait of Gallipoli (after the Gallipoli peninsula) and in classical antiquity as the Hellespont ( / ˈ h ɛ l ɪ s p ɒ n t / HEL -isp-ont ; Classical Greek : Ἑλλήσποντος , romanized: Hellḗspontos , lit.

'Sea of Helle '), is a narrow, natural strait and internationally significant waterway in northwestern Turkey that forms part of the continental boundary between Asia and Europe and separates Asian Turkey from European Turkey. Together with the Bosporus , the Dardanelles forms the Turkish Straits .

One of the world's narrowest straits used for international navigation , the Dardanelles connects the Sea of Marmara with the Aegean and Mediterranean seas while also allowing passage to the Black Sea by extension via the Bosporus. The Dardanelles is 61 kilometres (38 mi) long and 1.2 to 6 kilometres (0.75 to 3.73 mi) wide. It has an average depth of 55 metres (180 ft) with a maximum depth of 103 metres (338 ft) at its narrowest point abreast the city of Çanakkale . The first fixed crossing across the Dardanelles opened in 2022 with the completion of the 1915 Çanakkale Bridge .

Most of the northern shores of the strait along the Gallipoli peninsula ( Turkish : Gelibolu ) are sparsely settled, while the southern shores along the Troad peninsula ( Turkish : Biga ) are inhabited by the city of Çanakkale's urban population of 110,000.

Names [ edit ] The contemporary Turkish name Çanakkale Boğazı , meaning ' Çanakkale Strait', is derived from the eponymous midsize city that adjoins the strait, itself meaning 'pottery fort'—from چاناق ( çanak , 'pottery') + قلعه ( kale , 'fortress')—in reference to the area's famous pottery and ceramic wares, and the landmark Ottoman fortress of Sultaniye.

The English name Dardanelles is an abbreviation of Strait of the Dardanelles . During Ottoman times there was a castle on each side of the strait. These castles together were called the Dardanelles , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] probably named after Dardanus , an ancient city on the Asian shore of the strait which in turn was said to take its name from Dardanus , the mythical son of Zeus and Electra . The name comes from the Dardani in the Balkans, according to Papazoglu.

[ 3 ] The ancient Greek name Ἑλλήσποντος ( Hellēspontos ) means "Sea of Helle", and was the ancient name of the narrow strait. It was variously named in classical literature Hellespontium Pelagus , Rectum Hellesponticum , and Fretum Hellesponticum . These names derived from that of Helle , daughter of King Athamas, who drowned here after falling from a flying golden ram in the mythology of the Golden Fleece .

[ 4 ] Geography [ edit ] As a maritime waterway , the Dardanelles connects various seas along the Eastern Mediterranean , the Balkans , the Near East , and Western Eurasia , and specifically connects the Aegean Sea to the Sea of Marmara . The Marmara further connects to the Black Sea via the Bosporus , while the Aegean further links to the Mediterranean . Thus, the Dardanelles allows maritime connections from the Black Sea all the way to the Mediterranean Sea—and on to the Atlantic Ocean via Gibraltar, and to the Indian Ocean through the Suez Canal —making it a crucial international waterway, in particular for the passage of goods going to and coming from Russia , Ukraine , and other nations bordering the Black Sea.

The particular geography of the strait and that of its shores has also made it important from a geostrategic and military point of view. The strait is long and narrow, and contains multiple curves and sharp angles formed as its shores, including some high cliffs and bluffs , both contain and protrude out into the water body. The overall length of the strait, and the geography of the land which forms it on both sides, mean that it is a place where the passage of ships can be controlled from land-based (unsinkable) positions. Control of the area has thus long been fought over, including notably during the ancient Greco-Persian and Peloponnesian Wars , the Gallipoli Campaign (1915-16) of the First World War, and the Turkish War of Independence (1919-23).

The strait is located at approximately 40°13′N 26°26′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.217°N 26.433°E ﻿ / 40.217; 26.433 .

Present morphology [ edit ] The strait is 61 kilometres (38 mi) long, and 1.2 to 6 kilometres (0.7 to 3.7 mi) wide, averaging 55 metres (180 ft) deep with a maximum depth of 103 metres (338 ft) at its narrowest point at Nara Burnu , abreast Çanakkale . There are two major currents through the strait: a surface current flows from the Black Sea towards the Aegean Sea, and a more saline undercurrent flows in the opposite direction.

[ 5 ] The Dardanelles is unique as a natural formation in many respects. The very narrow and winding shape of the strait is more akin to that of a river (thus, one might also talk of its 'banks' rather than its 'shores'). It also is the sole connection point of two far larger bodies of water and so experiences significant tidal water movements and associated currents and effects. For ships, it is thus considered one of the most hazardous, crowded, difficult, and potentially dangerous waterways in the world. The currents produced by tidal action in the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara are such that ships under sail must wait at anchorage for the right conditions before entering the Dardanelles.

History [ edit ] As part of the only passage between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, the Dardanelles has always been of great importance from a commercial and military point of view, and remains strategically important today. It is a major sea access route for numerous countries, including Russia and Ukraine . Control over it has been an objective of a number of hostilities in modern history, notably the attack of the Allied Powers on the Dardanelles during the 1915 Battle of Gallipoli in the course of World War I .

Ancient Dardanian, Persian, Roman, and Byzantine eras (pre-1454) [ edit ] Dardanian and Persian history [ edit ] An artist's illustration depicting Xerxes ' alleged "punishment" of the Hellespont The ancient city of Troy was located near the western entrance of the strait, and the strait's Asiatic shore was the focus of the Trojan War . Troy was able to control the marine traffic entering this vital waterway. The Persian army of Xerxes I of Persia and later the Macedonian army of Alexander the Great crossed the Dardanelles in opposite directions to invade each other's lands, in 480 BC and 334 BC respectively.

Herodotus says that, circa 482 BC, Xerxes I (the son of Darius ) had two pontoon bridges built across the width of the Hellespont at Abydos , in order that his huge army could cross from Persia into Greece . This crossing was named by Aeschylus in his tragedy The Persians as the cause of divine intervention against Xerxes.

[ 6 ] According to Herodotus (vv.34), both bridges were destroyed by a storm and Xerxes had those responsible for building the bridges beheaded and the strait itself whipped.

The Histories of Herodotus vii.33–37 and vii.54–58 give details of building and crossing of Xerxes' Pontoon Bridges . Xerxes is then said to have thrown fetters into the strait, given it three hundred lashes with multiple whips and branded it with red-hot irons as the soldiers shouted at the water.

[ 7 ] Herodotus commented that this was a "highly presumptuous way to address the Hellespont" but in no way atypical of Xerxes. (vii.35) Harpalus the engineer is said to have eventually helped the invading armies to cross by lashing the ships together with their bows facing the current and adding two additional anchors to each ship.

From the perspective of ancient Greek mythology Helle , the daughter of Athamas, supposedly was drowned at the Dardanelles in the legend of the Golden Fleece . Likewise, the strait was the scene of the legend of Hero and Leander , wherein the lovesick Leander swam the strait nightly in order to tryst with his beloved, the priestess Hero, but was ultimately drowned in a storm.

Byzantine history [ edit ] The Dardanelles were vital to the defence of Constantinople during the Byzantine period.

Also, the Dardanelles was an important source of income for the ruler of the region. At the Istanbul Archaeological Museum a marble plate contains a law by the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I (491–518 AD), that regulated fees for passage through the customs office of the Dardanelles. Translation: ... Whoever dares to violate these regulations shall no longer be regarded as a friend, and he shall be punished. Besides, the administrator of the Dardanelles must have the right to receive 50 golden Litrons, so that these rules, which we make out of piety, shall never ever be violated ... The distinguished governor and major of the capital, who already has both hands full of things to do, has turned to our lofty piety in order to reorganize the entry and exit of all ships through the Dardanelles ... Starting from our day and also in the future, anybody who wants to pass through the Dardanelles must pay the following: – All wine merchants who bring wine to the capital (Constantinopolis), except Cilicians , have to pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis and 2 sextarius of wine.

– In the same manner, all merchants of olive-oil, vegetables and lard must pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis. Cilician sea-merchants have to pay 3 follis and in addition to that, 1 keration (12 follis) to enter, and 2 keration to exit.

– All wheat merchants have to pay the officials 3 follis per modius, and a further sum of 3 follis when leaving.

Since the 14th century the Dardanelles have almost continuously been controlled by the Turks.

Ottoman era (1354–1922) [ edit ] 1554 map of the Dardanelles in Belon's Observations The Dardanelles continued to constitute an important waterway during the period of the Ottoman Empire , which conquered Gallipoli in 1354.

Ottoman control of the strait continued largely without interruption or challenges until the 19th century, when the Empire started its decline .

Nineteenth century [ edit ] Gaining control of, or guaranteed access to, the strait became a key foreign-policy goal of the Russian Empire during the 19th century. During the Napoleonic Wars , Russia—supported by Great Britain in the Dardanelles Operation — blockaded the straits in 1807.

In 1833, following the Ottoman Empire 's defeat in the Russo-Turkish War of 1828–1829 , Russia pressured the Ottomans to sign the Treaty of Hunkiar Iskelesi —which required the closing of the straits to warships of non-Black Sea powers at Russia's request. That would have effectively given Russia a free hand in the Black Sea.

This treaty alarmed the Ottoman Empire , who were concerned that the consequences of potential Russian expansionism in the Black Sea and Mediterranean regions could conflict with their own possessions and economic interest in the region. At the London Straits Convention in July 1841, the United Kingdom , France , Austria , and Prussia pressured Russia to agree that only Turkish warships could traverse the Dardanelles in peacetime. The United Kingdom and France subsequently sent their fleets through the straits to defend the Danube front and to attack the Crimean Peninsula during the Crimean War of 1853–1856 – but they did so as allies of the Ottoman Empire. Following the defeat of Russia in the Crimean War, the Congress of Paris in 1856 formally reaffirmed the London Straits Convention.

World War I [ edit ] Main articles: Occupation of Constantinople and Chanak Crisis Main article: Gallipoli Campaign 1915 Landing of French troops in Moudros (Lemnos island) during the Gallipoli Campaign Landing at Gallipoli in April 1915 Anzac Cove The Sphinx overlooking Anzac Cove In 1915 the Allies sent a substantial invasion force of British, Indian, Australian, New Zealand, French and Newfoundland troops to attempt to open up the straits. In the Gallipoli campaign , Turkish troops trapped the Allies on the coasts of the Gallipoli peninsula. The campaign damaged the career of Winston Churchill , then First Lord of the Admiralty (in office 1911–1915), who had eagerly promoted the (unsuccessful) use of Royal Navy sea power to force open the straits.

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk , subsequent founder of the Republic of Turkey , served as an Ottoman commander during the land campaign.

The Turks mined the straits to prevent Allied ships from penetrating them but, in minor actions two submarines, one British and one Australian, did succeed in penetrating the minefields. The British submarine sank an obsolete Turkish pre-dreadnought battleship off the Golden Horn of Istanbul.

Sir Ian Hamilton 's Mediterranean Expeditionary Force failed in its attempt to capture the Gallipoli peninsula, and the British cabinet ordered its withdrawal in December 1915, after eight months' fighting. Total Allied deaths included 41,000 British and Irish, [ 8 ] 15,000 French, 8,700 Australians, 2,700 New Zealanders, 1,370 Indians and 49 Newfoundlanders.

[ 9 ] Total Turkish deaths were around 60,000.

Following the war, the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres demilitarized the strait and made it an international territory under the control of the League of Nations . The Ottoman Empire's non-ethnically Turkish territories were broken up and partitioned among the Allied Powers, and Turkish jurisdiction over the straits curbed.

Turkish republican and modern eras (1923–present) [ edit ] After the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire following a lengthy campaign by Turks as part of the Turkish War of Independence against both the Allied Powers and the Ottoman court, the Republic of Turkey was created in 1923 by the Treaty of Lausanne , which established most of the modern sovereign territory of Turkey and restored the straits to Turkish territory, with the condition that Turkey keep them demilitarized and allow all foreign warships and commercial shipping to traverse the straits freely.

As part of its national security strategy, Turkey eventually rejected the terms of the treaty, and subsequently remilitarized the straits area over the following decade. Following extensive diplomatic negotiations, the reversion was formalized under the Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits on 20 July 1936. That convention, which is still in force today, treats the straits as an international shipping lane while allowing Turkey to retain the right to restrict the naval traffic of non-Black Sea states.

During World War II , through February 1945, when Turkey was neutral for most of the length of the conflict, the Dardanelles were closed to the ships of the belligerent nations. Turkey declared war on Germany in February 1945, but it did not employ any offensive forces during the war.

In July 1946, the Soviet Union sent a note to Turkey proposing a new régime for the Dardanelles that would have excluded all nations except the Black Sea powers. The second proposal was that the straits should be put under joint Turkish-Soviet defence. This meant that Turkey, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Romania would be the only states having access to the Black Sea through the Dardanelles. The Turkish government however, under pressure from the United States, rejected these proposals.

[ 10 ] Turkey joined NATO in 1952, thus affording its straits even more strategic importance as a commercial and military waterway.

In more recent years, [ when?

] the Turkish Straits have become particularly important for the oil industry. Russian oil, from ports such as Novorossyisk , is exported by tankers primarily to western Europe and the U.S. via the Bosporus and the Dardanelles straits.

The Dardanelles were closed in late February 2022 to all foreign warships at the beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in accordance with the Montreux Convention .

[ 11 ] Crossings [ edit ] The Çanakkale 1915 Bridge on the Dardanelles strait, connecting Europe and Asia, is the longest suspension bridge in the world .

[ 12 ] Maritime [ edit ] The waters of the Dardanelles are traversed by numerous passenger and vehicular ferries daily, as well as recreational and fishing boats ranging from dinghies to yachts owned by both public and private entities.

The strait also experiences significant amounts of commercial shipping traffic.

Land [ edit ] Main article: Çanakkale 1915 Bridge The Çanakkale 1915 Bridge joins Lapseki , a district of Çanakkale, on the Asian side and Sütlüce , a village of the Gelibolu district, on the European side.

[ 13 ] It is part of planned expansions to the Turkish National Highway Network. Work on the bridge began in March 2017, and it was opened on March 18, 2022.

[ 14 ] Subsea [ edit ] Two submarine cable systems transmitting electric power at 400 kV bridge the Dardanelles to feed west and east of Istanbul. They have their own landing stations in Lapseki and Sütlüce. The first, situated in the northeast quarter portion of the strait, was energised in April 2015 and provides 2 GW via six phases 400 kV AC 3.9 km (2.4 mi) far through the sea. The second, somewhat in the middle of the strait, was still under construction in June 2016 and will provide similar capabilities to the first line.

Both subsea power lines cross four optical fibre data lines laid earlier along the strait.

[ 15 ] A published map shows communication lines leading from Istanbul into the Mediterranean, named MedNautilus and landing at Athens , Sicily and elsewhere.

[ 16 ] Gallery [ edit ] Marble plate with 6th century AD Byzantine law regulating payment of customs in the Dardanelles Historic map of the Dardanelles by Piri Reis The ANZACs at Gallipoli in 1915 Map of the Dardanelles drawn by G. F. Morrell, 1915, showing the Gallipoli peninsula and the west coast of Turkey, as well as the location of front-line troops and landings during the Gallipoli Campaign A view of the Dardanelles from Gallipoli peninsula A view of Çanakkale from the Dardanelles Ferry line across the Dardanelles in Çanakkale Aerial view of the city of Çanakkale Dardanelles in 2021 The narrowest section of the Dardanelles See also [ edit ] Action of 26 June 1656 Battle of the Dardanelles (disambiguation) Dardanelles Commission List of maritime incidents in the Turkish Straits References [ edit ] ^ Hoogstraten, David van; Nidek, Matthaeus Brouërius van; Schuer, Jan Lodewyk (1727).

"Dardanellen" .

Groot algemeen historisch, geografisch, genealogisch, en oordeelkundig woordenboek (in Dutch). Vol. 4: D en E. Amsterdam/Utrecht/The Hague. p. 25.

OCLC 1193061215 .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2017.

^ Crabb, George (1833).

"Dardanelles" .

Universal Historical Dictionary . Vol. 1. London.

OCLC 1158045075 .

^ Papazoglu, F. (1978). The Central Balkan Tribes in Pre-Roman Times: Triballi, Autariatae, Dardanians, Scordisci and Moesians. Niederlande: Hakkert, p. 132 ^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Hellespont ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 246.

^ Rozakis, Christos L.; Stagos, Petros N. (1987).

The Turkish Straits . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 1.

ISBN 90-247-3464-9 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 .

^ Aeschylus .

"The Persians" . Translated by Potter, Robert .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2003 . Retrieved 26 September 2003 – via The Internet Classics Archive.

^ Green, Peter (1996).

The Greco-Persian Wars . Berkeley; London: The University of California Press. p. 75.

ISBN 0-520-20573-1 .

^ "Key facts of Gallipoli casualties" .

SBS World News . 17 April 2014 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ "Gallipoli casualties by country" .

New Zealand History . New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 1 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 November 2020 .

^ Cabell, Phillips B. H. (1966).

The Truman presidency : the history of a triumphant succession . New York: Macmillan. pp.

102– 103.

OCLC 1088163662 .

^ Ozberk, Tayfun (28 February 2022).

"Turkey closes the Dardanelles and Bosphorus to warships" .

Naval News . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ "Groundbreaking ceremony for bridge over Dardanelles to take place on March 18" .

Hürriyet Daily News . 17 March 2017 . Retrieved 19 March 2017 .

^ "Project Information" . 1915 Çanakkale Bridge . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ "Turkey opens record-breaking bridge between Europe and Asia" .

CNN . 18 March 2022 . Retrieved 19 March 2022 .

^ Yüce, Gülnazi (7–8 June 2016).

Submarine Cable Projects (2-03) (PDF) . First South East European Regional CIGRÉ Conference. Portorož, Slovenia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 April 2018 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ "Submarine Cable Map 2017" .

TeleGeography .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dardanelles .

Pictures of the city of Çanakkale Map of Hellespont Livius.org: Hellespont Archived 1 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine Monuments and memorials of the Gallipoli campaign along the Dardanelles Old Maps of the Dardanelles , Eran Laor Cartographic collection, The National Library of Israel Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic Pleiades Other NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wgvvx
Cached time: 20250817043729
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.898 seconds
Real time usage: 1.175 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3979/1000000
Revision size: 29308/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 218979/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6906/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95668/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.568/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18469679/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  951.878      1 -total
 28.86%  274.687      1 Template:Infobox_body_of_water
 27.75%  264.114      1 Template:Infobox
 20.55%  195.587      1 Template:Reflist
 10.70%  101.853      1 Template:Native_name_checker
  8.63%   82.115      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  8.22%   78.197      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.98%   75.942      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
  7.72%   73.458      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.39%   70.322      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8073:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043729 and revision id 1303832940. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dardanelles&oldid=1303832940 " Categories : Dardanelles Landforms of Çanakkale Province Straits of the Mediterranean Sea Straits of Turkey Turkish Straits Important Bird Areas of Turkey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1: long volume value CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2020 Articles containing Turkish-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles using infobox body of water with mapframe Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Classical Greek-language text Articles containing Ottoman Turkish (1500-1928)-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from March 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 09:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dardanelles 101 languages Add topic

