Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Later forms of Anabaptism 3 Non-Anabaptist Radical Reformers 4 Other movements 5 Beliefs 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Radical Reformation 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy 日本語 Português Română Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Anabaptist movement concurrent with the Protestant Reformation Part of a series on the Reformation Ninety-five Theses , written by Martin Luther in 1517 Precursors Peter Waldo and Waldensians John Wycliffe and Lollardy Jan Hus and Hussites Girolamo Savonarola and Piagnoni Arnold of Brescia and Arnoldists Peter of Bruys and Petrobrusians Henry of Lausanne and Henricians Berengar of Tours and Berengarians Friends of God Pataria Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Claudius of Turin Wessel Gansfort Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Johannes von Goch Gundolfo Beginning Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Luther Bible Magisterials Radicals Contributing factors Western Schism Avignon Papacy Bohemian Reformation Northern Renaissance Christian humanism German mysticism Johannes Gutenberg and his printing press Erasmus Johann Reuchlin Theologies of seminal figures Theology of Martin Luther Theology of Huldrych Zwingli Theology of John Calvin Protestant Reformers Martin Luther Philip Melanchthon Huldrych Zwingli John Calvin Martin Bucer William Tyndale Andreas Karlstadt Theodore Beza George Buchanan Heinrich Bullinger Peter Martyr Vermigli William Farel François Hotman John Knox Hubert Languet Thomas Müntzer Balthasar Hubmaier Menno Simons Thomas Cranmer Richard Hooker Jacobus Arminius Thomas Helwys Roger Williams Henry Denne Many others By location Germany Switzerland ( Geneva / Zürich ) England Scotland Netherlands Czech Lands Hungary Romania Slovenia Denmark–Norway and Holstein Sweden and Finland Iceland Estonia and Latvia Austria France Italy Poland-Lithuania Ireland Major political leaders Henry VIII Elizabeth I Oliver Cromwell James VI and I William the Silent Gaspard II de Coligny Henry IV of France Jeanne d'Albret Stephen Bocskai Gabriel Bethlen Gustav II Adolf Frederick V, Elector Palatine Philip I of Hesse Electors of Saxony Frederick III John Frederick I Counter-Reformation Catholic Church Council of Trent Counter-Reformation § Politics Censorship of the Bible § 16th century Anti-Protestantism Criticism Holy Roman Emperors Charles V Ferdinand II Political and religious conflicts Thirty Years' War French Wars of Religion Eighty Years' War War of the Three Kingdoms German Peasants' War Wars of Kappel Schmalkaldic War Art and literature Painting and sculpture Northern Mannerism Lutheran art German Renaissance Art Swedish art English art Woodcuts Art conflicts Beeldenstorm Building Influence on church architecture Literature Elizabethan Metaphysical poets Propaganda Welsh Scottish Anglo-Irish German Czech Swiss Slovak Sorbian Romanian Danish Bohorič alphabet Faroese Norwegian Swedish Finnish Icelandic Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age Folklore of the Low Countries 16th century Renaissance humanism 16th century in poetry 16th century in literature Theater English Renaissance theatre Pastoral Morality History Tragedy Revenge Music Forms Hymnody of continental Europe Music of the British Isles Hymn tune Lutheran chorale Lutheran hymn Anglican church music Exclusive psalmody Scottish church music Normative principle Anglican chant Homophony vs.

Polyphony Falsobordone Verse anthem Liturgies Reformed worship Calvin's liturgy Formula missae Deutsche Messe Liturgical Struggle Ecclesiastical Latin Lutheran and Anglican Mass in music Cyclic mass vs.

Paraphrase mass Roman vs.

Sarum Rites Sequence (retained by Lutherans, mostly banned by Trent) Hymnals First and Second Lutheran hymnals First Wittenberg hymnal Ausbund Swenske songer Thomissøn's hymnal Book of Common Prayer Metrical psalters Book of Common Order Souterliedekens Genevan Psalter Scottish Psalter Whole Book of Psalms Conclusion and commemorations Conclusion Confessionalization with subsequent Protestant orthodoxy Peace of Westphalia Simultaneous rise of Pietism and Rationalism Monuments Reformation Wall Luther Monuments Calendrical commemoration Reformation Day Lutheran Anglican Protestantism v t e Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e Part of a series on Anabaptism A 1685 illustration by Jan Luyken , published in Martyrs Mirror , of Dirk Willems saving his pursuer, an act of mercy that led to his recapture, after which he was burned at the stake near Asperen in the present-day Netherlands Background Christianity Radical Reformation Sermon on the Mount Doctrines and practices Theology of Anabaptism Believer's baptism Lovefeast Nonconformity to the world Nonresistance Free will Freedom of religion Priesthood of all believers Separation of church and state Foot washing Holy kiss Plain dress Shunning Simple living Singings Documents Schleitheim Confession Dordrecht Confession Ausbund Martyrs Mirror Key people George Blaurock Hans Denck Conrad Grebel Melchior Hoffman Balthasar Hubmaier Hans Hut Jakob Hutter Alexander Mack Felix Manz Pilgram Marpeck Melchior Rink Michael Sattler Menno Simons Largest groups Amish Apostolic Christians Brethren in Christ Bruderhof Conservative Mennonites Hutterites Mennonite World Conference Mennonites Mennonite Brethren Old Colony Mennonites Old Order Mennonites River Brethren Russian Mennonites Schwarzenau Brethren Related movements Schwenkfelders Pietism Radical Pietism Moravians Inspirationalists Quakers Neo-Anabaptism Christianity portal v t e The Radical Reformation represented a response to perceived corruption both in the Catholic Church and in the expanding Magisterial Protestant movement led by Martin Luther and many others. Starting in Germany and Switzerland in the 16th century, the Radical Reformation gave birth to many radical Protestant groups throughout Europe. The term covers Radical Reformers like Thomas Müntzer and Andreas Karlstadt , the Zwickau prophets , and Anabaptist groups like the Hutterites and the Mennonites .

In Germany, Switzerland and Austria, a majority sympathized with the Radical Reformation despite intense persecution.

[ 1 ] Although the surviving proportion of the European population that rebelled against Catholic, Lutheran and Reformed Churches was small, Radical Reformers wrote profusely, and the literature on the Radical Reformation is disproportionately large, partly as a result of the proliferation of the Radical Reformation teachings in the United States .

[ 2 ] [ page needed ] History [ edit ] Schleitheim Confession printed in 1550, displayed in the Anabaptist Room of the Local History Museum in Schleitheim , Switzerland.

Some early forms of the Radical Reformation were millenarian , focusing on the imminent end of the world. This was particularly notable in the rule of John of Leiden over the city of Münster in 1535, which was ultimately crushed by the combined forces of the Catholic Bishop of Münster and the Lutheran Landgrave of Hesse .

[ 3 ] After the Münster rebellion , the small group of the Batenburgers continued to adhere to militant Anabaptist beliefs. Non-violent Anabaptist groups also had millenarian beliefs.

The early Anabaptists believed that their reformation must purify both theology and the lives of Christians, especially their political and social relationships.

[ 4 ] Therefore, the church should not be supported by the state, neither by tithes and taxes, nor by the use of the sword; Christianity was a matter of individual conviction, which could not be forced on anyone, but rather required a personal decision for it.

[ 4 ] Many groups were influenced by Biblical literalism (like the Swiss Brethren ), spiritualism (like the south German Anabaptists) and mainly absolute pacifism (like the Swiss Brethren, the Hutterites and the Mennonites from northern Germany and the Netherlands). The Hutterites also practiced community of goods . In the beginning, most of them were strongly missionary .

Later forms of Anabaptism [ edit ] Later forms [ clarification needed ] of Anabaptism were much smaller and focused on the formation of small, separatist communities. Among the many varieties to develop were Mennonites, Amish , and Hutterites.

Typical among the new leaders of the later Anabaptist movement, and certainly the most influential of them, was Menno Simons , a Dutch Catholic priest who early in 1536 decided to join the Anabaptists.

[ 5 ] Simons had no use for the violence advocated and practiced by the Münster movement, which seemed to him to pervert the very heart of Christianity.

[ 5 ] Thus, Mennonite pacifism is not merely a peripheral characteristic of the movement, but rather belongs to the very essence of Menno's understanding of the gospel; this is one of the reasons that it has been a constant characteristic of all Mennonite bodies through the centuries.

[ 5 ] The Anabaptists of the Radical Reformation continue to inspire current community groups such as the Bruderhof and movements such as Urban Expression in the UK.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Non-Anabaptist Radical Reformers [ edit ] Though most of the Radical Reformers were Anabaptist, some did not identify themselves with the mainstream Anabaptist tradition. Thomas Müntzer was involved in the German Peasants' War . Andreas Karlstadt disagreed theologically with Huldrych Zwingli and Martin Luther, teaching nonviolence and refusing to baptize infants while not rebaptizing adult believers.

[ 8 ] Kaspar Schwenkfeld and Sebastian Franck were influenced by German mysticism and spiritualism. In 17th-century England, the tumultuous climate of the English Civil War and English Revolution saw the emergence of several movements that were influenced by or could be considered part of the Radical Reformation, such as the English Dissenters . One of these dissenting groups that developed along convergent lines with the continental Radical Reformation was the Religious Society of Friends , commonly known as Quakers, led by George Fox and Margaret Fell , among others.

[ 9 ] Other movements [ edit ] In addition to the Anabaptists, other Radical Reformation movements have been identified. Notably, George Huntston Williams , the great categorizer of the Radical Reformation, considered early forms of Unitarianism (such as that of the Socinians , and exemplified by Michael Servetus as well as the Polish Brethren ), and other trends that disregarded the Nicene Christology still accepted by most Christians, as part of the Radical Reformation. With Servetus and Faustus Socinus , anti-Trinitarianism came to the foreground.

[ 10 ] Beliefs [ edit ] The beliefs of the movement are those of the Believers' Church .

[ 11 ] Unlike the Catholics and the more Magisterial Lutheran and Reformed ( Zwinglian and Calvinist ) Protestant movements, some of the Radical Reformation abandoned the idea that the " Church visible " was distinct from the " Church invisible ." [ 12 ] Thus, the Church only consisted of the tiny community of believers who accepted Jesus Christ and demonstrated this by adult baptism, called " believer's baptism ".

While the magisterial reformers wanted to substitute their own learned elite for the learned elite of the Catholic Church , the radical Protestant groups rejected the authority of the institutional "church" organization, almost entirely, as being unbiblical. As the search for original Christianity was carried further, it was claimed that the tension between the church and the Roman Empire in the first centuries of Christianity was normative, [ clarification needed ] that the church is not to be allied with government sacralism , that a true church is always subject to be persecuted, and that the conversion of Constantine I was, therefore, the Great Apostasy that marked a deviation from pure Christianity.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Religion portal History portal Bohemian Reformation Christian anarchism English Dissenters Justus Velsius Martyrs Mirror Restorationism (Christian primitivism) Waldensians Oswald Glaidt Andreas Fischer Paul Fagius Johannes Reuchlin References [ edit ] ^ Horsch, John (1995).

Mennonites in Europe . Herald Press. p. 299.

ISBN 978-0836113952 .

^ Euan Cameron (2012).

The European Reformation (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-873093-4 .

^ Donald B. Kraybill, Concise Encyclopedia of Amish, Brethren, Hutterites, and Mennonites , JHU Press, USA, 2010, p. 12 ^ a b Gonzalez, A History of Christian Thought , 88.

^ a b c Gonzalez, A History of Christian Thought , 96.

^ "Why the Bruderhof is not a cult – by Bryan Wilson | Cult And Sect | Religion And Belief" .

Scribd . Retrieved 2017-07-12 .

^ "Eberhard Arnold: Founder of the Bruderhof" .

www.eberhardarnold.com . Retrieved 2017-05-25 .

^ Hein, Gerhard.

"Karlstadt, Andreas Rudolff-Bodenstein von (1486–1541)." .

Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online . Retrieved 19 April 2014 .

^ Anderson, Caleb.

"Reformation Europe: George Fox" .

sites.duke.edu/project_refeurope . Duke University . Retrieved 30 July 2023 .

^ Gonzalez, A History of Christian Thought , 101.

^ Donald B. Kraybill, Concise Encyclopedia of Amish, Brethren, Hutterites, and Mennonites , JHU Press, US, 2010, p. 25 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Robert S. Ellwood, Gregory D. Alles, The Encyclopedia of World Religions , Infobase Publishing, US, 2007, p. 912 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Justo L. Gonzalez, A History of Christian Thought (Abingdon: Nashville, 1975) [ ISBN missing ] Further reading [ edit ] Estep, William R.

, The Anabaptist story: An introduction to sixteenth-century Anabaptism (1996).

Roth, John, and James Stayer, eds.

A Companion to Anabaptism and Spiritualism, 1521–1700 (Brill, 2007).

Williams, George H., The Radical Reformation , 3rd ed (Truman State Univ Press, 2000).

Beno Profetyk (2020) Credo du Christocrate – Christocrat's creed (Bilingual French-English edition) External links [ edit ] Radical Reformation at Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online 16th Century Reformation Reading Room Archived 2014-04-07 at the Wayback Machine , Tyndale Seminary Radical Reformation at Protestant Museum v t e Anabaptism Background Protestant Reformation Radical Reformation Waldensians Petr Chelčický Moravian Church German mysticism Zwickau prophets Congregationalism Groups Swiss Brethren Hutterites Batenburgers Mennonites Old Order Mennonites Conservative Mennonites Russian Mennonites Amish New Order Amish Beachy Amish Amish Mennonites Abecedarians Schwenkfelders Schwarzenau (German Baptist) Brethren River Brethren Old Order River Brethren Brethren in Christ Church Bruderhof Apostolic Christian Church Peace churches History German Peasants' War Münster rebellion Martyrs Mirror Schleitheim Confession Dordrecht Confession of Faith Ausbund Old Order Movement Anabaptist–Jewish relations Settler colonialism Theology Theology of Anabaptism Church discipline Christian communism Freedom of religion Great Apostasy Memorialism Nonconformity to the world Nonresistance Pacifism Priesthood of all believers Separation of church and state – free church Sola scriptura Practices Agape feast Believer's baptism Closed communion Foot washing Ordnung Plain dress Shunning Simple living Singings Notable Anabaptists Felix Manz Conrad Grebel Pilgram Marpeck Michael Sattler Hans Denck Jakob Hutter Balthasar Hubmaier Bernhard Rothmann Dirk Philips Menno Simons Jakob Ammann Alexander Mack Samuel Heinrich Fröhlich Christianity portal v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radical_Reformation&oldid=1301835009 " Categories : History of Anabaptists Amish Mennonitism Protestant Reformation Christian terminology Christian radicalism 16th-century Protestantism 16th century in Europe Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from February 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2018 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 00:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radical Reformation 23 languages Add topic

