Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Use 3 Fish used 4 Environmental impact 5 Processing 6 Nutrient composition 7 Risks 8 See also 9 Sources 10 References Toggle the table of contents Fish meal 28 languages Afrikaans Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Қазақша Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Commercial product made from fish to feed farm animals Powdered fish meal Fish meal (sometimes spelled fishmeal ) is a commercial product made from whole wild-caught fish , bycatch , and fish by-products to feed farm animals , such as pigs, poultry, and farmed fish.

[ 1 ] Because it is calorically dense and cheap to produce, fish meal has played a critical role in the growth of factory farms and the number of farm animals it is possible to breed and feed.

[ 2 ] Fish meal takes the form of powder or cake. This form is obtained by drying the fish or fish trimmings, and then grinding it. If the fish used is a fatty fish , it is first pressed to extract most of the fish oil .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The production and large-scale use of fish meal are controversial. The lucrative market for fish meal as a feed encourages corporate fisheries not to limit their yields of bycatch (from which fish meal is made), and thus leads to depletion of ecosystems, environmental damage, and the collapse of local fisheries.

[ 4 ] Its role in facilitating the breeding and overfeeding of millions of pigs and chickens on factory farms has also been criticized by animal rights and animal welfare groups.

[ 5 ] Manufacturers of fish meal counter that fish meal's role in the feeding and breeding of millions of farm animals leads to the production of more food and the feeding of millions of people around the world.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Fish by-products such as fish fins , fish heads and fish scales have been used historically to feed poultry, pigs, and other farmed fish.

[ 7 ] A primitive form of fishmeal is mentioned in The Travels of Marco Polo at the beginning of the 14th century: "they accustom their cattle, cows, sheep, camels, and horses to feed upon dried fish , which being regularly served to them, they eat without any sign of dislike." The use of herring as an industrial raw material started as early as about 800 AD in Norway; a very primitive process of pressing the oil out of herring by means of wooden boards and stones was employed.

[ 3 ] Use [ edit ] Prior to 1910, fish meal was primarily used as fertilizer, at least in the UK.

[ 3 ] Fish meal is now primarily used as a protein supplement in compound feed .

[ 3 ] [ 8 ] As of 2010, about 56% of fish meal was used to feed farmed fish , about 20% was used in pig feed, about 12% in poultry feed , and about 12% in other uses, which included fertilizer.

[ 1 ] Fishmeal and fish oil are the principal sources of omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] and docosahexaenoic acid [DHA]) in animal diets.

[ 9 ] The cost of 65% protein fishmeal has varied between around $385 to $554 per ton since 2000, which is about two to three times the price of soybean meal .

[ 1 ] The rising demand for fish, as people in the developed world turn away from red meat and toward other sources of meat protein, has increased demand for farmed fish, with farmed fish accounting for half the fish consumed worldwide as of 2016.

[ 10 ] Demand for fish meal has increased accordingly, but harvests are regulated and supply cannot expand.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] This has led to a trend towards use of other ingredients such as soybean meal, cottonseed meal, leftovers from processing from corn and wheat, legumes , and algae , and an increase in research to find alternatives to fish meal and alternate strategic uses (for instance, in the growth phase, after newborn fish are established).

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Fish used [ edit ] Fish meal can be made from almost any type of seafood , but is generally manufactured from wild-caught, small marine fish that contain a high percentage of bones and oil.

[ 1 ] Previously, these fish have been considered unsuitable for direct human consumption, [ 1 ] but more recent research indicates the vast majority of fishmeal made from whole wild-caught fish is made from fish suitable for direct human consumption.

[ 12 ] Other sources of fishmeal are from bycatch and byproducts of trimmings made during processing (fish waste or offal) of various seafood products destined for direct human consumption.

[ 1 ] The main fish sources by country are: [ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 8 ] Chile: anchovy , horse mackerel China: various species Denmark: pout , sand eel , sprat European Union: pout , capelin , sand eel , mackerel Iceland and Norway: capelin , herring , blue whiting Japan: sardine , pilchard , saury , mackerel Peru: anchovy South Africa: pilchard Thailand: various species United States: menhaden , pollock It takes four to five tons of fish to produce one ton of fish meal; about six million tons of fish are harvested each year solely to make fish meal.

[ 1 ] Environmental impact [ edit ] Fish meal production is a significant contributor of over-fishing, and risks pushing fisheries beyond their replacement rate. Some areas of the world, such as Western Africa, have seen a large increase in fish meal production which in turn is hurting local fisheries and driving fisheries into collapse .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In 2022, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) expressed concern about overexploitation of fish in West Africa, caused by the fishmeal and fish oil industry.

[ 15 ] Processing [ edit ] Fish meal factory, Bressay , Shetland Islands Fish meal factory, Westfield, West Lothian Fish meal is made by cooking, pressing, drying, and grinding of fish or fish waste into a solid. Most of the water and some or all of the oil is removed.

[ 1 ] Of the several ways of making fish meal from raw fish, the simplest is to let the fish dry out in the sun before grinding and pressing. This method is still used in some parts of the world where processing plants are not available, but the end product is poor quality in comparison with ones made by modern methods.

Today, all industrial fish meal is made by the following processes: [ 3 ] Cooking: The fish are moved through a commercial cooker – a long, steam-jacketed cylinder – by a screw conveyor . This is a critical stage in preparing the fish meal, as incomplete cooking means the liquid from the fish cannot be pressed out satisfactorily and overcooking makes the material too soft for pressing. No drying occurs in the cooking stage.

Pressing: The cooked fish is compressed inside a perforated tube, expelling some of its liquids, leaving "press cake". Water content is reduced from 70% to about 50% and oil down to 4%.

Drying: The press cake is dried by tumbling inside a heated drum. Under-drying may result in the growth of molds or bacteria; over-drying can cause scorching and reduction in the meal's nutritional value.

Two alternative methods of drying are used: Direct: Very hot air at a temperature of 500 °C (932 °F) is passed over the material as it is tumbled rapidly in a cylindrical drum. While quicker, heat damage is much more likely if the process is not carefully controlled.

Indirect: The meal is tumbled inside a cylinder containing steam-heated discs.

Grinding: The dried meal is ground [ how?

] to remove any lumps or bone particles.

Nutrient composition [ edit ] Any complete diet must contain some protein , but the nutritional value of the protein relates directly to its amino acid composition and digestibility. High-quality fish meal normally contains between 60% and 72% crude protein by weight. Typical diets for fish may contain from 32% to 45% total protein by weight.

[ 16 ] Risks [ edit ] Unmodified fish meal can spontaneously combust from heat generated by oxidation of the polyunsaturated fatty acids in the meal. In the past, factory ships have sunk because of such fires. That danger has been eliminated by adding antioxidants to the meal.

[ 1 ] As of 2001, ethoxyquin was the most commonly used antioxidant, usually in the range of 200–1000 mg/kg.

[ 3 ] There has been some speculation that ethoxyquin in pet foods might be responsible for multiple health problems. To date, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has only found a verifiable connection between ethoxyquin and buildup of protoporphyrin IX in the liver, as well as elevations in liver-related enzymes in some animals, but with no known health consequences from these effects. In 1997, the Center for Veterinary Medicine asked pet food manufacturers to voluntarily limit ethoxyquin levels to 75 ppm until further evidence is reported. However, most pet foods that contain ethoxyquin have never exceeded this amount. Ethoxyquin has been shown to be slightly toxic to fish.

[ 17 ] Though it has been approved for use in foods in the US, and as a spray insecticide for fruits, ethoxyquin has not been thoroughly tested for its carcinogenic potential. Ethoxyquin has long been suggested to be a possible carcinogen, and a very closely related chemical, 1,2-dihydro-2,2,4-trimethylquinoline, has been shown to have carcinogenic activity in rats, and a potential for carcinogenic effect to fish meal prior to storage or transportation.

[ 18 ] Globally, most of the fish meal products are characterised by possessing a certain level of plastics pollution.

[ 19 ] A recent study showed that a wide range of plastics content was found, ranging from 0 to 526.7 n/kg in samples from 26 different fish meal products, from 11 countries on four continents and Antarctica.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Animal feed Forage fish Peruvian anchoveta Fish protein powder Bone meal Blood meal Feather meal Meat and bone meal Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2024​ , FAO.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m R. D. Miles and F. A. Chapman.

FA122: The Benefits of Fish Meal in Aquaculture Diets Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences Department, UF/IFAS Extension. Original publication date November 2005. Reviewed January 2015.

^ "The production of fish meal and oil - 10. The products" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 2025-06-20 .

^ a b c d e f g M. L. Windsor for the UK Department of Trade and Industry, Torry Research Station.

Fish meal. Torry Advisory Note No. 49 Archived 2019-01-01 at the Wayback Machine Published by FAO in partnership with Support unit for International Fisheries and Aquatic Research, SIFAR, 2001)  Bibliographical information from FAO index page Archived 2018-12-30 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Fish Meal Alternative Market Size, Share, Analysis, Trends, Forecast" .

Citius Research . Retrieved 2025-06-20 .

^ "Intensive animal farming | Description, History, Practices, Animal Welfare, Environmental Impact, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2025-06-20 .

^ "The Role of marine ingredients | IFFO - The Marine Ingredients Organisation" .

www.iffo.com . Retrieved 2025-06-20 .

^ https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/bca6b669-8736-4c2e-b002-2fe0a366c3cd/content ^ a b Tim Cashion from Sea Around Us .

The end use of marine fisheries landings Archived June 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Fisheries Centre Research Reports, 2016 ^ The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2024 . FAO. 2024-06-07.

doi : 10.4060/cd0683en .

ISBN 978-92-5-138763-4 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ a b c Fry JP, et al. Environmental health impacts of feeding crops to farmed fish. Environ Int. 2016 May;91:201-14. Review.

PMID 26970884 Free full text ^ NOAA NOAA-USDA Alternative Feeds Initiative page accessed June 3, 2016 ^ Leschin-Hoar, Clare (13 February 2017).

"90 Percent Of Fish We Use For Fishmeal Could Be Used To Feed Humans Instead" .

NPR .

^ Jacobs, Andrew (30 April 2017).

"China's Appetite Pushes Fisheries to the Brink" .

The New York Times .

^ "Site Offline" . 11 February 2019.

^ McVeigh, Karen (2022-02-10).

"Fish oil and fishmeal industry harming food security in west Africa, warns UN" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-08-05 .

^ "Manufacture, Storage, Composition And Use Of Fish Meal" . Archived from the original on 2019-01-01 . Retrieved 2010-09-11 .

^ Bintou, Aziza Toure; Bianco, Angelica; Mailhot, Gilles; Brigante, Marcello (2015-10-01).

"A new insight into ethoxyquin fate in surface waters: Stability, direct and indirect photochemical behaviour and the identification of main products" .

Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry .

311 : 118– 126.

doi : 10.1016/j.jphotochem.2015.06.030 .

ISSN 1010-6030 .

^ EFSA Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP) (2015).

"Safety and efficacy of ethoxyquin (6-ethoxy-1,2-dihydro-2,2,4-trimethylquinoline) for all animal species" .

EFSA Journal .

13 (11): 4272.

doi : 10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4272 .

hdl : 2434/559024 .

ISSN 1831-4732 .

^ a b Gündoğdu, S.; Eroldoğan, O. T.; Evliyaoğlu, E.; Turchini, G. M.; Wu, X. G. (2021-03-15).

"Fish out, plastic in: Global pattern of plastics in commercial fishmeal" .

Aquaculture .

534 : 736316.

Bibcode : 2021Aquac.53436316G .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2020.736316 .

ISSN 0044-8486 .

S2CID 233659976 .

v t e Fishing industry topics Wild fisheries Fishing industry Aquarium fishery Artisanal fishing Bycatch Commercial fishing Declawing of crabs Fish slaughter List of harvested aquatic animals by weight Trawling Overfishing Pair trawling Midwater trawling Bottom trawling Seining Gillnetting Longlining Lobster fishing Trolling Dredging Fishing vessels Fish trap Power block Shark finning Fisheries Agulhas Bank Crab fisheries Cod fisheries Fishing by country Fisheries management Illegal fishing in Africa Krill fishery Ocean fisheries World fish production North Sea Shrimp fishery Aquaculture and farmed fisheries Aquaculture Aquaculture engineering Aquaponics Best practices Copper alloys Geothermal energy and aquaculture Inland saline Integrated multi-trophic Mariculture Antimicrobials Offshore Organic Raceway Recirculating Fish farming Broodstock Catfish Cobia Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fish feed Fish hatchery Fish stocking Spawning bed Salmon Tilapia Tailwater US hatcheries Algaculture Giant kelp Microalgae Microalgal bacterial flocs Photobioreactor Raceway pond Seaweed Other species Brine shrimp Coral Freshwater prawns Geoduck Hirudiculture Marine shrimp Octopus Oysters Scallops Sea cucumber Sea sponges Turtles By country Australia Canada Chile China Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Madagascar Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Philippines Samoa Solomon Islands South Africa South Korea Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu United Kingdom United States Alaska Hawaii Maine Vanuatu Seafood processing and marketing Seafood processing Fish processing Fish factory Factory ship Fish preservation Slurry ice Dried fish Filleted fish Gibbing Salmon cannery Salted fish Smoked fish Kippers Seafood products Seafood Fish as food Cod liver oil Fish products Fish emulsion Fish meal Fish hydrolysate Fish oil Fish protein powder Fish sauce Gravlax Hákarl Lox Lutefisk Rakfisk Roe Bottarga Caviar Eoran Red caviar Pollock roe Tobiko Karasumi Shrimp paste Surimi Surströmming Seafood marketing Fish marketing Live fish trade Shrimp marketing Chasse-marée Fishmonger Fishwife Worshipful Company of Fishmongers Fish markets Billingsgate Busan English (Ireland) Fulton Garak Honolulu Huanan Jagiroad Jagalchi La Nueva Viga Maine Avenue Muara Angke Nouakchott Noryangjin Oluwo Pasil Peterhead Pike Place Sydney Scania Taipei Toyosu Tsukiji Ulsan Waterfront (Dubai) v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fish_meal&oldid=1304337829 " Categories : Meat industry Pet foods Fish products Fish farming Organic fertilizers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2018 Free-content attribution Free content from FAO This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 12:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fish meal 28 languages Add topic

