Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Function 4 Misinterpretations 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Xuanxue 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Français 한국어 Кыргызча 日本語 Polski Русский Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Post-classical Chinese philosophy bringing together Taoist and Confucian beliefs Xuanxue ( simplified Chinese : 玄学 ; traditional Chinese : 玄學 ; pinyin : Xuánxué ; Wade–Giles : Hsüan 2 -hsüeh 2 ), sometimes called Neo-Daoism (Neo-Taoism), is a metaphysical post-classical Chinese philosophy from the Six Dynasties (222-589), bringing together Taoist and Confucian beliefs through revision and discussion. The movement found its scriptural support both in Taoist and drastically reinterpreted Confucian sources.

Xuanxue , or "Mystic Learning", came to reign supreme in cultural circles, especially at Jiankang during the period of division. The concept represented the more abstract, unworldly, and idealistic tendency in early medieval Chinese thought.

Xuanxue philosophers combined elements of Confucianism and Taoism to reinterpret the I Ching , Daodejing and Zhuangzi .

Definition [ edit ] The name first compounds xuan ( 玄 ) "black, dark; mysterious, profound, abstruse, arcane." It occurs in the first chapter of the Daodejing (" 玄之又玄 ， 眾妙之門 "). The word xuan literally depicts a shade of deep, mystical, dark red.

Daodejing speaks of the Dao as Xuan , more specifically underpinning the depth, utter impenetrability, and the profound mystery of the Dao .

[ 1 ] Xue ( 學 ) means "study, learn, learning"; thus, xuanxue is literally the "learning" or "study" of the "arcane", "mysterious", or "profound". Therefore, the meaning of xuanxue can be described as "study of the mysterious or profound".

In Modern Standard Chinese usage, xuanxue can mean "Neo-Taoism", " esoteric ", " metaphysics ", " spiritualism ", or " mysticism ".

The New Treatise on the Uniqueness of Consciousness by Xiong Shili defines Xuanxue as "dark/obscure/mysterious/profound learning". The concept can be described by such abstractions as "to initiate no action", "emptiness", "one and the many", "root and branches", "having and not having", and the "emotional responses" and "pattern".

[ 2 ] In modern Chinese, Xuanxue is also taken to refer to astrology , geomancy and other popular religious arts .

[ 1 ] Another translation of xuanxue could be "learning of the dark." [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Distribution of philosophical ideologies ( Jingxue and Xuanxue) during the Northern and Southern Dynasties Xuanxue arose after the Han dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE) in early Medieval China . It is mainly represented by a few scholars, namely Wang Bi (226-249), He Yan (d. 249), Xiang Xiu (223?-300), Guo Xiang (d. 312) and Pei Wei (267-300).

[ 1 ] In general, these scholars sought to reinterpret the social and moral understanding of Confucianism in ways to make it more compatible with Taoist philosophy.

[ 1 ] Xuanxue philosophers of the Han dynasty were concerned with restoring unity and harmony to the land, not by condemning the teachings of the sages , but by interpreting them in new ways.

Xuanxue thinkers thereby developed their theories by reinterpreting the relationship between Taoist and Confucian texts through an appreciation of their common themes.

[ 1 ] Through this syncretic movement, the "Way of Mysterious Learning" ( Xuanxue ) emerged.  These post-Han Confucians saw Han Confucianism as restrictive and out of touch with ordinary society, and sought to incorporate Taoist ideas of natural human behaviour. However, such scholars did not agree on how this incorporation was to be accomplished: some argued that morality came from nature and should be aligned with nature; others argued that it was natural to bypass morality and follow nature directly; another group argued that morality itself was nature and simply needed to be purified from the hypocritical use of Confucianism to restrict individuality.

[ 4 ] Xuanxue constitutes a major stage in the development of Confucianism as some of their commentaries became standard interpretations of Confucianism during the Tang period.

[ 4 ] Two influential Xuanxue scholars were Wang Bi and Guo Xiang, editors and leading commentators on the Daodejing and Zhuangzi , respectively.

[ 1 ] For instance, the Daodejing exists in two received versions named after the commentaries. While the "Heshang Gong version" explains textual references to Daoist meditation, the "Wang Bi version" does not.

Richard Wilhelm said the Wang Bi commentary changed the Daodejing "from a compendiary of magical meditation to a collection of free philosophical aperçus ." One of the major defining features of Zhengshi Xuanxue is the " Pure Conversation " ( 清談 ) gatherings that took place among political and intellectual elites from the 3rd century onward, through which intellectuals questioned tradition and shared their ideas during the Wei - Jin and Six Dynasties periods.

[ 5 ] These sessions were transformed versions of the more politically charged "Pure Criticism" ( 清議 ) protests of the later Han, which were, in turn, continuations of political remonstration practices.

[ 5 ] Much of Xuanxue had become divorced from the realities of life and afforded an escape from it.

During the 5th-century CE, Xuanxue formed a part of the official curriculum at the Guozijian , together with Rú ( Confucian learning), Literature , and History .

[ 1 ] Although Xuanxue does not represent one monolithic school of thought, it does encompass a broad range of philosophical positions.

Function [ edit ] The goal of Xuanxue is to bring to light the nature and function of Dao , which appears dark and impenetrable. It started from the assumption that all temporally and spatially limited phenomena (anything "nameable"; all movement, change, and diversity; in short, all "being") is produced and sustained by one impersonal principle, which is unlimited, unnameable, unmoving, unchanging, and undiversified.

[ 6 ] Rather than a school of set doctrines, Xuanxue is a broad, dynamic intellectual front. Many Xuanxue scholars argued that "words cannot fully express meaning," as meaning transcends the limiting confines of language.

Xuanxue seeks to bring together Confucian and Daoist ideologies with fresh annotation and discourse, working with the classical definitions, doctrines, and rules set by previous philosophers.

[ 1 ] The concept of Wú is central to Xuanxue . It is translated as " nothing ", "nothingness", " non-being ", and " negativity ".

[ 7 ] The Tao can literally only be described as nameless and formless, not having any characteristics of things. That the Tao is the "mother of all life" is also central to Xuanxue ideology. Because of the Tao being the beginning of all things, while simultaneously being indescribable and non-being, the Tao is said to be "dark" or "mysterious" ( xuan ).

[ 7 ] Misinterpretations [ edit ] Xuanxue should not be misinterpreted as interchangeable with the Dao . Rather, Xuanxue is the study of the mystery and darkness of the intangible.

Dao represents xuan , the mystical that is central to the philosophy. The Dao supplies the subject matter/basis for the "Mystic Learning" that underpins the thinkings and teachings of Xuanxue .

[ 8 ] Xuanxue aims at unlocking the mystery of the Dao , but should not be confused with a revival of preceding schools of Taoism.

[ 1 ] Xuanxue is committed to analytic rigor and clarity in explicating the meaning of Dao , employing the new, contemporary language of the time. However, critics sometimes condemn it as "dark" because they judge it as obfuscating and detrimental to the flourishing of Dao .

[ 9 ] They use phrases like "dark words" ( xuanyan ) or "dark discourse" ( xuanlun ) in a pejorative sense, indicating that to them Xuanxue was nothing but convoluted empty talk. In these contexts, xuan may be translated as "abstruse", "obscure", or words to that effect.

[ 9 ] To classify Xuanxue as merely "Neo-Taoism" misleadingly reinforces suggestions that Wei-Jin thinkers were only "reinterpreting Confucianism through the lens of Taoism" (Chan 2010: 5). Chan points out that since xuan ( 玄 ) is already something "obscure" and "insubstantial" in Chinese, xuanxue can be left "untranslated, though not unexplained" (Chan 2010: 6).

Xuanxue is also often classified as "Profound Learning". Although "profound" is more appropriate than "dark", ambiguity is still an issue with this classification.

[ 9 ] Xuanxue is not a kind of scholasticism that pitches one school against another. Instead of seeing them as attempting to reconcile Confucianism with Taoism, it may be suggested that they were primarily concerned with the substantive issue of the relationship between mingjiao and ziran .

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Chan, Alan.

"Neo-Daoism" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Shili, Xiong (2015).

New Treatise on the Uniqueness of Consciousness . New Haven & London: Yale University Press. p. 110.

^ "Dark Learning | Chinese philosophy | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2022-07-06 .

^ a b Xinzhong Yao (2000).

An introduction to Confucianism . Cambridge University Press. pp.

89– 95.

ISBN 9780521644303 .

^ a b Bo Mou (27 October 2008).

The Routledge History of Chinese Philosophy . Routledge. pp. 303–.

ISBN 978-1-134-24938-1 .

^ Zürcher, Erik; Twitchett, Denis C.

China - Dong (Eastern) Han , Britannica.com .

^ a b JeeLoo Liu; Douglas Berger (13 June 2014).

Nothingness in Asian Philosophy . Routledge. pp. 214–.

ISBN 978-1-317-68384-1 .

^ Sellmann, James D (September 2020).

"Xuanxue's Contributions to Chinese Philosophy" .

researchgate.org .

^ a b c d "Neo-Daoism" (PDF) .

edisciplinas.usp.br . Sep 2, 2014.

Further reading [ edit ] Theobald, Ulrich.

"Chinese Literature and Philosophy - Xuanxue 玄學 The School of the Mystery" .

www.chinaknowledge.de .

Littlejohn, Ronnie, "Daoist Philosophy", section 11 "Neo-Daoism" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

D'Ambrosio, Paul.

"Xuanxue "Neo-Daoism": Reworking the Relationship between Confucian and Daoist Themes" .

academia.edu .

External links [ edit ] "Philosophy and Religion in Early Medieval China" Archived 2020-10-28 at the Wayback Machine , sunypress.edu .

v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xuanxue&oldid=1303768571 " Categories : Xuanxue History of Chinese philosophy Wei, Jin, Northern and Southern dynasties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 23:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xuanxue 12 languages Add topic

