Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Publishing partnerships 3 Open access 4 Notable series Toggle Notable series subsection 4.1 The American Campus 4.2 Comics Culture 4.3 Global Media & Race 4.4 Key Words in Jewish Studies 4.5 Nature, Society, and Culture 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Rutgers University Press 6 languages Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic publishing house in New Jersey Rutgers University Press Founded 1936 Country of origin United States Headquarters location New Brunswick, New Jersey Distribution Chicago Distribution Center (US) UBC Press (Canada) Eurospan Group (Europe) [ 1 ] Key people Micah Kleit (Director) Publication types Books Official website www .rutgersuniversitypress .org Rutgers University Press ( RUP ) is a nonprofit academic publishing house, operating in New Brunswick, New Jersey under the auspices of Rutgers University .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Rutgers University Press, a nonprofit academic publishing house operating in Piscataway, New Jersey, [ 3 ] under the auspices of
Rutgers University, was founded on March 26, 1936. Since then, the press has grown in size and the scope of its publishing program. Among the original areas of specialization were Civil War history and European history. The press’ current areas of specialization include sociology, anthropology, health policy, history of medicine, human rights, urban studies, Jewish studies, American studies, film and media studies , the environment, and books about New Jersey and the mid–Atlantic region. The press consists of a small team of 18 full-time staff members.

[ 4 ] Publishing partnerships [ edit ] In 2018, Rutgers University Press entered into a partnership with Bucknell University Press .

[ 5 ] In 2021, Rutgers University Press entered into a partnership with University of Delaware Press .

[ 6 ] Open access [ edit ] Rutgers is one of thirteen publishers to participate in the Knowledge Unlatched pilot, a global library consortium approach to funding open access books .

[ 7 ] Notable series [ edit ] Rutgers University Press has more than eighty series of books, both past and current.

[ 8 ] This is a list of notable series by the press.

The American Campus [ edit ] Edited by Harold S. Wechsler.

The books in this series explore recent developments and public policy issues in higher education in the United States. Topics include access to college and affordability; drop-out rates; tenure and academic freedom; campus labor; the expansion of administrative posts and salaries; the crisis in the humanities and the arts; the corporate university and for-profit colleges; online education; controversy in sports programs; and gender, ethnic, racial, religious, and class dynamics and diversity. Books feature scholarship from a variety of disciplines in the humanities and social sciences.

[ 9 ] Comics Culture [ edit ] Edited by Corey K. Creekmur, Craig Fischer, Jeet Heer , and Ana Merino .

Volumes in the Comics Culture series explore the artistic, historical, social, and cultural significance of newspaper comic strips, comic books, and graphic novels, with individual titles devoted to focused studies of key titles, characters, writers, and artists throughout the history of comics; additional books in the series address major themes or topics in comics studies, including prominent genres, national traditions, and significant historical and theoretical issues.

[ 10 ] Global Media & Race [ edit ] Edited by Frederick Luis Aldama .

Books in this series consider how race—and intersectional identities generally—is constructed in front of the camera and behind, attending to issues of representation and consumption as well as the making of racialized and anti-racist media phenomena from script to production and policy. It utilizes a comparative and interdisciplinary approach to media and race.

[ 11 ] Key Words in Jewish Studies [ edit ] Edited by Deborah Dash Moore , MacDonald Moore, and Andrew Bush.

Key Words in Jewish Studies is a series of books that provide clear and judiciously illustrated accounts of terms currently in use and to chart histories of past usage. Far from consolidating and narrowing a critical lexicon, deciphering key words stimulates discussion about the boundaries of Jewish studies , its relationship to other forms of cultural studies, and the position of Jewish studies in the larger sphere of culture.

[ 12 ] Nature, Society, and Culture [ edit ] Edited by Scott Frickel .

This series provides a platform for showcasing the best of scholarship on nature-society-culture interactions, and features carefully crafted empirical studies of socio-environmental change and the effects such change has on ecosystems, social institutions, historical processes and cultural practices. Anchored in sociological analyses of the environment, the series is home to studies that employ a range of disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives to investigate the pressing socio-environmental questions of our time–from environmental inequality and risk, to the science and politics of climate change and serial disaster, to the environmental causes and consequences of urbanization and war-making, and beyond.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Literature portal New Jersey portal List of English-language book publishing companies List of university presses References [ edit ] ^ "Place An Order – Rutgers University Press" .

^ "Rutgers University Press on JSTOR" .

jstor.org . Retrieved June 18, 2020 .

^ "Mission and History" .

Rutgers University Press .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved May 9, 2024 .

^ "Small Press Profile: Rutgers University Press" .

American Booksellers Association . February 12, 2020 . Retrieved August 9, 2021 .

^ Henning-Stout, Sara (June 10, 2017).

"Announcing a New University Press Partnership" .

Rutgers University Press . Retrieved August 9, 2021 .

^ "UD Press Partners with Rutgers" .

UDaily . Retrieved August 9, 2021 .

^ "Publishers – Knowledge Unlatched" .

knowledgeunlatched.org .

^ "Browse Series" .

Rutgers University Press . August 9, 2021.

^ "Series Descriptions" .

Rutgers University Press .

^ "Series Descriptions" .

Rutgers University Press .

^ "Series Descriptions" .

Rutgers University Press .

^ "Series Descriptions" .

Rutgers University Press .

^ "Series Descriptions" .

Rutgers University Press .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other SNAC Yale LUX Portal : Books Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rutgers_University_Press&oldid=1276459177 " Categories : Rutgers University Press Rutgers University publications Book publishing companies based in New Jersey Publishing companies established in 1936 University presses of the United States Companies based in New Brunswick, New Jersey Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 23:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rutgers University Press 6 languages Add topic

