Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Africa 2 North America Toggle North America subsection 2.1 Sub-national colours 3 South America 4 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 4.1 Sub-national colours 5 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 5.1 Sub-national colours 6 Oceania Toggle Oceania subsection 6.1 Sub-national colours 7 Countries with limited or no recognition 8 Former countries Toggle Former countries subsection 8.1 Caliphates 8.2 Ancient/Imperial Chinese dynasties 9 Supranational organisations Toggle Supranational organisations subsection 9.1 Examples of use of these colours 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents National colours 19 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Eesti Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Simple English ไทย اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Colors that represent a nation Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e National colours are frequently part of a country's set of national symbols . Many states and nations have formally adopted a set of colours as their official "national colours" while others have de facto national colours that have become well known through popular use. National colours often appear on a variety of different media, from the nation's flag to the colours used in sports . Before World War I , they also served as the colours of different military uniforms for each nation or region.

Africa [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Algeria Green, white and red National colours of Algeria Angola Red, black and yellow National colours of Angola Benin Green, yellow and red National colours of Benin Botswana Light blue, black and white National colours of Botswana Burkina Faso Red, green and yellow National colours of Burkina Faso Burundi Red, white and green National colours of Burundi Cameroon Green, red and yellow National colours of Cameroon Cape Verde Blue, white, red and yellow National colours of Cape Verde Central African Republic Blue, white, green, yellow and red National colours of Central African Republic Chad Blue, yellow and red National colours of Chad Comoros Yellow, white, red, blue and green National colours of Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of the Blue, yellow and red National colours of Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) Congo, Republic of the Green, yellow and red National colours of Congo Republic Djibouti Light blue, green, white and red National colours of Djibouti Egypt Red, white and black Gold National colours of Egypt Equatorial Guinea Green, white, red and blue National colours of Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Green, blue, red and yellow National colours of Eritrea Eswatini (Swaziland) Blue, yellow, red, black and white National colours of Eswatini Ethiopia Green, yellow, red and blue National colours of Ethiopia Gabon Green, yellow and blue Gambia Red, blue, green and white Ghana Red, yellow, green and black Black and white (used in sports) Guinea Red, yellow and green Guinea-Bissau Red, yellow, green and black Ivory Coast Orange, white and green Kenya Black, red, green and white Lesotho Blue, white, green and black Liberia Red, white and blue Libya Red, black, green and white Madagascar Red, green and white Malawi Black, red and green Mali Green, yellow and red Mauritania Green, yellow and red Mauritius Red, blue, yellow and green Morocco Red and green Mozambique Green, yellow, red, black and white Namibia Blue, red, green, white and yellow Niger Orange, white and green Nigeria Green and white Rwanda Sky blue, yellow and green São Tomé and Príncipe Green, yellow, red and black Senegal Green, yellow and red Seychelles Blue, yellow, red, white and green Sierra Leone Green, white and blue Somalia Blue and white South Africa Red, green, blue, gold, black and white [ 1 ] Green and gold (used in sports) South Sudan Black, red, green, blue, yellow and white Sudan Red, white, black and green Tanzania Green, yellow, blue and black Togo Green, yellow, red and white Tunisia Red and white Uganda Black, yellow and red Zambia Green, red, black and orange Zimbabwe Green, yellow, red, black and white North America [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Antigua and Barbuda Red, white, blue, black and yellow Bahamas Aquamarine, yellow and black Barbados Ultramarine, gold and black Belize Blue, red and white Sky blue (used in sports) Canada Red and white [ 2 ] Black (only used in sports) National colours of Canada Costa Rica Blue, white and red Black (used in sports) Cuba Blue, white and red Black Dominica Green, yellow, black, white and red Blue (used in sports) Dominican Republic Blue, white and red El Salvador Blue and white Grenada Green, yellow and red Guatemala Blue and white Navy blue and green-blue Haiti Blue and red [ 3 ] Honduras Turquoise blue and white Navy blue and midnight blue Jamaica Green, gold and black Mexico Green, white and red Black, Indian red, magenta and lime green (used only in sports) Nicaragua Blue and white Gold and denim (used only in sports) Panama Blue, white and red Midnight blue and cadet blue (used only in sports) Saint Kitts and Nevis Green, red and white Gold and black Saint Lucia Light blue, yellow, black and white Blue (only in sports) Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Blue, yellow and green Trinidad and Tobago Red, white and black Maroon (only in sports) United States Red, white and blue [ 3 ] List of U.S. state colors Sub-national colours [ edit ] Country, nation or region Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Anguilla Orange, blue and white Aruba Yellow, cerulean, white, red Bermuda Red, blue and white Prussian blue (used in sports) Bonaire Yellow, blue and white British Virgin Islands Green, yellow and white Cayman Islands Blue, red and white Curaçao Blue, yellow and white Guadeloupe Green, red and white Black Martinique Red, green and black Blue and white Montserrat Black, green, dark blue, red and white New Brunswick Pine green, navy blue and white See Flag of New Brunswick Puerto Rico Red, white and blue Quebec Royal Blue and white See Flag of Quebec Saint Martin Yellow and blue Dark blue, red and white Saint Pierre et Miquelon Blue, white and red Sint Maarten Red, blue and white Turks and Caicos Blue, light blue, red and white Green sheen (only in sports) US Virgin Islands White, yellow and blue Light blue (used only in sports) South America [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Argentina Light blue and white [ 4 ] Blue and black (used in sports) Bolivia Red, yellow and green White (used in sports) Brazil Green and yellow Blue and white Chile Red, white and blue Colombia Yellow, blue and red Dark blue and white (used in sports) Ecuador Yellow, blue and red Sky blue (used in sports) French Guiana Yellow and green Blue (used in sports) Guyana Yellow and green Red and black Paraguay Red, white and blue Bluegray (used in sports) Peru Red and white Suriname White and green Red and gold Uruguay Blue and white Light blue (used in sports) Artigas flag , Flag of the Treinta y Tres Venezuela Yellow, blue and red Burgundy, khaki, white and neon yellow (used in sports) Asia [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Afghanistan Black, red, green and white Blue  (Sports) Bahrain Red and white Bangladesh Red and green White (football) [ 5 ] First Flag of Bangladesh (1971) Bhutan Orange, gold and white Brunei Yellow, black, white and red Blue and green (football) Cambodia Red and blue Black (football) China Red and yellow Dark blue, black and white (sports) Georgia Red and white India Saffron orange, blue, white and green Sky blue (sports) Indonesia Red and white [ 6 ] Green (sports) Iran Green, white and red Black Iraq Red, white, black and green Israel Blue and white [ 7 ] National colours of Israel Japan Red and white Black (sports); Blue, white and spring bud (only used in football ) Jordan Black, white, green and red Kazakhstan Blue and gold White and black (sports) Korea, North (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) Red, white and blue Korea, South (Republic of Korea) White, red, blue and black Kuwait Green, white, red and black Blue and red (sports) Kyrgyzstan Red and yellow Laos Red, blue and white Black, gold and sky blue (football) Lebanon Red, white and green Malaysia Gold and black Red, white, dark blue and gold Maldives Red and white Green and blue (football) Mongolia Blue, red and yellow White (sports) Myanmar Yellow, green, red and white Nepal Crimson, blue and white Oman Red, white and green Gold Pakistan Green and white Lime green and gold (sports) Philippines Blue, red, white and yellow Qatar Maroon and white Saudi Arabia Green and white Lavender [ 8 ] Singapore Red and white Blue (football) Sri Lanka Blue and yellow Maroon, yellow, orange, green (flag colours) and white Syria Red, white, black and green Gray and gold Tajikistan Red, white and green Thailand Red, white and blue Royal yellow, royal purple and blue sapphire Royal flags of Thailand Timor-Leste Red, yellow, black and white Turkmenistan Green and white Sand United Arab Emirates Red, green, white and black Gold and blue Uzbekistan Blue, white, green and red Black (sports) Vietnam Yellow and red Blue and White (sports) Yemen Red, white and black Sub-national colours [ edit ] Country, nation or region Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Hong Kong Red and white Black and gray Macau Green and white White and dark blue (sports) Europe [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Albania Red and black Andorra Blue, yellow and red Armenia Red, blue and orange Austria Red and white Azerbaijan Sky blue, red and green Belarus Red, green and white Belgium Red Black and yellow; Light blue (used in sports) [ 9 ] Bosnia and Herzegovina Blue and gold White (used in football) Bulgaria White, green and red Croatia Red, white and blue Czech Republic White, red and blue [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] National colours of the Czech Republic Cyprus Blue and white Orange Denmark Red and white Estonia Blue, black and white [ 13 ] Finland White and blue Red and gold France Blue, white and red [ 14 ] Georgia Red and white Germany Black, red and gold White; Silver (used in motor racing) ; Green (used in football) National colours of Germany Greece Blue and white National colours of Greece Hungary Red, white and dark green Iceland Blue, white and red Ireland Green St. Patrick's blue , white, orange Italy Green, white and red [ 15 ] Azure National colours of Italy Latvia Carmine and white Liechtenstein Blue and red Lithuania Yellow, green and red Luxembourg Red, white and light blue Malta Red and white Moldova Blue, yellow and red Monaco Red and white Montenegro Red and gold Netherlands Orange Red, white and blue (flag) Orange refers to the Dutch royal family , the House of Orange-Nassau .

North Macedonia Red and yellow White (used by the national football team) Norway Red, blue and white Poland White and red Portugal Green and red (Before the 1910 revolution : White and blue) Romania Blue, yellow and red Russia White, blue and red Green San Marino White and light blue Serbia Red, blue and white [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] National colours of Serbia Slovakia White, blue and red Slovenia White, blue and red [ 19 ] Green, blue and white (sports) [ 20 ] Spain Red and gold (During the Second Spanish Republic : also purple) Sweden Blue and yellow See Flag of Sweden Switzerland Red and white Turkey Red and white Turquoise Ukraine Blue and gold National colours of Ukraine United Kingdom Red, white and blue British racing green National colours of the United Kingdom Sub-national colours [ edit ] Country, nation or region Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Åland Blue, yellow and red Andalucia Green and white Basque Country Green and red White Bavaria Sky blue and white See Flag of Bavaria Brittany Black and white Brussels Region Blue and yellow Grey Canary Islands Yellow, blue and white Catalonia Red and yellow Cornwall Black and white Dublin City Green and blue It is common to see dark blue and light blue flown for Dublin, but this is the GAA colours for Dublin county .

England Red and white Blue (sports) Faroe Islands White, blue and red Flanders Black and yellow Friesland Blue, white and red Galicia Sky blue and white Gibraltar Red and white Guernsey Red and white Green (sports) See Flag of Guernsey Isle of Man Red and grey Yellow (sports) Yellow is the colour of the unofficial national football team .

Jersey Red and white Northern Ireland Red and white Green and white (sports) Green and white is in reference to the national football team Saxony Green and white Scotland Blue and white Wales Red, green and white Yellow Yellow is in reference to the colour of the national flower of Wales, the daffodil.

Wallonia Red and yellow Oceania [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Australia Green and gold Blue and white National colours of Australia Fiji Light blue White and black ( rugby and other sports) Kiribati Red, gold, blue and white New Zealand Black [ 21 ] White, silver, ochre red, teal and beige (used by the cricket team in the 1980s) National colours of New Zealand Papua New Guinea Red, black, yellow and white Samoa Red, white and blue Solomon Islands Olive green, yellow and blue Green and white Tonga Red and white Tuvalu Sky blue, yellow and white Blue Vanuatu Red, green, black and yellow Sub-national colours [ edit ] Country, nation or region Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information American Samoa Blue, red and white Cook Islands Green and white French Polynesia Red and white Guam Indigo and red Blue and white New Caledonia Gray, white and red Niue Golden yellow and blue Australian Capital Territory Dark blue, white and gold [ 22 ] see Sport in Australian Capital Territory New South Wales Sky blue [ 23 ] Navy blue and white see Sport in New South Wales Northern Territory Black, White and Ochre [ 24 ] see Sport in Northern Territory Queensland Maroon [ 25 ] White and gold see Symbols of Queensland South Australia Red, gold and dark blue [ 26 ] see Sport in South Australia Tasmania Bottle green, yellow and maroon [ 27 ] [ 28 ] see Sport in Tasmania Victoria Navy blue and silver [ 29 ] White see Sport in Victoria Western Australia Gold and black White see Sport in Western Australia Countries with limited or no recognition [ edit ] These are the national colours for countries or states that have limited or no recognition .

Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Abkhazia Green, white and red Kosovo Blue, gold and white Black Palestine Black, white, green and red Somaliland Green, white and red South Ossetia White, red and yellow Taiwan (Republic of China) Blue, white and red Verdigris (University Sports) Transnistria Red and green Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus Red and white Western Sahara (Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic) Black, white, green and red Former countries [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Austria-Hungary Black and gold Red, white and green Flags of Austria-Hungary Black and gold were the colours of the ruling Habsburg monarchy Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh) Red, blue and orange White Byzantine Empire Red, gold and purple Byzantine flags and insignia China (Republic of China, 1912-1949) Blue, white and red Confederate States of America Blue, white and red Cadet grey Cadet grey was an official color of the Confederate States Army Czechoslovakia Blue, white and red East Germany Black, red and gold Blue National colours of Germany France (Kingdom of France 987–1792, 1814–1848) White and blue French Blue , French Flags German Empire Black, white and red German Flags Göktürk Khaganate Sky blue Holy Roman Empire Gold and black White and red Flags of the Holy Roman Empire Nazi Germany Black, white and red Brown German Flags Neutral Moresnet Black, white and navy Portugal (Kingdom of Portugal 1139-1910) Blue and white Republic of Texas red, white and blue Texas is a current state of the United States but was a former independent republic from 1839-1845.

Rhodesia Green Soviet Union Red Gold South Africa (pre-1994) Orange, white and blue Green (sports) South Yemen Red, sky blue, white and black Yugoslavia Blue, white and red Caliphates [ edit ] Country Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Umayyad Caliphate Error: Template:Country data Umayyad Caliphate does not exist White Abbasid Caliphate Black Black Standard Fatimid Caliphate White Ottoman Empire Red Ancient/Imperial Chinese dynasties [ edit ] See also: colour in Chinese culture Dynasty Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information Xia dynasty Black, grue [ 30 ] Green/blue in China Shang dynasty White [ 30 ] Zhou dynasty Red [ 30 ] Qin dynasty Black [ 30 ] Han dynasty Black (206 BC-104 BC) Yellow (104 BC-26 AD) Red (26 AD-220 AD) [ 30 ] Former Wei dynasty Yellow [ 30 ] Jin dynasty Red [ 30 ] Liu Song dynasty Red [ 30 ] Southern Qi dynasty Red [ 30 ] Green/blue in China Liang dynasty Red [ 30 ] Chen dynasty Red [ 30 ] Northern Wei dynasty Yellow (399-491) Black (491-535) [ 30 ] Northern Qi dynasty Black [ 30 ] Northern Zhou dynasty Black [ 30 ] Sui dynasty Red [ 30 ] Tang dynasty Yellow (618-750) Reddish Yellow  (750-907) [ 30 ] Liao dynasty Black [ 30 ] Later Jin dynasty White [ 30 ] Song dynasty Red [ 30 ] Western Xia dynasty White [ 30 ] Jin dynasty White [ 30 ] Yuan dynasty White [ 30 ] Ming dynasty Red [ 30 ] Qing dynasty Yellow [ 30 ] Imperial yellow jacket Yellow Dragon Flag Supranational organisations [ edit ] Some noted supranational organisations like the United Nations and the European Union have their own colours as part of their branding and marketing . They are usually taken from the organisation's flag. Although they do not have national sporting teams, the colours can be used for anything connected to the organisation, like associated bodies.

Organisation Flag Primary colours Secondary colours Primary Secondary Further information African Union Green and gold Flag of the African Union Arab League Green Red, black and white Flag of the Arab League , Pan-Arab colours Association of Southeast Asian Nations Blue, red and yellow Brown Flag of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation Green and yellow Blue and white Caribbean Community Sky blue, dark blue and yellow Maroon (sports) Maroon is the colour of the West Indies cricket team . Although they are not an officially part of CARICOM, most members of the community are members of the Cricket West Indies .  CARICOM sees the organisation as an associated institute of Community.

[ 31 ] Community of Portuguese Language Countries Blue and white Flag of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Eurasian Economic Union White Blue and gold Flag of the Eurasian Economic Union European Union Reflex blue and gold Flag of Europe Mercosur White and blue Green Flag of Mercosur NATO Dark Blue Flag of NATO Nordic Council Blue and white Flag of the Nordic Council ; Design Manual of the Nordic Council - Colours Organisation of Islamic Cooperation White, green and black Red See Flag of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and Green in Islam Organization of Turkic States Turquoise Although the flag of the Organization of Turkic States is light blue and white, turquoise is the colour most associated with the Turkic region.

South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Gold and white United Nations Light blue and white Flag of the United Nations Examples of use of these colours [ edit ] United Nations: the recognisable blue helmets of the peacekeeping operations and the flags of associated UN agencies like the World Health Organization , with the UN's light blue and white.

European Union : the blue and yellow of the EU flag ; uses include the blue European Health Insurance Card and the Blue Card for skilled immigration.

See also [ edit ] Tricolour List of international auto racing colours Lists of national symbols References [ edit ] ^ "National flag" . South African Government. 2018-02-19.

^ "National Colours: Red and White" . Government of Canada . Retrieved 2013-10-26 .

^ a b "National Symbols".

The World Factbook (52nd ed.). Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Public Affairs. 2014.

ISBN 978-0-16-092553-5 .

OCLC 913577992 . Archived from the original on 2016-11-08 . Retrieved 2015-05-02 .

^ "Símbolos nacionales" . Government of Argentina. Archived from the original on 2015-10-09.

La primera enseña patria es la Bandera Nacional. Creada por el general Manuel Belgrano el 27 de febrero de 1812, fue consagrada con los mismos coloures 'celeste y blanco' por el Congreso de Tucumán el 20 de julio de 1816 y ratificada por el mismo cuerpo en Buenos Aires , el 25 de febrero de 1818.

^ "Bangladesh national team" . Colours of Football . Retrieved 2018-07-11 .

^ Minahan, James B. (2009).

The Complete Guide to National Symbols and Emblems . ABC-CLIO. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0-313-34497-8 . Retrieved 2015-10-26 .

National colours: Red and white ^ "Israel National Symbols: The Israeli Flag" . Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 2014-06-11 .

^ Noor, Saleha (2023).

"Lavender and the Kingdom: Vogue Arabia Celebrates Saudi Arabia's New Color Identity" .

Vogue Arabia . Retrieved 2024-01-28 .

^ "Rode Duivels brengen eerbetoon aan wielrenners met uitshirts" . Sporza. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2016-08-20 .

^ "Státní symboly" .

hrad.cz .

^ "Symboly současné České republiky" .

vlast.cz .

^ "Státní symboly České republiky" . toulkypocechach.com. Archived from the original on 2014-02-02 . Retrieved 2014-01-26 .

^ "National symbols of Estonia" . Archived from the original on 2016-08-01 . Retrieved 2016-07-29 .

^ " Le drapeau tricolour " [The Tricolour Flag] (in French). 2002-06-20. Archived from the original on 2005-01-28 . Retrieved 2015-07-18 .

Le pavillon, ainsi que le drapeau national, sera formé des trois couleurs nationales disposées en trois bandes égales, de manière à ce que le bleu soit attaché à la garde du pavillon, le blanc au milieu et le rouge flottant.

^ Ferorelli, Nicola (1925).

La vera origine del tricoloure italiano . Rassegna storica del Risorgimento. Vol. 12. pp.

654– 680.

^ The Journal of the Orders & Medals Research Society of Great Britain . Orders and Medals Research Society. 1969. p. 207).

^ Chronicles . Rockford Institute. 1994. p. 39.

^ Thomas, Nigel; Mikulan, Krunoslav (2006).

The Yugoslav Wars (2): Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia 1992–2001 . Osprey Publishing. p. 58.

ISBN 978-1-84176-964-6 .

^ "National Insignia" . Government of the Republic of Slovenia. Archived from the original on 2011-10-04 . Retrieved 2016-08-21 .

the three national colours (white, blue and red) of Carniola - the central historic state on the territory of the Slovenian people - are used ^ "Sport in Slovenia" (PDF) . Government Communication Office of the Republic of Slovenia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-08-21 . Retrieved 2016-08-21 .

The Olympic Committee of Slovenia suggests that sports organisations use the following ratio when designing national sports equipment: 50% green, 30% blue and 20% white.

^ "Design of The New Zealand Orders Insignia" . The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Government of New Zealand . Archived from the original on 2017-06-21 . Retrieved 2013-03-20 .

^ "ACT Flags and Emblems" .

ACT Government Chief Minister's Department . 27 February 2023.

^ Symbols and emblems of NSW Archived 2010-03-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Northern Territory Flag" .

Department of the Chief Minister . Archived from the original on 2010-03-08.

^ "State colour" .

Department of the Premier and Cabinet .

^ "State Emblems and Insignia" . Archived from the original on 2015-01-22 . Retrieved 2016-09-09 .

, Government of South Australia ^ Department of Premier and Cabinet - TASMANIA : Sporting colours ^ "Tasmanian Sporting Colours - Story of their Origin" .

The Mercury . 13 February 1925.

^ "Ensigns of Public Authority" .

Department of Premier and Cabinet . Archived from the original on 2011-05-27 . Retrieved 2019-05-30 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x Gao, Jingyi (2012).

"Official Colours of Chinese Regimes: A Panchronic Philological Study with Historical Account of China" (PDF) .

Trames. A Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences . 16(66/61) (3). Estonian Academy Publishers: 237– 285.

doi : 10.3176/tr.2012.3.03 .

^ "West Indies Cricket Board" .

CARICOM . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

v t e National colours Australia States Canada Czech Republic Germany Greece Israel Italy New Zealand Portugal Serbia Ukraine United Kingdom United States States Pan-National Africa Arab Malay Slavic v t e Colour topics Colour science Colour physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colours Chromophore Structural colouration Animal colouration Colour of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Colour perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Colour blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Colour calibration Colour constancy Colour task Colour code Colour temperature Colour vision test Evolution of colour vision Impossible colours Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Colour psychology Colour symbolism Colour preferences Lüscher colour test Kruithof curve Political colour National colours Chromophobia Chromotherapy Colour reproduction Colour photography Colour balance Colour cast Digital image processing Colour management Colour printing Multi-primary colour display Quattron Colour model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Colour space Colour mapping Colour philosophy Colour scheme Colour tool Monochromatic colours Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colours Analogous colours Achromatic colours (Neutral) Polychromatic colours Light-on-dark Web colours Tinctures in heraldry Colour theory Colour mixing Primary colour Secondary colour Chromaticity Colour solid Colour wheel Colour triangle Colour analysis (fashion) Colour realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Colour terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Grey Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the colour naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Colour history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Colour in Chinese culture Traditional colours of Japan Human skin colour Colour dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colourfulness Pastel colours Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Colour organisations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Colour Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colours: A–F List of colours: G–M List of colours: N–Z List of colours (compact) List of colours by shade List of colour palettes List of colour spaces List of Crayola crayon colours history Colour chart List of RAL colours List of web colours Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index v t e Color classifications Color Index Color systems, standards and palettes ANPA Color charts Color palettes (computer graphics) Colour Index International (CI list of dyes ) Crayola Crayons DIC Federal Standard 595 HKS ISCC–NBS Munsell NCS Ostwald Pantone RAL list Web colors X11 Color names (alphabetic) List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) Variations of base colors Shades of red Shades of yellow Shades of green Shades of cyan Shades of blue Shades of magenta Shades of orange Shades of chartreuse Shades of spring green Shades of azure Shades of violet Shades of rose Shades of brown Shades of purple Shades of pink Shades of white Shades of gray Shades of black Category v t e National symbols ( list ) Topics Coat of arms Colour Deity Dish Emblem Father Flag Flower Myth Patron saint Personification Poetry Epic Poets Religion Sport Lists Animals birds Anthems Dances Founders Fruits Instruments Drinks liquors Mottos Trees Galleries Country coats of arms State flags Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_colours&oldid=1302679424 " Categories : National colours Color in culture Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Flag decoration missing country data templates This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 22:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National colours 19 languages Add topic

