Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General 2 Customary or social conventions Toggle Customary or social conventions subsection 2.1 Social 3 Government 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Convention (norm) 36 languages العربية تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Simple English Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Türkçe Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of agreed, stipulated, or generally accepted standards A convention influences a set of agreed, stipulated, or generally accepted standards, social norms , or other criteria, often taking the form of a custom.

In physical sciences , numerical values (such as constants, quantities, or scales of measurement) are called conventional if they do not represent a measured property of nature, but originate in a convention, for example an average of many measurements, agreed between the scientists working with these values.

General [ edit ] A convention is a selection from among two or more alternatives, where the rule or alternative is agreed upon among participants. Often the word refers to unwritten customs shared throughout a community. For instance, it is conventional in many societies that strangers being introduced shake hands. Some conventions are explicitly legislated; for example, it is conventional in the United States and in Germany that motorists drive on the right side of the road, whereas in Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Nepal, India and the United Kingdom motorists drive on the left. The standardization of time is a human convention based on the solar cycle or calendar. The extent to which justice is conventional (as opposed to natural or objective ) is historically an important debate among philosophers .

The nature of conventions has raised long-lasting philosophical discussion.

Quine , Davidson , and David Lewis published influential writings on the subject. Lewis's account of convention received an extended critique in Margaret Gilbert 's On Social Facts (1989), where an alternative account is offered. Another view of convention comes from Ruth Millikan 's Language:  A Biological Model (2005), once more against Lewis.

[ example needed ] According to David Kalupahana, The Buddha described conventions—whether linguistic, social, political, moral, ethical, or even religious—as arising dependent on specific conditions. According to his paradigm, when conventions are considered absolute realities, they contribute to dogmatism, which in turn leads to conflict. This does not mean that conventions should be absolutely ignored as unreal and therefore useless. Instead, according to Buddhist thought, a wise person adopts a Middle Way without holding conventions to be ultimate or ignoring them when they are fruitful.

[ 1 ] Customary or social conventions [ edit ] Social [ edit ] Main articles: Norm (social) , Mores , Norm (philosophy) , and taboo In sociology , a social rule refers to any social convention commonly adhered to in a society . These rules are not written in law or otherwise formalized. In social constructionism , there is a great focus on social rules. It is argued that these rules are socially constructed, that these rules act upon every member of a society, but at the same time, are re-produced by the individuals.

Sociologists representing symbolic interactionism argue that social rules are created through the interaction between the members of a society. The focus on active interaction highlights the fluid, shifting character of social rules. These are specific to the social context, a context that varies through time and place. That means a social rule changes over time within the same society. What was acceptable in the past may no longer be the case. Similarly, rules differ across space: what is acceptable in one society may not be so in another.

Social rules reflect what is acceptable or normal behaviour in any situation.

Michel Foucault 's concept of discourse is closely related to social rules as it offers a possible explanation how these rules are shaped and change. It is the social rules that tell people what is normal behaviour for any specific category. Thus, social rules tell a woman how to behave in a womanly manner, and a man, how to be manly . Other such rules are as follows: Strangers being introduced shake hands, as in Western societies, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] but: Bow toward each other, in Korea, Japan and China Wai each other in Thailand Do not bow at each other, in the Jewish tradition In the United States, eye contact, a nod of the head toward each other, and a smile, with no bowing; the palm of the hand faces sideways, neither upward nor downward, in a business handshake.

Present business cards to each other, in business meetings (both-handed in Japan) Click heels together, while saluting in some military contexts [ 4 ] In most places it's always polite to ask before kissing or hugging, this is called public display of affection .

[ 5 ] A property norm is to place things back where we found them.

A property norm is used to identify which commodities are accepted as money.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] A sexual norm can refer to a personal or a social norm.

[ 8 ] Most cultures have social norms regarding sexuality, and define normal sexuality to consist only of certain sex acts between individuals who meet specific criteria of age, consanguinity, race/ethnicity, and/or social role and socioeconomic status. In the west outside the traditional norm between consenting adults what is considered not normal is what falls under what is regarded as paraphilia or sexual perversion.

A form of marriage , polygyny or polyandry , is right or wrong in a given society , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] as is homosexual marriage considered wrong in many of the societies. A religious more for an example is that a woman or man must not cohabitate, live together, when romantically involved until they have gotten married. Adultery is considered wrong that is not violating sexual fidelity when there is union of a couple in marriage.

A men's and women's dress code .

[ 12 ] Avoid using rude hand gestures like pointing at people, swear words , offensive language etc., [ 12 ] A woman's curtsey [ 13 ] in some societies In the Middle East, never displaying the sole of the foot toward another, as this would be seen as a grave insult.

In many schools, though seats for students are not assigned they are still "claimed" by certain students, and sitting in someone else's seat is considered an insult.

[ 14 ] To reciprocate when something is done for us.

[ 15 ] Etiquette norms, [ 16 ] like asking to be excused from the gathering's table, be ready to pay for your bill particularly in the case you asked people to dinner, it is a faux pas to refuse an offer of food as a guest.

Contraception norms, not to limit access to them by women who require it, some cultures limit contraception.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Recreational drug use restrictions on access or as popularly accepted in the culture [ 21 ] where it is used as an example alcohol, nicotine, cannabis and hashish, there is a disincentive and prohibition for controlled substances where use and sale is prohibited like MDMA and party drugs.

The belief that certain forms of discrimination are unethical because they take something away from the person by restrictions and by being ostracised. Furthermore, can "Restrict women's and girls' rights, access to empowerment opportunities and resources".

[ 22 ] A person has a duty of care for the aged persons within the family.

[ 2 ] This is particularly true in countries of Asia. Much of aged care falls under unpaid labor.

Refuse to favor known persons, as this would be an abuse of power relationship.

Do not make a promise if you know that you can not keep it.

[ 2 ] Do not ask for money if you know that you can not pay it back to that person or place.

"Practice honesty and not deceive the innocent with false promises to obtain economic benefits or gratuities." [ 2 ] It is suitable to make a Pledge of Allegiance in the United States, when prompted to in some social contexts.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] An gentlemen's agreement , or gentleman's agreement, is an informal and legally non-binding agreement between two or more parties. We follow through on our business dealings, when we say we will do something then we do it and will not falter to do so.

[ 2 ] Do not divulge the privacy of others.

[ 2 ] Treat friends and family nonviolently , be faithful and honest in a couple, to treat with respect the beliefs, activities or aims of our parents, show respect for beliefs, religious and cultural symbols of others.

[ 2 ] Tolerate and respect people with functional diversity, particularly when they wish to integrate in a game or sports equipment. Also tolerate different points of view than your own, even if contrary, and do not try and change their beliefs by force.

[ 2 ] Give the seat to people with children, pregnant or elderly, in public and private transportation.

[ 2 ] Face the front, do not go elevator surfing, and do not push extra buttons in an elevator or stand too close to someone if there are few people.

[ 12 ] In a library, it is polite to have talk in the same noise volume as that of a classroom.

In a cinema, it is correct to not talk during a movie because people are there to watch the film, also it is correct to not have phones on as the light and sound will distract other patrons.

[ 25 ] If you are going to be punctual , notify friends or acquaintances if you will be late.

[ 25 ] If you cannot show up to an outing, restaurant, theater, cinema, etc., it's proper to give the reason over your phone or address sometime prior.

[ 25 ] It is a norm to speak one at a time.

[ 25 ] A religious vow is a special promise. It made in a religious sense or in ceremonies such as in marriages when there is a couple who are being promised to marriage called " marriage vows ", they are also promising one another to be faithful and take care of their children.

Helping somebody in need, [ 26 ] for social responsibility or to prevent harm. See the parable of the Good Samaritan .

Do not go to a non-fast food restaurant or bar unless you have enough to make a good tip , depending on the place.

[ 27 ] Examples of US social norms or customs turned into laws include the following: People under 21 cannot buy alcohol .

You must be 16 to drive.

[ 28 ] Firearms are legal and relatively accessible to anyone who wants one.

[ 29 ] In a city you cannot cross the street wherever you like, you must use a zebra crossing. You can be fined if the police catch you breaking this rule.

[ relevant?

– discuss ] It is a social norm to provide tips in the US to waitresses and waiters.

There are numerous gender-specific norms that influence society: [ 25 ] [ better source needed ] Girls should wear pink; boys should wear blue.

Men should be strong and not show any emotion.

Women should be caring and nurturing.

Men should do repairs at the house and be the one to work and make money; while women are expected to take care of the housework and children.

A man should pay for the woman's meal when going out to dinner.

Men should open doors for women at bars, clubs, workplace, and should clear the way for the exit.

[ 16 ] Government [ edit ] Main article: Constitutional convention (political custom) In government , convention is a set of unwritten rules that participants in the government must follow. These rules can be ignored only if justification is clear, or can be provided. Otherwise, consequences follow. Consequences may include ignoring some other convention that has until now been followed. According to the traditional doctrine (Dicey), [ citation needed ] conventions cannot be enforced in courts, because they are non-legal sets of rules. Convention is particularly important in the Westminster System of government, where many of the rules are unwritten.

See also [ edit ] A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English Conventional electrical unit Conventional insulin therapy Conventional landing gear Conventional pollutant Conventional sex Conventional superconductor Conventional treatment Conventional tillage Conventional wastewater treatment Conventional wisdom Conventionalism Conventionally grown De facto standard Non-conventional trademark Standard (disambiguation) Trope (literature) Unconventional computing Unconventional superconductor Unconventional wind turbines References [ edit ] ^ David Kalupahana , Nagarjuna: The Philosophy of the Middle Way.

SUNY Press, 1986, pages 17–18. The author refers specifically to the thought of the Buddha here.

^ a b c d e f g h i "40 Examples of Moral and Social Norms" .

www.lifepersona.com . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Hagan, Ekua.

"The Art of Handshaking" .

www.psychologytoday.com . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ "Rendering Honours" .

moebius.freehostia.com . Retrieved 2019-04-21 .

^ "Public Displays of Affection Abroad (PDA) - Expat Guide Asia" .

www.expatguideasia.com . Archived from the original on 24 May 2017 . Retrieved 10 October 2018 .

^ Young, H. Peyton.

Social Norms: Prepared for the New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics .

doi : 10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_2338-1 .

ISBN 9781349951215 .

S2CID 13026974 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Araujo, Luis (2004).

"Social norms and money" .

Journal of Monetary Economics .

51 (2): 241– 256.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmoneco.2003.01.005 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Bozon, Michel; Rennes, Juliette (February 2015).

The history of sexual norms: the hold of age and gender (42 ed.). Belin. p. 304.

ISBN 9782701194325 . Retrieved 2019-09-26 .

^ Burton, Neel.

"The Pros and Cons of Polygamy Is there a link between polygamy and social unrest?" .

www.psychologytoday.com . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Solomon, Andrew (12 March 2021).

"How Polyamorists and Polygamists Are Challenging Family Norms" .

www.newyorker.com . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Mondal, Puja (12 April 2014).

"Mores (Strongest Social Norms): Meaning and Characteristics" .

www.yourarticlelibrary.com/ . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ a b c McNaught, Amber (9 May 2017).

"What Are Social Norms? You Follow Them Every Day Without Even Noticing" .

www.lifehack.org . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Croffey, Amy (14 June 2016).

"Etiquette to meet the Queen: The curtsy is out and kissing was never in" .

www.smh.com.au . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Robins, Aaron Vela (23 November 2016).

"A Social Norms Experiment: The Unspoken Rule of Class Seats" .

www.gcmag.org . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ "Norm of Reciprocity and Persuasion" .

www.psychologistworld.com . 23 January 2017 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ a b "25 Etiquette Rules You Should Never Forget" .

www.powerofpositivity.com . 17 November 2016 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ SC, DL, D, JC., Dixon, Herbert, Loxton, Lucke (2014). " 'As many options as there are, there are just not enough for me': Contraceptive use and barriers to access among Australian women".

Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care .

19 (5): 340– 51.

doi : 10.3109/13625187.2014.919380 .

PMID 24901891 .

S2CID 20602371 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ CC, LA, A, J, JS, Garrett, Keogh , Kavanagh, Tomnay , Hocking (2015).

"Understanding the low uptake of long-acting reversible contraception by young women in Australia: A qualitative study" .

BMC Women's Health .

15 72: 15:72.

doi : 10.1186/s12905-015-0227-9 .

PMC 4566517 .

PMID 26359250 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ A, L, Mills, Barclay (2006).

"None of them were satisfactory: Women's experiences with contraception" .

Health Care Women Int .

27 (5): 379– 98.

doi : 10.1080/07399330600629468 .

PMID 16877290 .

S2CID 9017737 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Drucker, Donna J. (7 April 2020).

Contraception A Concise History By . The MIT Press Essential Knowledge series. MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262538428 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ "Specialty Drug Classes That Are Costing Consumers an Arm and a Leg" .

The Motley Fool . 2015-10-24.

^ Ferrant, Fuiret, Gaëlle, Léa (11 June 2018).

"Social norms and gender equality: The potential for social transformation and women's empowerment" .

www.womendeliver.org . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Etzler, Cooper, Summer, Brandon.

"The Pledge of Allegiance: To stand or not to stand" .

lhslance.org . Lancer Media . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Longley, Robert.

"A Brief History of the Pledge of Allegiance" .

www.thoughtco.com . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ a b c d e "Social Norm Examples" .

examples.yourdictionary.com . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ "The Social Psychology Perspectives On Helping Others" .

www.psychologynoteshq.com . 14 February 2014 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ "US social customs | American cultural Norms" .

www.estavisaus.org . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Muscato, Christopher.

"History of the Driving Age" .

Study.com . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ Schaeffer, Katherine (2024-07-24).

"Key facts about Americans and guns" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved 2025-03-05 .

External links [ edit ] Rescorla, Michael (2007) Convention – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Law-Ref.org – an index of important international conventions v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐62w6q
Cached time: 20250817222733
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.650 seconds
Real time usage: 0.813 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3892/1000000
Revision size: 21803/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 214950/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5679/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 134562/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.384/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20204963/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  615.517      1 -total
 36.07%  222.009      1 Template:Reflist
 24.82%  152.792     20 Template:Cite_web
 16.24%   99.970      1 Template:Social_philosophy
 14.72%   90.581      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.66%   84.053      1 Template:World_view
 12.93%   79.591      3 Template:Lang
 10.36%   63.738      1 Template:Short_description
  5.85%   36.035      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.59%   34.397      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7830:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222733 and revision id 1301039531. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Convention_(norm)&oldid=1301039531 " Categories : Concepts in ethics Consensus reality Cultural conventions Social agreement Social concepts Social conventions Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from August 2018 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2021 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from November 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Convention (norm) 36 languages Add topic

