Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Kelly's concerns 2.2 Personal construct psychology 2.3 Dimensions of transitions 2.4 Rep test 3 Selected publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents George Kelly (psychologist) 16 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Polski Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American personality theorist (1905–1967) For other people named George Kelly, see George Kelly (disambiguation) .

George Kelly Born ( 1905-04-28 ) April 28, 1905 Perth, Kansas , U.S.

Died March 6, 1967 (1967-03-06) (aged 61) Waltham, Massachusetts , U.S.

Alma mater University of Edinburgh University of Iowa Known for Personal construct theory Repertory grid Scientific career Fields Psychology Institutions Ohio State University Brandeis University Fort Hays State University Thesis Common Factors in Reading and Speech Disabilities (1931) Doctoral advisors Carl Seashore Lee Edward Travis Doctoral students Brendan Maher George Alexander Kelly (April 28, 1905 – March 6, 1967) was an American psychologist , therapist , educator and personality theorist. He is considered a founding figure in the history of clinical psychology and is best known for his theory of personality, personal construct psychology .

[ 1 ] Kelly's work has influenced many areas of psychology, including constructivist , humanistic , existential, and cognitive psychology.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] George Alexander Kelly was born in 1905 on a farm near Perth, Kansas [ 5 ] to two strictly religious parents.

[ 6 ] He was their only child. They moved frequently during his childhood years, resulting in a fragmented early education. He later attended Friends University and Park College , where he received a bachelor's degree in physics and mathematics .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Early on, he was interested in social problems, and he went on to get his master's degree in sociology at the University of Kansas , where he wrote a thesis on workers' leisure activities.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] He also completed minor studies in labor relations .

[ 10 ] Kelly taught at various colleges and other institutions, with course topics ranging from speech-making to "Americanization". In 1929, after receiving an exchange scholarship, he completed a Bachelor of Education degree at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland , [ 5 ] writing a thesis dealing with the prediction of teaching success. He then returned to the United States to continue psychology studies and completed a graduate and doctoral degrees in psychology at the State University of Iowa in 1931.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] After he received his Ph.D. in psychology, Kelly worked as a psychotherapist in Kansas.

[ 11 ] His dissertation was on speech and reading disabilities .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] For some years before World War II , Kelly worked in school psychology , developing a program of traveling clinics which also served as a training ground for his students.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] He had a keen interest in clinical diagnosis . It was during this period that Kelly left behind this interest in psychoanalytic approach to human personality, because he said people were more troubled by natural disasters than any psychological issue, such as the libidinal forces.

[ 5 ] During World War II , Dylan Brundage and Kelly worked as aviation psychologists , where, among other things, Kelly was responsible for a training program for local civilian pilots.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] After the war and a brief tenure as a psychology faculty member at the University of Maryland , he was appointed professor and director of clinical psychology at the Ohio State University , where he remained until 1965.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Under his guidance, OSU's graduate psychology training programs became some of the best in the United States, offering a unique blend of clinical skills and a strong commitment to scientific methodology.

It is also at OSU that Kelly developed his major contribution to the psychology of personality .

[ 12 ] The Psychology of Personal Constructs was published in 1955 and achieved immediate international recognition, gaining him visiting appointments at various universities in the US as well as in Europe, the former Soviet Union, South America, the Caribbean, and Asia.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] He was also elected president of the clinical and the consulting divisions of the American Psychological Association , and served as president of the American Board of Examiners in Professional Psychology , providing expertise and insight, especially regarding ethical issues.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Kelly went on a world tour in 1961, invited to speak about his essays and articles all over the country.

[ 13 ] In 1964, Kelly wrote a paper for the First Old Saybrook Conference, which has been renamed to Association for Humanistic Psychology (AHP). Kelly's paper, "The threat of aggression", was later published in the Journal of Humanistic Psychology . Kelly transferred from Ohio State University to Brandeis University in the United States for the psychology department.

[ 11 ] Kelly noted: " Johann Herbart 's work on education and particularly mathematical psychology influenced me. I think mathematics is the pure instance of construct functioning—the model of human behavior" Although Kelly was influenced by Herbart—a philosopher, psychologist, and founder of pedagogy as an academic discipline [ 11 ] —some of Kelly's inspiration for the theory of personal constructs came from a close friend of his. Namely, this friend had been an actor in some drama in college, and for two or three weeks he really got into his character and lived it as it was the real him. Kelly, unlike many people who would see this only as a sheer affectation, thought this was the expression of his real self and the behavior was authentic.

[ 5 ] Kelly also worked extensively on researching the implications and applications of his theory, while continuing to work in clinical psychology.

Joseph Rychlak is among his prominent students who expanded on his theories.

Brendan A. Maher , who became a professor himself, published a selection of Kelly's essays and articles after his death.

[ 10 ] [ 13 ] Kelly had all his students refer to him as "Professor Kelly"; however, when they would receive a Ph.D. dissertation they were permitted to call him George and he would also call them by their first name instead of "Miss", "Mrs.", or "Mister".

[ 5 ] George Kelly left OSU to take an endowed faculty position as the Mashulam and Judith Riklis Chair in Behavioral Science at Brandeis University in 1965.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Kelly died on March 6, 1967, at the age of 61, just two years after accepting the Riklis Chair of Behavioral Science at Brandeis.

[ 5 ] Kelly's ideas are still used in today's findings to explore personality into greater depths. His ideas also help to uncover the patterns of behavior.

[ 14 ] [ page needed ] Work [ edit ] Kelly's concerns [ edit ] Kelly did not like his theory being compared to other theories. Oftentimes, people believed Kelly's personal construct theory was similar to humanistic theories or cognitive theories, but Kelly thought of his theory as its own category of theories. Some say Kelly was similar to Ulric Neisser , "the father of cognitive psychology", because they both studied cognitive psychology characteristics, others say Kelly was similar to Abraham Maslow , the creator of Maslow's hierarchy of needs , because they both studied humanistic psychology characteristics. Although Kelly's research had some humanistic psychology characteristics, it differed from that field in many ways as well. Kelly rejected being labelled as a cognitive psychologist—to the extent that he almost wrote another book stating his theory had no link to cognitive theories.

[ 11 ] Kelly saw that current theories of personality were so loosely defined and difficult to test that in many clinical cases the observer contributed more to the diagnosis than the patient. If people took their problems to a Freudian analyst, they would be analysed in Freudian terms; a Jungian would interpret them in Jungian terms; a behaviourist would interpret them in terms of conditioning ; and so on.

Kelly acknowledged that both the therapist and patient would each bring a unique set of constructs to bear in the consulting room. Therefore, the therapist could never be completely "objective" in construing their client's world. The effective therapist was, however, one who construed the patient's material at a high level of abstraction within the patient's (as opposed to the therapist's) system of construction. The therapist could then comprehend the ways in which the patient saw the world that were disordered and help the patient to change their maladaptive constructs.

Personal construct psychology [ edit ] Main article: Personal construct theory Kelly's fundamental view of personality was that people are like naive scientists who see the world through a particular lens, based on their uniquely organized systems of construction, which they use to anticipate events.

[ 15 ] Personal construct theory explores the individual's map they form by coping with the psychological stresses of their lives.

[ 14 ] [ page needed ] But because people are naive scientists, they sometimes employ systems for construing the world that are distorted by idiosyncratic experiences not applicable to their current social situation. A system of construction that chronically fails to characterize and/or predict events, and is not appropriately revised to comprehend and predict one's changing social world, is considered to underlie psychopathology (or mental illness.) The body of Kelly's work, The Psychology of Personal Constructs , was written in 1955 [ 16 ] when Kelly was a professor at Ohio State University. The first three chapters of the book were republished by W. W. Norton in paperback in 1963 [ 17 ] and consist only of his theory of personality which is covered in most personality books. The re-publication omitted Kelly's assessment technique, the rep grid test , and one of his techniques of psychotherapy ( fixed role therapy ), which is rarely practiced in the form he proposed.

Kelly believed that each person had their own idea of what a word meant. If someone were to say their sister is shy, the word "shy" would be interpreted in different ways depending on the person's personal constructs they had already associated with the word "shy". Kelly wanted to know how the individual made sense of the world based on their constructs.

[ 14 ] [ page needed ] Kelly believed that a person's own meaning and definition is the foundation of who and what that person is and helps give shape to a person's idea of what the world is based on their individual constructs.

[ 18 ] On the other hand, Kelly's fundamental view of people as naive scientists was incorporated into most later-developed forms of cognitive-behavioral therapy that blossomed in the late 70s and early 80s, and into intersubjective psychoanalysis which leaned heavily on Kelly's phenomenological perspective and his notion of schematic processing of social information.

[ 19 ] Kelly's personality theory was distinguished from drive theories (such as psychodynamic models) on the one hand, and from behavioral theories on the other, in that people were not seen as solely motivated by instincts (such as sexual and aggressive drives) or learning history but by their need to characterize and predict events in their social world. Because the constructs people developed for construing experience have the potential to change, Kelly's theory of personality is less deterministic than drive theory or learning theory. People could conceivably change their view of the world and in so doing change the way they interacted with it, felt about it, and even others' reactions to them. For this reason, it is an existential theory, regarding humankind as having a choice to reconstrue themselves, a concept Kelly referred to as constructive alternativism . Constructs provide a certain order, clarity, and prediction to a person's world. Kelly referenced many philosophers in his two volumes but the theme of new experience being at once novel and familiar (due to the templates placed on it) is closely akin to the notion of Heraclitus : "we step and do not step in the same rivers." Experience is new but familiar to the extent that it is construed with historically derived constructs.

Kelly defined constructs as bipolar categories—the way two things are alike and different from a third—that people employ to understand the world. Examples of such constructs are "attractive", "intelligent", or "kind". A construct always implies contrast. So when an individual categorizes others as attractive, or intelligent, or kind, an opposite polarity is implied. This means that such a person may also evaluate the others in terms of the constructs "ugly", "stupid", or "cruel". In some cases, when a person has a disordered construct system, the opposite polarity is unexpressed or idiosyncratic. The importance of a particular construct varies among individuals. The adaptiveness of a construct system is measured by how well it applies to the situation at hand and is useful in predicting events. All constructs are not used in every situation because they have a limited range (range of convenience). Adaptive people are continually revising and updating their own constructs to match new information (or data) that they encounter in their experience.

Kelly's theory was structured as a testable scientific treatise with a fundamental postulate and a set of corollaries.

Fundamental postulate: "A person's processes are psychologically channelized by the ways in which he [or she] anticipates events." The construction corollary: "a person anticipates events by construing their replications." This means that individuals anticipate events in their social world by perceiving a similarity with a past event (construing a replication).

The experience corollary: "a person's construction system varies as he successively construes the replication of events." The dichotomy corollary: "a person's construction system is composed of a finite number of dichotomous constructs." The organization corollary: "each person characteristically evolves, for his convenience in anticipating events, a construction system embracing ordinal relationships between constructs." The range corollary: "a construct is convenient for the anticipation of a finite range of events only." The modulation corollary: "the variation in a person's construction system is limited by the permeability of the constructs within whose range of convenience the variants lie." The choice corollary: "a person chooses for himself that alternative in a dichotomized construct through which he anticipates the greater possibility for extension and definition of his system." The individuality corollary: "persons differ from each other in their construction of events." The commonality corollary: "to the extent that one person employs a construction of experience which is similar to that employed by another, his psychological processes are similar to the other person." The fragmentation corollary: "a person may successively employ a variety of construction subsystems which are inferentially incompatible with each other." The sociality corollary: "to the extent that one person construes the construction processes of another, he may play a role in a social process involving the other person." Disordered constructs are those in which the system of construction is not useful in predicting social events and fails to change to accommodate new information. In many ways, Kelly's theory of psychopathology (or mental disorders) is similar to the elements that define a poor theory. A disordered construct system does not accurately predict events or accommodate new data.

Dimensions of transitions [ edit ] Transitional periods in a person's life occur when they encounter a situation that changes their naive theory (or system of construction) of the way the world is ordered. They can create anxiety, hostility, and/or guilt and can also be opportunities to change one's constructs and the way one views the world.

The terms anxiety , hostility , and guilt had unique definitions and meanings in personal construct theory ( The Psychology of Personal Constructs , Vol. 1, 486–534).

Anxiety develops when a person encounters a situation that their construct system does not cover, an event unlike any they have encountered. An example of such a situation is a woman from the western United States who is accustomed to earthquakes, who moves to the eastern United States and experiences great anxiety because of a hurricane. While an earthquake might be of greater magnitude, she experiences greater anxiety with the hurricane because she has no constructs to deal with such an event. She is caught "with her constructs down." Similarly, a boy who has been abused in early childhood may not have the constructs to accommodate kindness from others. Such a boy might experience anxiety in an outstretched hand that others view as benevolent.

Guilt is dislodgement from one's core constructs. A person feels guilt if they fail to confirm the constructs that define them. This definition of guilt is radically different from in other theories of personality. Kelly used the example of the man who regards others as cow-like creatures "making money and giving milk." Such a man might construe his role in relationship to others in terms of his ability to con favors or money from them. Such a man, who other psychologists might call a ruthless psychopath, and see as unable to experience guilt, feels guilt, according to Kelly's theory, when he is unable to con others: He is then alienated from his core constructs.

Hostility is "attempting to extort confirmation of a social prediction that is already failing." When a person encounters a situation in which they expect one outcome and receive quite a different one, they should change their theory or constructs rather than trying to change the situation to match their constructs. But the person who continually refuses to modify their belief system to accommodate new data, and in fact tries to change the data, is acting in bad faith and with hostility. Hostility, in Kelly's theory, is analogous to a scientist "fudging" their data. An example might be a professor who sees himself as a brilliant educator who deals with poor student reviews by devaluing the students or the means of evaluation.

Rep test [ edit ] Main article: Repertory grid Rep stands for repertory grid . In 1955, George Kelly created an interactive grid known as the rep test based on his personal construct theory. The repertory grid is a mathematical way of giving meaning to one's own, or other people's, personal constructs. The repertory grid test needs a set of elements (such as people or things), and a set of constructs created by the individual.

[ 11 ] The test asks a person to list people or things that are important, then the responses are split into groups of three. There are three role-titles in each row; the person is to think how two of the constructs are alike, and how the other is different from the two that are alike.

[ 14 ] [ page needed ] The responses are sorted into two poles, an emergent pole and implicit pole. The emergent pole is the way in which two elements are similar, while the implicit pole is the way in which the third element differs from the two that are similar.

[ 11 ] After extracting a construct, the individual analyzes the role-titles and checks the elements that are best described under the emergent pole and leaves blank the elements best described under the implicit pole.

[ 11 ] Kelly's repertory grid test can be used in many different situations, from clinical psychology to marketing, due to its ability to apply constructs to any kind of event.

[ 11 ] Kelly believed the repertory grid provided a "basis for a mathematics of psychological space"—a way to mathematically model any person's "psychological space".

[ 11 ] Selected publications [ edit ] 1955: The psychology of personal constructs . Vol. I, II. Norton, New York. (2nd printing: 1991, Routledge, London, New York) 1963: A theory of personality. The psychology of personal constructs . Norton, New York (= Chapt. 1-3 of Kelly 1955).

1969: Clinical psychology and personality: The selected papers of George Kelly . John Wiley & Sons, New York.

References [ edit ] ^ "George Kelly" .

^ Winter, David A. "Still radical after all these years: George Kelly's The psychology of personal constructs ".

Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry .

18 (2): 276– 283.

doi : 10.1177/1359104512454264 .

^ Epting, Franz R.; Leitner, Larry M. (1992). "Humanistic psychology and personal construct theory".

The Humanistic Psychologist .

20 ( 2– 3): 243– 259.

doi : 10.1080/08873267.1992.9986793 .

^ Raskin, Jonathan D. (2002).

"Constructivism in psychology: Personal construct psychology, radical constructivism, and social constructionism" .

American Communication Journal .

5 (3) . Retrieved 4 February 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Ryckman, Richard M. (2013).

Theories of Personality . United States: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. pp.

273– 274.

ISBN 978-1-111-83501-9 .

^ Scheer, Joern.

"About George Kelly" .

kellysociety.org . Retrieved 2017-10-01 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Chiari, Gabriele (2017).

George A. Kelly and his personal construct theory (PDF) . The George Kelly Society.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Fransella, Fay; Neimeyer, Robert A. (2005). "George Alexander Kelly: The man and his theory". In Fransella, Fay (ed.).

The essential practitioner’s handbook of personal construct psychology . John Wiley. pp.

3– 13.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Fransella, Fay (1995).

George Kelly . SAGE.

^ a b Maher, Brendan A.

(1969).

Clinical Psychology and Personality: The Selected Papers of George Kelly . New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. pp.

1 .

ISBN 978-0-471-56356-3 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Benjafield, John G. (November 2008). "George Kelly: cognitive psychologist, humanistic psychologist, or something else entirely?".

History of Psychology .

11 (4): 239–262 (243–244).

doi : 10.1037/a0014108 .

PMID 19244833 .

^ Kelly, George A. (1955).

The psychology of personal constructs (2 vols.) . W. W. Norton.

^ a b Butt, Trevor (March 2012).

"Looking back: George Kelly and the garden of eden" .

The Psychologist .

25 (3): 250– 251.

^ a b c d Mischel, Walter; Shoda, Yuichi; Ayduk, Ozlem (2008) [1971].

Introduction to Personality: Toward an Integrative Science of the Person (8th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9780470087657 .

OCLC 176649055 .

^ Winter, David A. (April 2013). "Still radical after all these years: George Kelly's The Psychology of Personal Constructs ".

Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry .

18 (2): 276– 283.

doi : 10.1177/1359104512454264 .

PMID 22969164 .

S2CID 8993534 .

^ Kelly, George A. (1955).

The Psychology of Personal Constructs: Vol 1 and 2 . New York: WW Norton.

^ Kelly, George Alexander (1963).

A Theory of Personality: The Psychology of Personal Constructs . W.W. Norton and Company. pp.

190 pages.

ISBN 9780393001525 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Epting, Franz R.; Paris, Mark Eliot (2006). "A constructive understanding of the person: George Kelly and humanistic psychology".

The Humanistic Psychologist .

34 (1): 21– 37.

doi : 10.1207/s15473333thp3401_4 .

ISSN 1547-3333 .

^ Stolorow, Robert D.; Atwood, George E. (1979).

Faces in a Cloud: Subjectivity in Personality Theory . New York: Jason Aronson . p. 217.

ISBN 0876683057 .

OCLC 10726797 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to George Kelly (psychologist) at Wikiquote v t e Psychotherapy Schools Psychodynamic Adlerian therapy Analytical therapy Mentalization-based treatment Psychoanalysis Transference focused psychotherapy Cognitive and behavioral Clinical behavior analysis Acceptance and commitment therapy Functional analytic psychotherapy Cognitive behavioral therapy Cognitive therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy Rational emotive behavior therapy Humanistic Emotionally focused therapy Existential therapy Focusing Gestalt therapy Logotherapy Person-centered therapy Other Art therapy Dance therapy Feminist therapy Music therapy Narrative therapy Play therapy Reality therapy Systemic therapy Transactional analysis List Integrative Eclectic psychotherapy Multimodal therapy Transtheoretical model Approaches Brief psychotherapy Counseling Online therapy Telephone therapy Residential treatment Self-help Support group Research Clinical formulation Clinical pluralism Common factors theory Discontinuation History Practitioner–scholar model Techniques Behaviour therapy Aversion therapy Chaining Contingency management Shaping Stimulus control Token economy Counterconditioning Desensitization / Exposure therapy Systematic desensitization Other individual therapy Autogenic training Biofeedback Clean language Cognitive restructuring Emotion regulation Affect labeling Free association Homework Hypnotherapy Modeling Group psychotherapy Co-therapy Couples therapy Family therapy Psychodrama Sensitivity training People Philippe Pinel Josef Breuer Sigmund Freud Pierre Janet Alfred Adler Sándor Ferenczi Carl Jung Ludwig Binswanger Melanie Klein Otto Rank Karen Horney Harry Stack Sullivan Fritz Perls Anna Freud Donald Winnicott Wilhelm Reich Milton H. Erickson Jacques Lacan Erik Erikson Carl Rogers Viktor Frankl George Kelly Rollo May Virginia Axline Carl Whitaker Albert Ellis Silvano Arieti James Bugental Joseph Wolpe Virginia Satir Aaron Beck Salvador Minuchin Paul Watzlawick Haim Ginott Ogden Lindsley Paul Watzlawick Arthur Janov Eugene Gendlin R. D. Laing Jean Baker Miller Otto F. Kernberg Nathan Azrin Irvin D. Yalom Arnold Lazarus Lorna Smith Benjamin Marsha M. Linehan Vittorio Guidano Les Greenberg William R. Miller Steven C. Hayes Michael White Jeffrey Young Peter Fonagy Associations Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies Association for Behavior Analysis International European Association for Psychotherapy Society for Psychotherapy Research World Council for Psychotherapy Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wgvvx
Cached time: 20250817053507
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.720 seconds
Real time usage: 0.866 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4740/1000000
Revision size: 28496/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 101242/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6175/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 96082/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8524967/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  762.764      1 -total
 31.20%  237.959      1 Template:Reflist
 21.76%  165.986      1 Template:Infobox_scientist
 12.94%   98.689      3 Template:Navbox
 12.80%   97.647      1 Template:Psychotherapy
 10.85%   82.757      2 Template:Cite_web
 10.47%   79.829      4 Template:Page_needed
  9.36%   71.386      1 Template:Short_description
  9.13%   69.623      4 Template:Fix
  8.89%   67.819     10 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:434532:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053507 and revision id 1286811295. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Kelly_(psychologist)&oldid=1286811295 " Categories : 1905 births 1967 deaths Constructivism (psychological school) 20th-century American psychologists American social psychologists Park University alumni Friends University alumni University of Kansas alumni University of Iowa alumni Alumni of the University of Edinburgh People from Sheldon, Iowa Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2020 This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 03:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Kelly (psychologist) 16 languages Add topic

