Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Phaedo of Elis 30 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Ligure مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 4th-century BCE Greek philosopher Phaedo of Elis ( / ˈ f iː d oʊ / ; also, Phaedon ; Ancient Greek : Φαίδων ὁ Ἠλεῖος , gen .: Φαίδωνος; fl. 4th century BCE ) was a Greek philosopher . A native of Elis , he was captured in war as a boy and sold into slavery. He subsequently came into contact with Socrates at Athens , who warmly received him and had him freed. He was present at the death of Socrates , and Plato named one of his dialogues Phaedo .

He returned to Elis, and founded the Elean School of philosophy. Almost nothing is known of his doctrines, but his school survived him and was subsequently transferred to Eretria by his pupil Menedemus , where it became the Eretrian school .

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Born in the last years of the 5th century BCE, Phaedo was a native of Elis and of high birth.

[ 1 ] He was taken prisoner in his youth, and passed into the hands of an Athenian slave dealer; being of considerable personal beauty, [ 2 ] he was forced into prostitution .

[ 3 ] The occasion on which he was taken prisoner was no doubt the war between Sparta and Elis, 402–401 BCE, in which the Spartans were joined by the Athenians in 401 BCE.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Two years would have been available for Phaedo's acquaintance with Socrates , to whom he attached himself. According to Diogenes Laërtius [ 6 ] he was ransomed by one of the friends of Socrates. The Suda says that he was accidentally present at a conversation with Socrates, and pleaded with him to effect his liberation. Various accounts mention Alcibiades , Crito , or Cebes , as the person who ransomed him.

[ 3 ] Cebes is stated to have become friends with Phaedo, and to have instructed him in philosophy. Phaedo was present at the death of Socrates in 399 BCE, and was young enough for Socrates to stroke his hair, [ 2 ] which was worn long in the Spartan style.

[ 5 ] That Phaedo was friends with Plato seems likely from the way in which he is introduced in Plato's dialogue Phaedo , which takes its name from him.

Athenaeus , though, relates that Phaedo and Plato were enemies, and that Phaedo resolutely denied any of the views which Plato ascribed to him.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Phaedo appears to have lived in Athens for a short time after the death of Socrates. He then returned to Elis, where he became the founder of a school of philosophy. His disciples included Anchipylus , Moschus , and Pleistanus , who succeeded him.

[ 8 ] Subsequently Menedemus and Asclepiades transferred the school to Eretria , where it was known as the Eretrian school and is frequently identified (e.g. by Cicero ) with the Megarian school .

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] The doctrines of Phaedo are not known, nor is it possible to infer them from the Platonic dialogue of which he is the namesake. His writings, none of which are preserved , were in the form of dialogues. As to their authenticity, nothing is known, in spite of an attempt at verification by Panaetius , [ 9 ] who maintained that the Zopyrus and the Simon were genuine.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Besides these Diogenes Laërtius mentions as of doubtful authenticity the Nicias , Medius , Antimachus or Elder , and Scythian Discourse .

[ 11 ] Some scholars believe that Phaedo's Simon dialogue created the character of Simon the Shoemaker .

[ 12 ] The Suda also mentions the Simmias , Alcibiades , and Critolaus .

[ 13 ] Seneca has preserved one of his dicta , concerning the results of frequenting the company of good (or bad) people: [ 1 ] [ 14 ] Phaedo says: "Certain tiny animals do not leave any pain when they sting us; so subtle is their power, so deceptive for purposes of harm. The bite is disclosed by a swelling, and even in the swelling there is no visible wound". That will also be your experience when dealing with wise people, you will not discover how or when the benefit comes to you, but you will discover that you have received it.

See also [ edit ] List of speakers in Plato's dialogues List of slaves Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Chisholm 1911 , p. 341.

^ a b Plato, Phaedo , 89a–b ^ a b Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Phaedo" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 105.

; Suda , "Phaedon"; Aulus Gellius , 18 ^ Xenophon , Hellenica iii.2.21–31; Diodorus Siculus, xiv.17.4–12, 34 ^ a b Nails 2002 , p. 231 ^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Phaedo" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 105.

^ Athenaeus, xi. 505, 507 ^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Phaedo" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 105,126.

^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Phaedo" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 64.

^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Phaedo" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 105.

; Suda , "Phaedon" ^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Phaedo" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 105.

^ Hock 1976 , pp. 41–53.

^ Suda , "Phaedon".

^ Seneca, Epistles , xciv. 41 .

References [ edit ] Gellius, Aulus (n.d.).

Noctes Atticae (Attic Nights) . Vol. ii. p. 18.

Hock, R.F. (1976).

Simon the Shoemaker as an ideal Cynic . Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies. Vol. 17. pp.

41– 53.

Nails, Debra (2002).

The people of Plato: a prosopography of Plato and other Socratics . Hackett Publishing. p. 231.

"Phaedon".

Suda .

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Phaedo ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 341.

Further reading [ edit ] "Elis, Philosophical School of" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 WorldCat National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phaedo_of_Elis&oldid=1290097972 " Categories : 4th-century BC Greek philosophers 5th-century BC births Ancient Eleans Ancient Greek slaves and freedmen Pupils of Socrates Metic philosophers in Classical Athens Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 20:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phaedo of Elis 30 languages Add topic

