Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Varieties Toggle Varieties subsection 1.1 Doric proper 1.1.1 Laconian 1.1.2 Argolic 1.1.3 Corinthian 1.2 Northwest Doric 1.2.1 Phocian 1.2.2 Locrian 1.2.3 Elean 1.2.4 Epirote 1.2.5 Ancient Macedonian 1.2.6 Achaean Doric 1.2.7 Achaean Doric koine 1.2.8 Northwest Doric koine 2 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 2.1 Vowels 2.1.1 Long a 2.1.2 Compensatory lengthening of e and o 2.1.3 Contraction of a and e 2.1.4 Synizesis 2.1.5 Proto-Greek *a 2.2 Consonants 2.2.1 Proto-Greek *-ti 2.2.2 Proto-Greek *ts 2.2.3 Digamma 2.3 Accentuation 3 Morphology Toggle Morphology subsection 3.1 Future tense 4 Glossary Toggle Glossary subsection 4.1 Common 4.2 Doric proper 4.2.1 Argolic 4.2.2 Cretan 4.2.3 Laconian 4.2.4 Magna Graecia's Doric 4.3 North-West 4.3.1 Aetolian-Acarnanian 4.3.2 Delphic-Locrian 4.3.3 Elean 4.3.4 Epirote 4.3.5 Achaean Doric 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Doric Greek 33 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek dialect For the modern Doric dialect of Scotland, see Doric dialect (Scotland) .

For the architectural style, see Doric order .

This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Doric Greek Western Greek Region Acarnania , Aetolia , Epirus , western and eastern Locris , Phocis , Doris , Achaea , Elis , Messenia , Laconia , Argolid , Aegina , Corinthia , Megara , Kythira , Milos , Thera , Crete , Karpathos , Rhodes , and possibly ancient Macedonia Also, colonies of the aforementioned regions in Cyrene , Magna Graecia , Black Sea , Ionian Sea and Adriatic Sea Era c.

800 – c.

100 BC; evolved into the Tsakonian language Language family Indo-European Hellenic Greek Doric Greek Early form Proto-Greek Dialects Doric proper: Laconian • Tsakonian Argolic Corinthian Northwest Doric: Phocian Locrian Elean Epirote (?) Ancient Macedonian Achaean Doric Achaean Doric Koine Northwest Doric koine Writing system Greek alphabet Language codes ISO 639-3 – Linguist List grc-dor Glottolog dori1248 Distribution of Greek dialects in Greece in the classical period .

[ 1 ] Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Central group: Aeolic Arcado-Cypriot Eastern group: Attic Ionic Distribution of Greek dialects in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily) in the classical period.

Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Eastern group: Attic - Ionic Doric or Dorian ( Ancient Greek : Δωρισμός , romanized : Dōrismós ), also known as West Greek , was a group of Ancient Greek dialects ; its varieties are divided into the Doric proper and Northwest Doric subgroups. Doric was spoken in a vast area, including northern Greece ( Acarnania , Aetolia , Epirus , western and eastern Locris , Phocis , Doris , and possibly ancient Macedonia ), most of the Peloponnese ( Achaea , Elis , Messenia , Laconia , Argolid , Aegina , Corinthia , and Megara ), the Southern Aegean ( Kythira , Milos , Thera , Crete , Karpathos , and Rhodes ), as well as the colonies of some of those regions in Cyrene , Magna Graecia , the Black Sea , the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic Sea . It was also spoken in the Greek sanctuaries of Dodona , Delphi , and Olympia , as well as at the four Panhellenic festivals ; the Isthmian , Nemean , Pythian , and Olympic Games .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] By Hellenistic times, under the Achaean League , an Achaean Doric koine appeared, exhibiting many peculiarities common to all Doric dialects, which delayed the spread of the Attic -based Koine Greek to the Peloponnese until the 2nd century BC.

[ 5 ] The only living descendant of Doric is the Tsakonian language which is still spoken in Greece today; [ 6 ] though critically endangered, with only a few hundred – mostly elderly – fluent speakers left.

[ 7 ] It is widely accepted that Doric originated in the mountains of Epirus in northwestern Greece , the original seat of the Dorians . It then expanded to all other regions and the colonisations that followed. The presence of a Doric state ( Doris ) in central Greece, north of the Gulf of Corinth , led to the theory that Doric had originated in northwest Greece or maybe beyond in the Balkans . The dialect's distribution towards the north extends to the Megarian colony of Byzantium and the Corinthian colonies of Potidaea , Epidamnos , Apollonia and Ambracia ; there, it further added words to what would become the Albanian language , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] probably via traders from a now-extinct "Adriatic Illyrian " intermediary.

[ 10 ] In the north, local epigraphical evidence includes the decrees of the Epirote League , the Pella curse tablet , three additional lesser known Macedonian inscriptions (all of them identifiable as Doric), [ 11 ] numerous inscriptions from a number of Greek colonies. Furthermore, there is an abundance of place names used to examine features of the northern Doric dialects. Southern dialects, in addition to numerous inscriptions, coins, and names, have also provided much more literary evidence through authors such as Alcman , Pindar , and Archimedes of Syracuse , among others, all of whom wrote in Doric. There are also ancient dictionaries that have survived; notably the one by Hesychius of Alexandria , whose work preserved many dialectal words from throughout the Greek-speaking world.

Varieties [ edit ] Doric proper [ edit ] Doric Greek dialects Where the Doric dialect group fits in the overall classification of ancient Greek dialects depends to some extent on the classification. Several views are stated under Greek dialects . The prevalent theme of most views listed there is that Doric is a subgroup of West Greek . Some use the terms Northern Greek or Northwest Greek instead. The geographic distinction is only verbal and ostensibly is misnamed: all of Doric was spoken south of "Southern Greek" or "Southeastern Greek." Be that as it may, "Northern Greek" is based on a presumption that Dorians came from the north and on the fact that Doric is closely related to Northwest Greek . When the distinction began is not known. All the "northerners" might have spoken one dialect at the time of the Dorian invasion; certainly, Doric could only have further differentiated into its classical dialects when the Dorians were in place in the south. Thus West Greek is the most accurate name for the classical dialects.

Tsakonian , a descendant of Laconian Doric (Spartan), is still spoken on the southern Argolid coast of the Peloponnese, in the modern prefectures of Arcadia and Laconia . Today it is a source of considerable interest to linguists, and an endangered dialect.

Laconian [ edit ] Laconia in Greece Laconian was spoken by the population of Laconia in the southern Peloponnese and also by its colonies, Taras and Herakleia in Magna Graecia .

Sparta was the seat of ancient Laconia.

Laconian is attested in inscriptions on pottery and stone from the seventh century BC. A dedication to Helen dates from the second quarter of the seventh century. Taras was founded in 706 and its founders must already have spoken Laconic.

Many documents from the state of Sparta survive, whose citizens called themselves Lacedaemonians after the name of the valley in which they lived.

Homer calls it "hollow Lacedaemon", though he refers to a pre-Dorian period. The seventh century Spartan poet Alcman used a dialect that some consider to be predominantly Laconian.

Philoxenus of Alexandria wrote a treatise On the Laconian dialect .

Argolic [ edit ] Argolis in Greece Argolic was spoken in the thickly settled northeast Peloponnese at, for example, Argos , Mycenae , Hermione , Troezen , Epidaurus , and as close to Athens as the island of Aegina . As Mycenaean Greek had been spoken in this dialect region in the Bronze Age , it is clear that the Dorians overran it but were unable to take Attica . The Dorians went on from Argos to Crete and Rhodes .

Ample inscriptional material of a legal, political and religious content exists from at least the sixth century BC.

Corinthian [ edit ] Corinthia in Greece Corinthian was spoken first in the isthmus region between the Peloponnesus and mainland Greece ; that is, the Isthmus of Corinth . The cities and states of the Corinthian dialect region were Corinth , Sicyon , Archaies Kleones , Phlius , the colonies of Corinth in western Greece: Corcyra , Leucas , Anactorium , Ambracia and others, the colonies in and around Italy: Syracuse, Sicily and Ancona , and the colonies of Corcyra : Dyrrachium , and Apollonia . The earliest inscriptions at Corinth date from the early sixth century BC.

[ 12 ] They use a Corinthian epichoric alphabet. (See under Attic Greek .) Corinth contradicts the prejudice that Dorians were rustic militarists, as some consider the speakers of Laconian to be. Positioned on an international trade route, Corinth played a leading part in the re-civilizing of Greece after the centuries of disorder and isolation following the collapse of Mycenaean Greece.

Northwest Doric [ edit ] The Northwest Doric (or "Northwest Greek", with "Northwest Doric" now considered more accurate so as not to distance the group from Doric proper) group is closely related to Doric proper.

[ 13 ] Whether it is to be considered a part of the southern Doric Group or the latter a part of it or the two considered subgroups of West Greek, the dialects and their grouping remain the same.

West Thessalian and Boeotian had come under a strong Northwest Doric influence.

While Northwest Doric is generally seen as a dialectal group, [ 13 ] dissenting views exist, such as that of Méndez-Dosuna, who argues that Northwest Doric is not a proper dialectal group but rather merely a case of areal dialectal convergence.

[ 14 ] Throughout the Northwest Doric area, most internal differences did not hinder mutual understanding, though Filos, citing Bubenik, notes that there were certain cases where a bit of accommodation may have been necessary.

[ 15 ] The earliest epigraphic texts for Northwest Doric date to the 6th–5th century BC.

[ 13 ] These are thought to provide evidence for Northwest Doric features, especially the phonology and morphophonology, but most of the features thus attributed to Northwest Doric are not exclusive to it.

[ 13 ] The Northwest Doric dialects differ from the main Doric Group dialects in the below features: [ 16 ] Dative plural of the third declension in -οις ( -ois ) (instead of -σι ( -si )): Ἀκαρνάνοις ἱππέοις Akarnanois hippeois for Ἀκαρνᾶσιν ἱππεῦσιν Akarnasin hippeusin (to the Acarnanian knights).

ἐν ( en ) + accusative (instead of εἰς ( eis )): en Naupakton (into Naupactus).

-στ ( -st )  for -σθ ( -sth ): γενέσται genestai for genesthai (to become), μίστωμα mistôma for misthôma (payment for hiring).

ar for er: amara /Dor.

amera /Att.

hêmera (day), Elean wargon for Doric wergon and Attic ergon (work) Dative singular  in -oi instead of -ôi : τοῖ Ἀσκλαπιοῖ ,  Doric τῷ Ἀσκλαπιῷ , Attic Ἀσκληπιῷ (to Asclepius) Middle participle in -eimenos instead of -oumenos Four or five dialects of Northwestern Doric are recognised.

Phocian [ edit ] Ancient Phocis in Greece This dialect was spoken in Phocis and in its main settlement of Delphi , where a local form known as the Delphian dialect was spoken.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Plutarch says that Delphians pronounce b in the place of p ( βικρὸν for πικρὸν ).

[ 19 ] Locrian [ edit ] Locrian Greek is attested in two locations: Ozolian Locris , along the northwest coast of the Gulf of Corinth around Amfissa (earliest c.

500 BC ); [ 20 ] Opuntian Locris , on the coast of mainland Greece opposite northwest Euboea , around Opus .

Elean [ edit ] The dialect of Elis (earliest c.

600 BC ) [ 21 ] is considered, after Aeolic Greek , one of the most difficult for the modern reader of epigraphic texts.

[ 22 ] Epirote [ edit ] Main article: Epirote Greek Spoken at the Dodona oracle, (earliest c.

550 –500 BC) [ 23 ] firstly under control of the Thesprotians ; [ 24 ] later organized in the Epirote League (since c.

370 BC ).

[ 25 ] Ancient Macedonian [ edit ] Macedon (orange) c.

431 BC Most scholars maintain that ancient Macedonian was a Greek dialect, [ 26 ] probably of the Northwestern Doric group in particular.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Olivier Masson , in his article for The Oxford Classical Dictionary , talks of "two schools of thought": one rejecting "the Greek affiliation of Macedonian" and preferring "to treat it as an Indo-European language of the Balkans" of contested affiliation (examples are Bonfante 1987, and Russu 1938); the other favouring "a purely Greek nature of Macedonian as a northern Greek dialect" with numerous adherents from the 19th century and on (Fick 1874; Hoffmann 1906; Hatzidakis 1897 etc.; Kalleris 1964 and 1976).

[ 30 ] Masson himself argues with the largely Greek character of the Macedonian onomastics and sees Macedonian as "a Greek dialect, characterised by its marginal position and by local pronunciations" and probably most closely related to the dialects of the Greek North-West (Locrian, Aetolian, Phocidian, Epirote). Brian D. Joseph acknowledges the closeness of Macedonian to Greek (even contemplating to group them into a "Hellenic branch" of Indo-European), but retains that "[t]he slender evidence is open to different interpretations, so that no definitive answer is really possible".

[ 31 ] Johannes Engels has pointed to the Pella curse tablet , written in Doric Greek: "This has been judged to be the most important ancient testimony to substantiate that Macedonian was a north-western Greek and mainly a Doric dialect".

[ 32 ] Miltiades Hatzopoulos has suggested that the Macedonian dialect of the 4th century BC, as attested in the Pella curse tablet , was a sort of Macedonian 'koine' resulting from the encounter of the idiom of the ' Aeolic '-speaking populations around Mount Olympus and the Pierian Mountains with the Northwest Greek-speaking Argead Macedonians hailing from Argos Orestikon , who founded the kingdom of Lower Macedonia .

[ 33 ] However, according to Hatzopoulos, B. Helly expanded and improved his own earlier suggestion and presented the hypothesis of a (North-)' Achaean '  substratum extending as far north as the head of the Thermaic Gulf , which had a continuous relation, in prehistoric times both in Thessaly and Macedonia , with the Northwest Greek-speaking populations living on the other side of the Pindus mountain range, and contacts became cohabitation  when the Argead Macedonians completed their wandering from Orestis to Lower Macedonia in the 7th c. BC.

[ 33 ] According to this hypothesis, Hatzopoulos concludes that the Macedonian Greek dialect of the historical period, which is attested in inscriptions, is a sort of koine resulting from the interaction and the influences of various elements, the most important of which are the North- Achaean substratum, the Northwest Greek idiom of the Argead Macedonians , and the Thracian and Phrygian adstrata.

[ 33 ] Achaean Doric [ edit ] Achaean Doric most probably belonged to the Northwest Doric group.

[ 34 ] It was spoken in Achaea in the northwestern Peloponnese, on the islands of Cephalonia and Zakynthos in the Ionian Sea, and in the Achaean colonies of Magna Graecia in Southern Italy (including Sybaris and Crotone ). This strict Doric dialect was later subject to the influence of mild Doric spoken in Corinthia . It survived until 350 BC.

[ 35 ] Achaean Doric koine [ edit ] By Hellenistic times, under the Achaean League , an Achaean Doric koine appeared, exhibiting many peculiarities common to all Doric dialects, which delayed the spread of the Attic -based Koine Greek to the Peloponnese until the 2nd century BC.

[ 5 ] Northwest Doric koine [ edit ] Political situation in the Greek world around the time at which the Northwest Doric koine arose The Northwest Doric koine refers to a supraregional North-West common variety that emerged in the third and second centuries BC, and was used in the official texts of the Aetolian League .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Such texts have been found in W. Locris, Phocis, and Phtiotis, among other sites.

[ 38 ] It contained a mix of native Northwest Doric dialectal elements and Attic forms.

[ 39 ] It was apparently based on the most general features of Northwest Doric, eschewing less common local traits.

[ 37 ] [ 40 ] Its rise was driven by both linguistic and non-linguistic factors, with non-linguistic motivating factors including the spread of the rival Attic-Ionic koine after it was recruited by the Macedonian state for administration, and the political unification of a vast territories by the Aetolian League and the state of Epirus. The Northwest Doric koine was thus both a linguistic and a political rival of the Attic-Ionic koine.

[ 37 ] Phonology [ edit ] Vowels [ edit ] Long a [ edit ] Proto-Greek long *ā is retained as ā , in contrast to Attic developing a long open ē ( eta ) in at least some positions.

Doric g ā m ā tēr ~ Attic g ē m ē tēr 'earth mother' Compensatory lengthening of e and o [ edit ] In certain Doric dialects (Severe Doric), *e and *o lengthen by compensatory lengthening or contraction to eta or omega , in contrast to Attic ei and ou ( spurious diphthongs ).

Severe Doric -ō ~ Attic -ou (second-declension genitive singular) -ōs ~ -ous (second-declension accusative plural) -ēn ~ -ein (present, second aorist infinitive active) Contraction of a and e [ edit ] Contraction: Proto-Greek *ae > Doric ē ( eta ) ~ Attic ā .

Synizesis [ edit ] Proto-Greek *eo, *ea > some Doric dialects' io, ia .

Proto-Greek *a [ edit ] Proto-Greek short *a > Doric short a ~ Attic e in certain words.

Doric hi a ros , Art a mis ~ Attic hi e ros 'holy', Art e mis Consonants [ edit ] Proto-Greek *-ti [ edit ] Proto-Greek *-ti is retained (assibilated to -si in Attic).

Doric phā t i ~ Attic phē s i 'he says' (3rd sing. pres. of athematic verb) legon t i ~ legou s i 'they say' (3rd pl. pres. of thematic verb) wīka t i ~ eiko s i 'twenty' triāka t ioi ~ triāko s ioi 'three hundred' Proto-Greek *ts [ edit ] Proto-Greek *ts > -ss- between vowels. (Attic shares the same development, but further shortens the geminate to -s- .) Proto-Greek *métsos > Doric me ss os ~ Attic me s os 'middle' (from Proto-Indo-European *médʰyos , compare Latin me di us ) Digamma [ edit ] Initial *w ( ϝ ) is preserved in earlier Doric (lost in Attic).

Doric w oikos ~ Attic oikos 'house' (from Proto-Indo-European *weyḱ-, *woyḱ- , compare Latin v īcus 'village') Literary texts in Doric and inscriptions from the Hellenistic age have no digamma.

Accentuation [ edit ] For information on the peculiarities of Doric accentuation, see Ancient Greek accent § Doric .

Morphology [ edit ] This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Numeral te t ores ~ Attic te tt ares , Ionic te ss eres "four".

Ordinal pr ā tos ~ Attic–Ionic pr ō tos "first".

Demonstrative pronoun t ēnos "this" ~ Attic–Ionic (e) k einos t for h (from Proto-Indo-European s ) in article and demonstrative pronoun.

Doric t oi , t ai ; t outoi , t autai ~ Attic-Ionic h oi , h ai ; h outoi , h autai .

Third person plural, athematic or root aorist -n ~ Attic -san .

Doric ed on ~ Attic–Ionic edo san First person plural active -mes ~ Attic–Ionic -men .

Future -se-ō ~ Attic -s-ō .

prāx ē tai ( prāk-se-etai ) ~ Attic–Ionic prāx e tai Modal particle ka ~ Attic–Ionic an .

Doric ai ka, ai de ka, ai tis ka ~ ean, ean de, ean tis Temporal adverbs in -ka ~ Attic–Ionic -te .

hoka , toka Locative adverbs in -ei ~ Attic/Koine -ou .

teide , pei .

Future tense [ edit ] The aorist and future of verbs in -izō , -azō has x (versus Attic/Koine s ).

Doric agōni x ato ~ Attic agōni s ato "he contended" Similarly k before suffixes beginning with t .

Glossary [ edit ] This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: 1. inconsequent transcription, cp.: "Ἐλ ω ός El ô os", "κάρρ ω ν karr ō n", "μυρμηδ ό νες myrmēd ô nes". 2. missing greek terms, cp.: "(Attic gignôskô)".

Please help improve this article if you can.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Common [ edit ] αἰγάδες aigades (Attic αἶγες aiges ) "goats" αἶγες aiges (Attic κύματα kymata ) "waves" ἁλία halia (Attic ἐκκλησία ekklēsia ) "assembly" (Cf.

Heliaia ) [ 41 ] βρύκαιναι brykainai (Attic ἱέρειαι hiereiai ) "priestesses" [ 42 ] βρυκετός bryketos (Attic βρυγμός brygmos , βρυκηθμός brykēthmos ) "chewing, grinding, gnashing with the teeth" [ 42 ] δαμιοργοί damiorgoi (Attic ἄρχοντες archontes ) "high officials". Cf. Attic δημιουργός dēmiourgos "public worker for the people (dēmos), craftsman, creator"; Hesychius δαμιουργοί· αἱ πόρναι "prostitutes". Zamiourgoi Elean .

[ 43 ] Ἐλωός Elôos Hephaestus Ἥφαιστος παρὰ Δωριεῦσιν [ 44 ] κάρρων karrōn (Attic κρείττων kreittōn ) "stronger" (Ionic kreissōn, Cretan kartōn ) [ 45 ] κορύγης korygēs (Attic κῆρυξ kēryx ) "herald, messenger"  (Aeolic karoux) [ 46 ] λαιός laios ( Homeric , Attic and Modern Greek ἀριστερός aristeros ) "left".

Cretan : λαία laia , Attic aspis shield, Hesych .

λαῖφα laipha λαίβα laiba , because the shield was held with the left hand. Cf.Latin: laevus [ 47 ] λαία laia (Attic, Modern Greek λεία leia ) "prey" λέω (λείω) le(i)ō (Attic ἐθέλω ethelō ) "will" οἴνωτρος oinōtros "vine pole" (: Greek οἶνος oinos "wine"). Cf.

Oenotrus μογίοντι mogionti (Ionic πυρέσσουσι pyressousi ) "they are on fire, have fever" (= Attic μογοῦσι mogousi "they suffer, take pains to") μυρμηδόνες myrmēdônes (Attic μύρμηκες myrmēkes ) "ants". Cf.

Myrmidons [ 48 ] ὄπτιλλος optillos or optilos 'eye' (Attic ophthalmos )  ( Latin oculus) (Attic optikos of sight, Optics ) [ 49 ] πάομαι paomai (Attic κτάομαι ktaomai ) "acquire" [ 50 ] ῥαπιδοποιός rhapidopoios poet, broiderer, pattern-weaver, boot-maker [ 51 ] ( rhapis needle for Attic rhaphis [ 52 ] ) σκανά skana (Attic skênê) tent, stage, scene ) (Homeric klisiê ) (Doric skanama encampment) τανθαλύζειν tanthalyzein (Attic τρέμειν tremein ) "to tremble" τύνη tunē or tounē 'you nominative' (Attic συ) dative τέειν teein (Attic σοί soi) χανάκτιον chanaktion (Attic μωρόν mōron )(chan goose [ 53 ] ) Doric proper [ edit ] Argolic [ edit ] Βαλλακράδες Ballacrades title of Argive athletes on a feast-day (Cf.achras wild pear-tree) [ 54 ] Δαυλὶς Daulis mimic festival at Argos (acc. Pausanias 10.4.9 daulis means thicket ) [ 55 ] [ 56 ] (Hes.

daulon fire log) δροόν droon strong (Attic ischyron, dynaton) [ 57 ] κέστερ kester youngman (Attic neanias) [ 58 ] κυλλάραβις kyllarabis discus and gymnasium at Argos [ 59 ] σεμαλία semalia ragged, tattered garments Attic rhakē, cf. himatia clothes) [ 60 ] ὤβεα ôbea eggs  (Attic ὠά ôa ) Cretan [ edit ] ἀγέλα agela "group of boys in the Cretan agōgē ". Cf.

Homeric Greek ἀγέλη agelē "herd" [ 61 ] (Cretan apagelos not yet received in agelê, boy under 17 [ 62 ] ) ἀδνός adnos holy, pure (Attic ἁγνός hagnos) ( Ariadne ) [ 63 ] ἀϝτὸς awtos (Attic autos) Hsch.

aus αὐς - αὐτός. Κρῆτες καὶ Λάκωνες [ 64 ] ἄκαρα akara legs [ 65 ] (Attic skelê) [ 66 ] ἁμάκις hamakis once (Attic hapax) [ 67 ] ἄργετος argetos juniper , cedar (Attic arkeuthos) [ 68 ] αὐκά auka power  (Attic alkê) [ 69 ] ἀφραττίας aphrattias strong βαλικιῶται balikiôtai Koine synepheboi (Attic hêlikiotai 'age-peers' of the same age hêlikia ) [ 70 ] βριτύ britu sweet  (Attic glyku) [ 71 ] δαμιόω damioô , Cretan and Boeotian .  for Attic zêmioô to damage, punish, harm [ 72 ] δαμπόν dampon first milk curdled by heating over embers (Attic puriephthon, puriatê) δῶλα dôla ears (Attic ôta) [ 73 ] (Tarentine ata [ 74 ] ) Ϝέλχανος Welchanos [ 75 ] for Cretan Zeus and Welchanios, Belchanios, Gelchanos [ 76 ] (Elchanios Cnossian month) ϝεργάδδομαι wergaddomai I work (Attic ergazomai) ϝῆμα wêma garment (Attic heima)  (Aeolic emma) (Koine (h)immation)(Cf.Attic amphi-ennumi I dress, amph-iesis clothing) [ 77 ] ἰβῆν ibên wine  (Dialectal ϝοἶνος woînos Attic oinos) (accusative ἰβῆνα ibêna) [ 78 ] ἴττον itton one (Attic hen ἕν ) [ 79 ] καρανώ karanô goat [ 80 ] ϙόσμος kosmos [ 81 ] and kormos [ 82 ] archontes in Crete, body of kosmoi (Attic κόσμος order, ornament, honour, world – kormos trunk of a tree) κύφερον, κυφή kypheron, kuphê head (Attic kephalê) [ 83 ] λάκος lakos rag, tattered garment  (Attic rhakos) ( Aeolic brakos  long robe, lacks the sense 'ragged') [ 84 ] μαλκενίς malkenis (Attic parthenos) Hsch: malakinnês.

ὄθρυν othrun mountain (Attic oros) (Cf.

Othrys ) ῥυστόν rhyston spear σεῖφα seipha darkness (Attic zophos, skotia) (Aeolic dnophos) σπεῦσδος speusdos title of Cretan officer (Cf.speudô speus- rush) τάγανα tagana (Attic tauta) these things τίρος tiros summer  (Homeric, Attic theros) τρέ tre you, accusative ( Attic se ) Laconian [ edit ] ἀβήρ abêr storeroom οἴκημα στοὰς ἔχον, ταμεῖον Λάκωνες ἀϝώρ awôr dawn (Attic ἠώς êôs )  ( Latin aurora) ἄδδα adda need, deficiency (Attic endeia ) Aristophanes of Byzantium (fr. 33) ἀδδαυόν addauon dry (i.e. azauon) or addanon (Attic xêron) αἴκουδα aikouda (Attic aischunē) αἰσχύνη. Λάκωνες αἵματία haimatia blood-broth, Spartan Melas Zomos Black soup ) (haima haimatos blood) ἀΐτας aïtas (Attic ἐρώμενος erōmenos ) "beloved boy (in a pederastic relationship)" ἀκκόρ akkor tube, bag (Attic askos) ἀκχαλίβαρ akchalibar bed (Attic skimpous)( Koine krabbatos) ἀμβροτίξας ambrotixas having begun, past participle(amphi or ana..+ ?) (Attic aparxamenos, aparchomai) (Doric -ixas for Attic -isas) ἀμπέσσαι ampesai (Attic amphiesai) to dress ἀπαβοίδωρ apaboidôr out of tune (Attic ekmelôs) (Cf.Homeric singer Aoidos ) / emmelôs, aboidôr in tune Ἀπέλλα apella (Attic ἐκκλησία ekklēsia ) "assembly in Sparta " (verb apellazein) ἀρβυλίς arbylis (Attic ἀρύβαλλος aryballos ) (Hesychius: ἀρβυλίδα λήκυθον. Λάκωνες) ἄττασι attasi wake up, get up (Attic anastêthi) βάβαλον babalon imperative of  cry aloud, shout (Attic kraugason) βάγαρον bagaron (Attic χλιαρόν chliaron 'warm') (Cf. Attic φώγω phōgō 'roast') (Laconian word) βαφά bapha broth (Attic zômos) (Attic βαφή baphê dipping of red-hot iron in water  ( Koine and Modern Greek βαφή vafi dyeing ) ϝείκατι weikati twenty (Attic εἴκοσι eikosi) βέλα bela sun and dawn Laconian (Attic helios Cretan abelios ) βερνώμεθα bernômetha Attic klêrôsômetha we will cast or obtain by lot (inf.

berreai ) (Cf.Attic meiresthai receive portion, Doric bebramena for heimarmenê, allotted by Moirai ) βέσκερος beskeros bread (Attic artos) βήλημα bêlêma hindrance, river dam (Laconian) βηρίχαλκον bêrichalkon fennel (Attic marathos) ( chalkos bronze) βίβασις bibasis Spartan dance for boys and girls βίδυοι bidyoi bideoi, bidiaioi also "officers in charge of the ephebes at Sparta " βίὡρ biôr almost, maybe (Attic ἴσως isôs , σχεδόν schedon ) wihôr ( ϝίὡρ ) βλαγίς blagis spot (Attic kêlis) βοῦα boua "group of boys in the Spartan agōgē " βο(υ)αγός bo(u)agos "leader of a boua at Sparta " βυλλίχης bullichês Laconian dancer  (Attic orchêstês ) βώνημα bônêma speech (Homeric, Ionic eirêma eireo )  (Cf.Attic phônêma  sound, speech) γαβεργόρ gabergor labourer (ga earth wergon work) (Cf.geôrgos farmer) γαιάδας gaiadas citizens, people (Attic dêmos ) γονάρ gonar mother Laconian  (gonades children Eur. Med. 717) δαβελός dabelos torch (Attic dalos)(Syracusan daelos, dawelos )(Modern Greek davlos) (Laconian δαβῇ dabêi (Attic kauthêi ) it should be burnt) δίζα diza goat (Attic aix) and Hera aigophagos Goat-eater in Sparta εἴρην eirēn (Attic ἔφηβος ephēbos ) " Spartan youth who has completed his 12th year" εἰσπνήλας eispnēlas (Attic ἐραστής erastēs ) one who inspires love, a lover  (Attic eispneô inhale, breathe) ἐξωβάδια exôbadia (Attic enôtia ; ôta ears) ἔφοροι ephoroi (Attic ἔφοροι ἄρχοντες archontes ) "high officials at Sparta". Cf. Attic ἔφορος ephoros "overseer, guardian" Θοράτης Thoratês Apollon thoraios containing the semen, god of growth and increase θρῶναξ thrônax drone (Attic kêphên) κάφα kapha washing, bathing-tub (Attic loutêr) (Cf.

skaphê basin, bowl) κελοῖα keloia (kelya, kelea also) "contest for boys and youths at Sparta " κίρα kira fox (Attic alôpêx ) (Hsch kiraphos).

μεσόδμα mesodma, messodoma woman  and ἀνθρωπώ anthrôpô (Attic gunê ) μυρταλίς myrtalis Butcher's broom (Attic oxumursinê) (Myrtale real name of Olympias ) πάσορ pasor passion (Attic pathos) πόρ por leg, foot (Attic pous ) πούρδαιν pourdain restaurant (Koine mageirion) (Cf.

purdalon , purodansion (from pyr fire hence pyre ) σαλαβάρ salabar cook (Common Doric/Attic mageiros ) σίκα sika 'pig' (Attic hus) and grôna female pig.

σιρία siria safeness (Attic asphaleia ) ψιθωμίας psithômias ill, sick (Attic asthenês) Λάκωνες τὸν ἀσθενῆ ψιλάκερ psilaker first dancer ὠβά ôba (Attic κώμη kōmē ) "village; one of five quarters of the city of Sparta" Magna Graecia's Doric [ edit ] ἀστύξενοι astyxenoi Metics , Tarentine βάννας bannas king basileus , wanax, anax [ 85 ] βειλαρμοσταὶ beilarmostai cavalry officers  Tarentine (Attic ilarchai ) (ilē, squadron + Laconian harmost -) δόστορε dostore 'you make' Tarentine (Attic ποιεῖτε ) Θαύλια Thaulia "festival of Tarentum ", θαυλακίζειν thaulakizein 'to demand sth with uproar' Tarentine, θαυλίζειν thaulizein "to celebrate like Dorians", Θαῦλος Thaulos " Macedonian Ares", Thessalian Ζεὺς Θαύλιος Zeus Thaulios , Athenian Ζεὺς Θαύλων Zeus Thaulon , Athenian family Θαυλωνίδαι Thaulonidai ῥάγανον rhaganon easy Thuriian (Attic rhaidion ) (Aeolic braidion ) σκύτας skytas 'back-side of neck' (Attic trachēlos ) τήνης tênês till Tarentine (Attic ἕως heôs ) τρυφώματα tryphômata whatever are fed or nursed, children, cattle (Attic thremmata) ὑετίς huetis jug, amphora Tarentine (Attic hydris, hydria )( huetos rain) North-West [ edit ] Aetolian-Acarnanian [ edit ] ἀγρίδιον agridion 'village' Aetolian (Attic chôrion)(Hesychius text: * ἀγρίδιον κωμάριον, χωρίον vA [παρὰ Αἰτωλοῖς] dim. of agros countryside, field) ἀερία aeria fog Aetolian (Attic omichlê, aêr air)(Hsch.

ἀερία ὀμίχλη, παρὰ Αἰτωλοῖς.

) κίββα kibba wallet, bag Aetolian (Attic πήρα pêra) (Cypr. kibisis) (Cf.Attic κιβωτός kibôtos  ark kibôtion box Suid . cites kibos) πλήτομον plêtomon Acarnanian old, ancient (Attic palaion , palaiotaton very old) Delphic-Locrian [ edit ] δείλομαι deilomai will, want Locrian , Delphian (Attic boulomai) ( Coan dêlomai) (Doric bôlomai) (Thessalian belloumai) ϝαργάνα Wargana female worker epithet for Athena ( Delphic ) (Attic Erganê) (Attic ergon work, Doric Wergon, Elean ϝάργον wargon ϝέρρω Werrô go away Locrian (Attic errô) (Hsch.

berrês fugitive, berreuô escape) Ϝεσπάριοι Λοϙροὶ Wesparioi Lokroi Epizephyrian (Western) Locrians (Attic hesperios of evening, western, Doric wesperios ) (cf. Latin Vesper ) ὀπλίαι opliai places where the Locrians counted their cattle Elean [ edit ] ἀϝλανέο̄ς awlaneôs without fraud, honestly  IvO7 (Attic adolôs)(Hsch.

alanes true)(Tarentinian alaneôs absolutely) ἀμίλλυξ amillux scythe (Attic drepanon) in accus.

ἀμίλλυκα ( Boeotian amillakas wine) ἀττάμιος attamios unpunished  (Attic azêmios) from an earliest addamios (cf.Cretan, Boeotian damioô punish) βάβακοι babakoi cicadas Elean (Attic tettiges) (in Pontus babakoi frogs) βαίδειος baideios ready  (Attic hetoimos) (heteos fitness) βενέοι beneoi Elean [ 86 ] βορσός borsos pole, stake (Attic stauros) βρα bra brothers, brotherhood  (Cf.Attic phratra ) βρατάνα bratana ladle (Attic torune) (Doric rhatana ) (cf.

Aeolic bradanizô brandish, shake off) δειρῆται deirêtai small birds ( Macedonian δρῆες drêes or δρῆγες drêges ) (Attic strouthoi) (Hsc.

trikkos small bird and king by Eleans) ϝράτρα wratra law, contract (Attic rhetra) σερός seros yesterday (Attic chthes) στερχανά sterchana funeral feast (Attic perideipnon) φίλαξ philax young oak ( Macedonian ilax , Latin ilex (Laconian dilax ariocarpus , sorbus )( Modern Cretan azilakas Quercus ilex ) φόρβυτα phorbuta gums (Attic oula) (Homeric pherbô feed, eat) Epirote [ edit ] ἀγχωρίξαντας anchôrixantas [ 87 ] having transferred, postponed [ 88 ] Chaonian (Attic metapherô, anaballô) (anchôrizo anchi near + horizô define and Doric x instead of Attic s ) (Cf. Ionic anchouros neighbouring) not to be confused with Doric anchôreô Attic ana-chôreô go back, withdraw.

ἀκαθαρτία akathartia impurity (Attic/Doric akatharsia) (Lamelles Oraculaires 14) ἀποτράχω apotrachô run away (Attic/Doric apotrechô ) [ 89 ] ἄσπαλοι aspaloi fishes Athamanian (Attic ichthyes) ( Ionic chlossoi) (Cf.LSJ aspalia angling, aspalieus fisherman, aspalieuomai I angle metaph. of a lover, aspalisai: halieusai, sagêneusai. ( hals sea) Ἄσπετος Aspetos divine epithet of Achilles in Epirus ( Homeric aspetos 'unspeakable, unspeakably great, endless' (Aristotle F 563 Rose; Plutarch, Pyrrhus 1; SH 960,4) [ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] γνώσκω gnôskô know (Attic gignôskô) (Ionic/Koine ginôskô) (Latin nōsco)(Attic gnôsis, Latin notio knowledge) (ref.

Orion p. 42.17) διαιτός diaitos (Hshc. judge kritês)  (Attic diaitêtês arbitrator) Lamelles Oraculaires 16 ἐσκιχρέμεν eskichremen lend out πὲρ τοῖ ἀργύρροι (Lamelles Oraculaires 8 of Eubandros) (Attic eis + inf. kichranai from chraomai use) ϝεῖδυς weidus knowing (Doric ϝειδώς ) weidôs) (Elean ϝειζός weizos) (Attic εἰδώς ) eidôs) ( PIE *weid- "to know, to see", Sanskrit veda I know) Cabanes, L'Épire 577,50 κάστον kaston [ 94 ] wood Athamanian (Attic xylon [ 95 ] from xyô scrape, hence xyston ); Sanskrit kāṣṭham ("wood, timber, firewood") (Dialectical kalon [ 96 ] wood, traditionally derived from kaiô [ 97 ] burn kauston [ 98 ] sth that can be burnt, kausimon fuel) λῃτῆρες lêïtêres Athamanian priests with garlands Hes.text ἱεροὶ στεφανοφόροι. Ἀθαμᾶνες (LSJ: lêitarchoi [ 99 ] public priests ) (hence Leitourgia μανύ manu [ 100 ] small Athamanian (Attic mikron, brachu) (Cf. manon [ 101 ] rare) (PIE *men- small, thin) (Hsch.

banon thin) ( manosporos thinly sown manophullos with small leaves Thphr .HP7.6.2–6.3) Νάϊος Naios or Naos epithet of Dodonaean Zeus (from the spring in the oracle) (cf.

Naiades and Pan Naios in Pydna SEG 50:622 (Homeric naô [ 102 ] flow, Attic nama spring) ( PIE *sna-) παγάομαι pagaomai 'wash in the spring' (of Dodona ) (Doric paga Attic pêgê running water, fountain) [ 103 ] παμπασία pampasia (to ask peri pampasias cliché phrase in the oracle) (Attic pampêsia [ 104 ] full property) (Doric paomai obtain) Πελιγᾶνες Peliganes or Peligones ( Epirotan , Macedonian senators) πρᾶμι prami do optative (Attic πράττοιμι prattoimi) Syncope (Lamelles Oraculaires 22) τίνε tine (Attic/Doric tini) to whom (Lamelles Oraculaires 7) τριθυτικόν trithutikon triple sacrifice  tri + thuo(Lamelles Oraculaires 138) Achaean Doric [ edit ] καιρότερον kairoteron ( Attic : ἐνωρότερον enôroteron)  "earlier" ( kairos time, enôros early cf.

Horae ) κεφαλίδας kephalidas (Attic: κόρσαι korsai) " sideburns " ( kephalides was also an alternative for epalxeis 'bastions' in Greek proper) σιαλίς sialis (Attic: βλέννος blennos) (cf.

blennorrhea ) slime , mud (Greek sialon or sielon saliva , modern Greek σάλιο salio) See also [ edit ] Griko language References [ edit ] ^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe , ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ Karali, Maria (2007). "The classification of the ancient Greek dialects". In Christidis, Anastassios-Fivos; Arapopoulou, Maria; Chriti, Maria (eds.).

A History of Ancient Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity . Translated by Markham, Chris.

Cambridge University Press . pp.

390– 391.

ISBN 978-0-521-83307-3 .

^ Méndez Dosuna, Julián (2007). "The Doric dialects". In Christidis, Anastassios-Fivos; Arapopoulou, Maria; Chriti, Maria (eds.).

A History of Ancient Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

444– 445.

ISBN 978-0-521-83307-3 .

^ Striano, Araceli (2014).

"Doric" . In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Bubenik, Vit; Crespo, Emilio; Golston, Chris; Lianeri, Alexandra; Luraghi, Silvia; Matthaios, Stephanos (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics . Vol. 1.

Brill Publishers . pp.

515– 516.

ISBN 978-9004225978 – via Academia.edu .

^ a b Buck, Carl Darling (1900). "The Source of the So-Called Achaean-Doric κοινη".

American Journal of Philology .

21 (2): 193– 196.

doi : 10.2307/287905 .

JSTOR 287905 .

^ "MultiTree: A Digital Library of Language Relationships — Tsakonian" . Archived from the original on October 3, 2018.

^ Moseley, Christopher (2007).

Encyclopedia of the world's endangered languages . New York: Routledge. s.v. "Tsakonian".

^ Çabej, E. (1961). "Die alteren Wohnsitze der Albaner auf der Balkanhalbinsel im Lichte der Sprache und der Ortsnamen".

VII Congresso Internaz. Di Sciense Onomastiche : 241– 251.

; Albanian version BUShT 1962:1.219-227 ^ Eric Hamp. Birnbaum, Henrik; Puhvel, Jaan (eds.).

The position of Albanian, Ancient IE dialects, Proceedings of the Conference on IE linguistics held at the University of California, Los Angeles, April 25–27, 1963 .

^ Huld, Martin E. (1986). "Accentual Stratification of Ancient Greek Loanwords in Albanian".

Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung .

99 (2): 245– 253.

^ O'Neil, James.

26th Conference of the Australasian Society for Classical Studies , 2005.

^ "Apollo and the Archaic temple at Corinth | Hesperia | Find Articles at BNET" . Archived from the original on 11 October 2008.

^ a b c d Panagiotis Filos (2017). "The Dialectal Variety of Epirus". In Georgios Giannakis; Emilio Crespo; Panagiotis Filos (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Berlin and Boston: Walter de Gruyter. p. 227.

The North-West group together with Doric (proper) formed the so-called 'West Greek' major dialectal group (or simply 'Doric' […]). However, the term 'North-West Doric' is considered more accurate nowadays […] since there is more emphasis on the many features that are common to both groups rather than on their less numerous and largely secondary differences.

^ Los dialectos dorios del Noroeste. Gramática y estudio dialectal (in Spanish). Salamanca. 1985. p. 508.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Panagiotis Filos (2017). "The Dialectal Variety of Epirus". In Georgios Giannakis; Emilio Crespo; Panagiotis Filos (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Berlin and Boston: Walter de Gruyter. p. 230.

^ Mendez Dosuna, Doric dialects, p. 452 online at Google Books).

^ Giannakis, Georgios B.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis, eds. (2018).

Studies in ancient Greek dialects: from central Greece to the Black Sea . Trends in Classics. Supplementary Volumes. Berlin: De Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-053213-5 .

^ Buck, Carl Darling (2001).

The Greek dialects . Advanced Language Series. London: Bristol Classical Press. pp.

140– 143, 205– 212.

ISBN 978-1-85399-556-9 .

^ Goodwin, William Watson (1874).

Plutarch's Morals, tr. by several hands. Corrected and revised by W.W. Goodwin .

Greek questions 9.

^ IG IX,1² 3:609 ^ Die Inschriften von Olympia, IvO 1.

^ Sophie Minon, Les Inscriptions Éléennes Dialectale , reviewed by Stephen Colvin ( online ).

^ Lamelles Oraculaires 77.

^ John Potter (1751).

Archaeologia Graeca Or the Antiquities of Greece . C. Strahan.

^ Cabanes, L'Épire de la mort de Pyrrhos a la conquête romaine (272–167 av. J.C.).

Paris 1976, p. 534,1.

^ Hatzopoulos, Miltiades B. (2017).

"Recent Research in the Ancient Macedonian Dialect: Consolidation and New Perspectives" . In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. p. 299.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

^ Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière (1993) [1989].

The Macedonian State. Origins, Institutions and History (reprint ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-814927-1 .

^ Michael Meier-Brügger: Indo-European linguistics.

Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York 2003, p. 28 ( online on Google books): "The Macedonian of the ancient kingdom of northern Greece is probably nothing other than a northern Greek dialect of Doric".

^ Crespo, Emilio (2017). "The Softening of Obstruent Consonants in the Macedonian Dialect". In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. p. 329.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

^ Olivier Masson (2003) [1996].

"Macedonian language" . In Simon Hornblower; Antony Spawforth (eds.).

The Oxford Classical Dictionary (revised 3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

905– 906.

ISBN 0-19-860641-9 .

^ Brian D. Joseph: "Ancient Greek". In: J. Garry et al. (eds.): Facts about the world's major languages: an encyclopedia of the world's major languages, past and present.

Online paper Archived 2016-10-01 at the Wayback Machine , 2001.

^ Johannes Engels: "Macedonians and Greeks", p. 95. In: Joseph Roisman, Ian Worthington: A Companion to Ancient Macedonia.

Chapter 5. John Wiley & Sons, New York 2011.

^ a b c Hatzopoulos, Miltiades B. (2017).

"Recent Research in the Ancient Macedonian Dialect: Consolidation and New Perspectives" . In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

321– 322.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

^ Woodard, Roger D., ed. (2008).

The Ancient Languages of Europe .

Cambridge University Press . between pages 49 and 50.

ISBN 978-1-139-46932-6 .

^ Classification of the West Greek dialects at the time about 350 B.C.

by Antonín Bartoněk, Amsterdam, Adolf M. Hakkert, 1972, p. 186.

^ Vit Bubenik (2000).

"Variety of speech in Greek linguistics: The dialects and the koinè " . In Sylvain Auroux; et al. (eds.).

Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaften. Ein internationales Handbuch zur Entwicklung der Sprachforschung von den Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart . Vol. Band 1. Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter. p. 441 f.

ISBN 978-3-11-011103-3 .

^ a b c Panagiotis Filos (2017). "The Dialectal Variety of Epirus". In Georgios Giannakis; Emilio Crespo; Panagiotis Filos (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Berlin and Boston: Walter de Gruyter. pp.

230– 233.

^ Vit Bubenik (1989).

Hellenistic and Roman Greece as a Sociolinguistic Area . Amsterdam. pp.

193– 213.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Wojciech Sowa (2018). "The dialectology of Greek". In Matthias Fritz; Brian Joseph; Jared Klein (eds.).

Handbook of Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics . De Gruyter Mouton. p. 715.

ISBN 978-3-11-054036-9 .

In different regions of Greece, however, different sorts of koinai emerged, of which the best known was the Doric Koinē, preserving general Doric features, but without local differences, and with an admixture of Attic forms. As in the case of the Doric Koinē, the Northwest Koinē (connected with the so-called Aetolian League) displayed the same mixture of native dialectal elements with Attic elements.

^ S. Minon (2014). "Diffusion de l'attique et expansion des koinai dans le Péloponnèse et en Grèce centrale".

Actes de la journée internationale de dialectologie grecque du 18 mars 2011, université Paris-Ouest Nanterre . Geneva. pp.

1– 18.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "No document found" .

^ a b Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert.

"Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon" .

Tufts University: Perseus Digital Library .

^ "No document found" .

^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, Α α" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, Α α" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ Plutarch Greek question 51 ^ "No document found" .

^ Dionysism and Comedy [1] by Xavier Riu ^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, Α α" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ Raphael Kühner, Friedrich Blass, Ausführliche Grammatik der Griechischen Sprache [2] ^ Elis — Olympia — bef. c. 500–450 BC IvO 7 ^ Epeiros — Dodona — 4th c. BC SEG 15:397 ^ The Oracles of Zeus: Dodona, Olympia, Ammon – Page 261 by Herbert William Parke ^ Epeiros — Dodona — ~340 BC SEG 26.700 – Trans.

^ Alexander the Great: A Reader [3] by Ian Worthing ^ Greek Mythography in the Roman World [4] By Alan Cameron (Aspetides) [5] ^ (cf. Athenian secretary: Aspetos, son of Demostratos from Kytheros ~340 BC) [6] ^ Pokorny – aspetos ^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

^ "No document found" .

Further reading [ edit ] Bakker, Egbert J., ed. 2010.

A companion to the Ancient Greek language.

Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Cassio, Albio Cesare. 2002. "The language of Doric comedy." In The language of Greek comedy.

Edited by Anton Willi, 51–83. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Colvin, Stephen C. 2007.

A historical Greek reader: Mycenaean to the koiné.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Horrocks, Geoffrey. 2010.

Greek: A history of the language and its speakers.

2nd ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Palmer, Leonard R. 1980.

The Greek language.

London: Faber & Faber.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Doric Greek Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Doric Greek in Encyclopædia Britannica Grammar of the Greek Language ( M1 Doric by Benjamin Franklin Fisk (1844) The Elements of Greek Grammar Doric by Richard Valpy, Charles Anthon (1834) Doric/Northwest Greek Brill's New Pauly Online v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Armenian Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Proto-Greek ( c.

2900 –1600 BC) Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1600 –1100 BC) Ancient Greek ( c.

800 –300 BC) Koine Greek ( c.

300 BC –AD 330) Medieval Greek ( c.

330 –1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Central Aeolic Mycenaean Arcadocypriot East Attic Ionic Homeric West Doric Northwest Achaean Epirote Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Hellenistic Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Constantinople Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Greco-Australian Phonology Ancient ( accent / teaching ) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Institute for Language and Speech Processing Other Eteocretan language Eteocypriot language Greek language question Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Minoan language Greek Language Day Trojan language Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries v t e Ages of Greek c.

3rd millennium BC c.

1600–1100 BC c.

800–300 BC c.

300 BC – AD 600 c.

600–1453 Since 1453 Proto-Greek Mycenaean Ancient Koine Medieval Modern Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doric_Greek&oldid=1304345400 " Categories : Doric Greek Ancient Greek Languages of ancient Macedonia Languages of ancient Anatolia Languages of ancient Crete Languages of ancient Italy Culture of ancient Greece Greek language Languages of Greece Languages attested from the 8th century BC 8th-century establishments in Europe Languages extinct in the 1st century BC 1st-century BC disestablishments Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia external links cleanup from November 2024 Language articles with Linglist code Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Dialects with Linguist List code Languages without ISO 639-3 code but with Glottolog code Language articles with unreferenced extinction date Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles needing cleanup from October 2017 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from October 2017 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2017 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 13:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Doric Greek 33 languages Add topic

