Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Wotjobaluk counting system 2 Other languages 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal enumeration 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Counting system used by Australian Aboriginals The Australian Aboriginal counting system was used together with message sticks sent to neighbouring clans to alert them of, or invite them to, corroborees , set-fights, and ball games . Numbers could clarify the day the meeting was to be held (in a number of "moons") and where (the number of camps' distance away). The messenger would have a message "in his mouth" to go along with the message stick.

A common misconception among non-Aboriginals is that Aboriginals did not have a way to count beyond two or three.  However, Alfred Howitt , who studied the peoples of southeastern Australia, disproved this in the late nineteenth century, [ citation needed ] although the myth continues in circulation today.

[ 1 ] The system in the table below is that used by the Wotjobaluk of the Wimmera (Howitt used this tribal name for the language called Wergaia in the AIATSIS language map ). Howitt wrote that it was common among nearly all peoples he encountered in the southeast: "Its occurrence in these tribes suggests that it must have been general over a considerable part of Victoria". As can be seen in the following tables, names for numbers were based on body parts, which were counted starting from the little finger. In his manuscripts, Howitt suggests counting commenced on the left hand.

Wotjobaluk counting system [ edit ] Aboriginal name literal Translation Translation Number Giti mŭnya little hand little finger 1 Gaiŭp mŭnya from gaiŭp = one, mŭnya = hand the Ring finger 2 Marŭng mŭnya from marung = the desert pine ( Callitris verrucosa ).

(i.e., the middle finger being longer than the others, as the desert pine is taller than other trees in Wotjo country.) the middle finger 3 Yolop-yolop mŭnya from yolop = to point or aim index finger 4 Bap mŭnya from Bap = mother the thumb 5 Dart gŭr from dart = a hollow, and gur = the forearm the inside of the wrist 6 Boibŭn a small swelling (i.e., the swelling of the flexor muscles of the forearm) the forearm 7 Bun-darti a hollow, referring to the hollow of the inside of the elbow joint inside of elbow 8 Gengen dartchŭk from gengen = to tie, and dartchuk = the upper arm.

This name is given also to the armlet of possum pelt which is worn around the upper arm.

the biceps 9 Borporŭng the point of the shoulder 10 Jarak-gourn from jarak =  reed, and gourn = neck, (i.e. is, the place where the reed necklace is worn.) throat 11 Nerŭp wrembŭl from nerŭp = the butt or base of anything, and wrembŭl = ear earlobe 12 Wŭrt wrembŭl'' from wŭrt = above and also behind, and wrembŭl = ear that part of the head just above and behind the ear 13 Doke doke from doka = to move 14 Det det hard crown of the head 15 A similar system but with one more place was described by Howitt for the Wurundjeri , speakers of the Woiwurrung language, in information given to Howitt by the elder William Barak . He makes it clear that once counting has reached "the top of the head. From this place the count follows the equivalents on the other side." Other languages [ edit ] Language 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Anindilyakwa [ 2 ] awilyaba ambilyuma abiyakarbiya abiyarbuwa amangbala ememberrkwa Gumulgal [ 2 ] urapon ukasar ukasar-urapon ukasar-ukasar ukasar-ukasar-urapon ukasar-ukasar-ukasar Gurindji [ 3 ] yoowarni garndiwirri nga-rloo-doo Kokata [ 2 ] kuma kutthara kabu wima ngeria Kunwinjku [ 2 ] na-kudji boken danjbik kunkarrngbakmeng kunbidkudji kunbidboken Ngaanyatjarra [ 4 ] kutja kutjarra marnkurra kutjarra-kutjarra kutjarra-marnkurra Nunggubuyu [ 2 ] anyjabugij wulawa wulanybaj wulalwulal marang-anyjabugij marang-anyjabugij wula marang-anyjabugij marang-anyjabugij Tiwi [ 2 ] natinga jirara jiraterima jatapinta punginingita wamutirara Wangka [ 2 ] kuja kujarra kujarra kuju kujarrakujarra marakuju marakujarra Yorta Yorta [ 5 ] iyung bultjubul bultjubul iyung bultjubul bultjubul bultjubul bultjubul iyung bultjubul biyin-n Yolngu [ 2 ] wanggany marrma' lurrkun marrma' marrma' gong wangany gong marrma' See also [ edit ] Wurundjeri Alfred Howitt References [ edit ] ^ "Explainer: how does the Aboriginal numeric system work?" .

The University of Sydney . Retrieved 2021-03-15 .

^ a b c d e f g h John Harris, Australian Aboriginal and Islander mathematics Archived 2014-05-14 at the Wayback Machine , Australian Aboriginal Studies, 1987.

^ William B. McGregor, (2013). Languages of the Kimberley, Western Australia , Routledge.

ISBN 9781134396023 ^ Stephanie Fryer-Smith, (2002).

Aboriginal Benchbook for Western Australian courts Archived 2013-10-12 at the Wayback Machine , Australian Institute of Judicial Administration Incorporated.

ISBN 1875527427 ^ 'Yorta Yorta Language Heritage Dictionary', Heather Bowe, Lois Peeler, Sharon Atkinson, copyright 1997, Hawker Brownlow Education, 2005.

Bibliography [ edit ] Howitt, A.W. 1904. The native tribes of south-east Australia. London: McMillan and Co. Reprinted. 1996. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. pp. 696–699 describe the system in Wotjobaluk, while p700-703 describe the Wurundjeri system.

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_Aboriginal_enumeration&oldid=1276131591 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal words and phrases Numerals Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 This page was last edited on 17 February 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal enumeration 1 language Add topic

