Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Comparison with other ethical theories 2 Religion 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Moral absolutism 20 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Latviešu Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metaethical position that some actions are intrinsically right or wrong Not to be confused with moral universalism .

Moral absolutism is a metaethical view that some or even all actions are intrinsically right or wrong, regardless of context or consequence.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Comparison with other ethical theories [ edit ] Moral absolutism is not the same as moral universalism . Universalism holds merely that what is right or wrong is independent of custom or opinion (as opposed to moral relativism ), [ 3 ] but not necessarily that what is right or wrong is sometimes independent of context or consequences (as in absolutism).

Louis Pojman gives the following definitions to distinguish the two positions of moral absolutism and objectivism: [ 4 ] Moral absolutism: There is at least one principle that ought never to be violated.

Moral objectivism: There is a fact of the matter as to whether any given action is morally permissible or impermissible: a fact of the matter that does not depend solely on social custom or individual acceptance.

Ethical theories which place strong emphasis on rights and duty , such as the deontological ethics of Immanuel Kant , are often forms of moral absolutism, as are many religious moral codes.

Religion [ edit ] One can adhere to moral absolutism in a strictly secular context, exemplified by the many variations of deontological moral rationalism . However, many religions, especially ones which define divine commandments, also adhere to moral absolutist positions. Therefore, to followers of such religions, the moral system is absolute, perfect and unchanging. Some secular philosophies also take a morally absolutist position, asserting that the absolute laws of morality are inherent in the nature of people, the nature of life in general, or the Universe itself.

[ citation needed ] Thomas Aquinas never explicitly addresses the Euthyphro dilemma , but draws a distinction between what is good or evil in itself and what is good or evil because of God's commands, [ 5 ] [ full citation needed ] with unchangeable moral standards forming the bulk of natural law .

[ 6 ] [ full citation needed ] Thus he contends that not even God can change the Ten Commandments , adding, however, that God can change what individuals deserve in particular cases, in what might look like special dispensations to murder or steal.

[ 7 ] [ full citation needed ] In popular culture [ edit ] Rorschach , one of the protagonists in the classic comic/graphic novel Watchmen (by Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons ): a masked vigilante and ruthless crime-fighter, Rorschach believes in moral absolutism— good and evil as pure ends, with no shades of gray—which compels him to seek to punish any evidence of evil at all costs. His mask displays a constantly morphing inkblot based on the ambiguous designs used in Rorschach inkblot tests , also his namesake, with the mask's black and white coloring never touching each other, and therefore consistent with his sense and view of morality .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Authoritarianism Deontological ethics Divine command theory Formalism (philosophy) Fundamentalism Graded absolutism Legalism (theology) Literalism (disambiguation) Moral dilemma Natural law Paternalism Religious exclusivism Ritualism References [ edit ] ^ Denyer, Nicholas (1997). "Is Anything Absolutely Wrong?".

Human Lives . pp.

39– 57.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-25098-1_3 .

ISBN 978-1-349-25100-1 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Locke, Don (April 1981). "Absolutism v Consequentialism: No Contest".

Analysis .

41 (2): 101– 106.

doi : 10.2307/3327242 .

JSTOR 3327242 .

^ "Moral Absolutism" .

Ethics Unwrapped . Retrieved 2020-05-27 .

^ Pojman, L. P.

A Defense of Ethical Objectivism (p. 50).

^ Aquinas & c. 1265–1274 , 2a2ae 57.2 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFAquinasc._1265–1274 ( help ) ^ Aquinas & c. 1265–1274 , 2a1ae 94.5 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFAquinasc._1265–1274 ( help ) ^ Aquinas & c. 1265–1274 , 1a2ae 100.8 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFAquinasc._1265–1274 ( help ) ^ "Rorschach’s Hypocrisy: The Moral Ambiguity of Watchmen’s Black and White Antihero", by Ingrid Sit: "Upon his entrance, Rorschach is characterised as a no-nonsense vigilante who embodies moral absolutism. From how he views his peers, Rorschach definitively distinguishes between what he deems heroic and what he deems not heroic" Student Journal | Arts One - The University of British Columbia v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_absolutism&oldid=1293625935 " Categories : Morality Deontology Ethical theories Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2025 This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral absolutism 20 languages Add topic

