Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts 2 Influences 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents English historical school of economics 4 languages 日本語 Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The English historical school of economics sought a return of inductive methods in economics, following the triumph of the deductive approach of David Ricardo in the early 19th century.

[ 1 ] The school considered itself the intellectual heirs of past figures who had emphasised empiricism and induction, such as Francis Bacon [ clarification needed ] and Adam Smith .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Included in this school are William Whewell , Richard Jones , Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie , Walter Bagehot , Thorold Rogers , Arnold Toynbee , William Cunningham , and William Ashley .

[ 1 ] Concepts [ edit ] The economists of the English historical school were in general agreement on several ideas. They pursued an inductive approach to economics rather than the deductive approach taken by classical and neoclassical theorists. They recognised the need for careful statistical research. They rejected the hypothesis of "the profit maximizing individual" or the "calculus of pleasure and pain" as the only basis for economic analysis and policy.  They believed that it was more reasonable to base analysis on the collective whole of altruistic individuals.

[ 4 ] Historical economists of the nineteenth century also rejected the view that economic policy prescriptions, however derived, would apply universally, without regard to place or time, as followers of the Ricardian and Marshallian schools did.

Alfred Marshall acknowledged the force of the historical school's views in his 1890 synthesis: [T]he explanation of the past and the prediction of the future are not different operations, but the same worked in opposite directions, the one from effect to cause, the other from cause to effect. As Schmoller well says, to obtain "a knowledge of individual causes" we need "induction; the final conclusion of which is indeed nothing but the inversion of the Syllogism which is employed in deduction.... Induction and deduction rest on the same tendencies, the same beliefs, the same needs of our reason." — [ 5 ] Influences [ edit ] John Stuart Mill , Auguste Comte , and Herbert Spencer appear among the influences on the English historical economists. The second half of Queen Victoria's reign saw the triumph of evolutionary concepts in the sciences ( geology , biology , and sociology ) and a transition from a " coal and iron " based manufacturing [ 6 ] economy to one based on communication , urbanisation , finance , and empire .  The rise of the historical school of jurisprudence provided  "allies in the struggle against the dominance of the abstract theory." [ 7 ] Historical economists viewed classical and neoclassical economics as too formal and as a rationalisation of free-trade policies [ 1 ] in a colonial and imperial setting.

See also [ edit ] Historical school of economics References [ edit ] ^ a b c Spiegel, 1991 ^ Cliffe Leslie, 1870.

^ Thorold Rogers, 1880 ^ Goldman (1989) ^ Marshall, 1890.

^ Ashton, 1948.

^ Spiegel, 1991.

Further reading [ edit ] Ashley, William J.  1897.  "The Tory Origin of Free Trade Policy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, July 1897. McMaster, on line.

Ashton, T. S. 1948.

The Industrial Revolution.

Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Cliffe Leslie, T. E. 1870. "The Political Economy of Adam Smith." Fortnightly Review (London). 14:549–63.  On line.

Goldman, Lawrence. 1989. "Entrepreneurs in Business History", The Business History Review, Vol. 63, No. 1, (Spring, 1989), pp. 223–25.

Marshall, Alfred (1920) [First published 1890].

"Appendix C: 'The scope and method of economics' " .

Principles of Economics (8th ed.). London: MacMillan & Co.

OCLC 219845301 .

Geoffrey Martin Hodgson, "Alfred Marshall and the British Methodendiskurs ", How Economics Forgot History: The Problem of Historical Specificity in the Social Sciences, pp. 95–112.  Routledge (2001) ISBN 0-415-25716-6 Spiegel, Henry William (1991).

The Growth of Economic Thought.

Durham & London: Duke University Press.

ISBN 0-8223-0973-4 Rogers, Thorold. 1880. "Editor's Preface" to Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 2 vols. (1869); revised edition (1880), pp. xxxiv et seq; on line at Osmania University, Digital Library of India, Internet Archive.

External links [ edit ] "English Historical School", New School v t e Economists of the English historical school Edmund Burke Richard Jones Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie Walter Bagehot Thorold Rogers William J. Ashley v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_historical_school_of_economics&oldid=1290346043 " Categories : English historical school of economics Political economy Schools of economic thought Hidden categories: Use British English from July 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2025 This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 07:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents English historical school of economics 4 languages Add topic

