Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Debate on socialism 1.2 Hayek 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Price system 9 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Español Հայերեն Italiano Português Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic system Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e In economics , a price system is a system through which the valuations of any forms of property (tangible or intangible) are determined. All societies use price systems in the allocation and exchange of resources as a consequence of scarcity .

[ 1 ] Even in a barter system with no money, price systems are still utilized in the determination of exchange ratios (relative valuations) between the properties being exchanged.

A price system may be either a regulated price system (such as a fixed price system ) where prices are administered by an authority, or it may be a free price system (such as a market system ) where prices are left to float "freely" as determined by supply and demand without the intervention of an authority. A mixed price system involves a combination of both regulated and free price systems.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Price systems have been around as long as there has been economic exchanges.

The price system has transformed into the system of global capitalism that is present in the early 21st century.

[ 2 ] The Soviet Union and other Communist states with a centralized planned economy maintained controlled price systems. Whether the ruble or the dollar is used in the economic system, the criterion of a price system is the use of money as an arbiter and usual final arbiter of whether a thing is done or not. In other words, few things are done without consideration for the monetary costs and the potential making of a profit in a price system.

Debate on socialism [ edit ] See also: Socialist calculation debate The American economist Thorstein Veblen wrote a seminal tract on the development of the term as discussed in this article [ tone ] : The Engineers and the Price System .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Its chapter VI, A Memorandum on a Practicable Soviet of Technicians discusses the possibility of socialist revolution in the United States comparable to that then occurring in Russia (the Soviets had not yet at that time become a state (USSR formed in 1922)).

According to Bockman, the original conception of socialism involved the substitution of money as a unit of calculation and monetary prices as a whole with calculation in kind (or valuation based on natural units), with business and financial decisions replaced by engineering and technical criteria for managing the economy. Fundamentally, this meant that socialism would operate under different economic dynamics than those of capitalism and the price system.

[ 5 ] In the 1930s, the economists Oskar Lange and Abba Lerner developed a comprehensive model of a socialist economy that utilized a price system and money for the allocation of capital goods . In contrast to a free-market price system, "socialist" prices would be set by a planning board to equal the marginal cost of production to achieve neoclassical Pareto efficiency. Because this model of socialism relied upon money and administered prices as opposed to non-monetary calculation in physical magnitudes, it was labelled "market socialism". In effect, Oskar Lange conceded that calculations in a socialist system would have to be performed in value terms with a functioning price system rather than using purely natural or engineering criteria as in the classic concept of socialism.

[ 6 ] Hayek [ edit ] Further information: Price signal Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek argued that a free price system allowed economic coordination via the price signals that changing prices send, which is regarded as one of his most significant and influential contributions to economics.

[ 7 ] In " The Use of Knowledge in Society " (1945), Hayek wrote, "The price system is just one of those formations which man has learned to use (though he is still very far from having learned to make the best use of it) after he had stumbled upon it without understanding it. Through it not only a division of labor but also a coordinated utilization of resources based on an equally divided knowledge has become possible. The people who like to deride any suggestion that this may be so usually distort the argument by insinuating that it asserts that by some miracle just that sort of system has spontaneously grown up which is best suited to modern civilization. It is the other way round: man has been able to develop that division of labor on which our civilization is based because he happened to stumble upon a method which made it possible. Had he not done so, he might still have developed some other, altogether different, type of civilization, something like the "state" of the termite ants, or some other altogether unimaginable type." [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Free price system Regulated market Planned economy Catallactics Economic calculation debate Economic history History of economic thought Lange model Market economy Price mechanism References [ edit ] ^ a b George J. Stigler , William J. Baumol .

"Price system" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2 January 2018 .

^ I Am The Price System R. B. Langan Great lakes Technocrat  April 1944, # 66.

^ Harbinger Edition, 1963. LCCCN 63-19639. First Published as a series of essays in The Dial (1919) then as a book in 1921.

^ Full Text (HTML) ^ Bockman, Johanna (2011).

Markets in the name of Socialism: The Left-Wing origins of Neoliberalism . Stanford University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-8047-7566-3 .

According to nineteenth-century socialist views, socialism would function without capitalist economic categories - such as money, prices, interest, profits and rent - and thus would function according to laws other than those described by current economic science. While some socialists recognized the need for money and prices at least during the transition from capitalism to socialism, socialists more commonly believed that the socialist economy would soon administratively mobilize the economy in physical units without the use of prices or money.

^ Revisiting the Socialist Calculation Debate: The role of markets and finance in Hayek's response to Lange's challenge , by Auerbach, Paul and Sotiropoulos, Dimitris. 2012. Kingston University London, Economics Discussion Paper 2012-6, pp. 1-2: "He readily acceded to the need for efficiency calculations to be made in value terms rather than using purely natural or engineering criteria, but claimed that these values could emerge along lines consistent with neoclassical value theory, without the need for a market in capital goods and without private ownership over the means of production." ^ Skarbek, David (March 2009), "F. A. Hayek's Influence on Nobel Prize Winners" (PDF) , Review of Austrian Economics , 22 (1): 109– 112, doi : 10.1007/s11138-008-0069-x , S2CID 144970753 [ permanent dead link ] ^ Friedrich Hayek (September 1945).

"The Use of Knowledge in Society" (PDF) .

The American Economic Review .

35 (4): 528.

v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Implicit Social Sunk Transaction Cost–benefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Cross elasticity of demand Income elasticity of demand Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Income–consumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Complementary Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Price controls Price ceiling Price floor Price discrimination Price signal Price system / Free Pricing Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage / Excess supply Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply and demand Demand / Law of demand Supply / Law of supply Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Development Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering economics Civil engineering economics Evolutionary Experimental Game theory Green Industrial organization Institutional Labour Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Business portal Category v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zkljf
Cached time: 20250812000332
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.423 seconds
Real time usage: 0.557 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1399/1000000
Revision size: 8122/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 67593/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2532/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48066/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.218/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5925080/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  457.911      1 -total
 31.00%  141.974      1 Template:Economic_systems_sidebar
 30.41%  139.257      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 24.17%  110.667      1 Template:Reflist
 16.85%   77.169      1 Template:Short_description
 15.22%   69.675      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 11.62%   53.191      1 Template:Flatlist
  9.23%   42.283      1 Template:Tone_inline
  8.74%   40.019      1 Template:Microeconomics
  8.65%   39.622      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1326228:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000332 and revision id 1138307441. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Price_system&oldid=1138307441 " Categories : History of money Economic systems Monetary economics Capitalism Market socialism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2021 All articles with style issues This page was last edited on 9 February 2023, at 00:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Price system 9 languages Add topic

