Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Proof 3 Generalizations 4 References Toggle the table of contents Lune of Hippocrates 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français עברית ქართული Қазақша Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometric construction The lune of Hippocrates is the upper left shaded area. It has the same area as the lower right shaded triangle.

In geometry , the lune of Hippocrates , named after Hippocrates of Chios , is a lune bounded by arcs of two circles , the smaller of which has as its diameter a chord spanning a right angle on the larger circle.  Equivalently, it is a non- convex plane region bounded by one 180-degree circular arc and one 90-degree circular arc. It was the first curved figure to have its exact area calculated mathematically.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Hippocrates wanted to solve the classic problem of squaring the circle , i.e. constructing a square by means of straightedge and compass , having the same area as a given circle .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He proved that the lune bounded by the arcs labeled E and F in the figure has the same area as triangle ABO . This afforded some hope of solving the circle-squaring problem, since the lune is bounded only by arcs of circles.

Heath concludes that, in proving his result, Hippocrates was also the first to prove that the area of a circle is proportional to the square of its diameter.

[ 2 ] Hippocrates' book on geometry in which this result appears, Elements , has been lost, but may have formed the model for Euclid 's Elements .

[ 3 ] Hippocrates' proof was preserved through the History of Geometry compiled by Eudemus of Rhodes , which has also not survived, but which was excerpted by Simplicius of Cilicia in his commentary on Aristotle 's Physics .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Not until 1882, with Ferdinand von Lindemann 's proof of the transcendence of π , was squaring the circle proved to be impossible.

[ 5 ] Proof [ edit ] Hippocrates' result can be proved as follows: The center of the circle on which the arc AEB lies is the point D , which is the midpoint of the hypotenuse of the isosceles right triangle ABO .  Therefore, the diameter AC of the larger circle ABC is ⁠ 2 {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}} ⁠ times the diameter of the smaller circle on which the arc AEB lies.  Consequently, the smaller circle has half the area of the larger circle, and therefore the quarter circle AFBOA is equal in area to the semicircle AEBDA . Subtracting the crescent-shaped area AFBDA from the quarter circle gives triangle ABO and subtracting the same crescent from the semicircle gives the lune. Since the triangle and lune are both formed by subtracting equal areas from equal area, they are themselves equal in area.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] Generalizations [ edit ] The lunes of Alhazen. The two blue lunes together have the same area as the green right triangle.

Using a similar proof to the one above, the Arab mathematician Hasan Ibn al-Haytham (Latinized name Alhazen , c. 965 – c. 1040) showed that where  two lunes are formed, on the two sides of a right triangle , whose outer boundaries are semicircles and whose inner boundaries are formed by the circumcircle of the triangle, then the areas of these two lunes added together are equal to the area of the triangle. The lunes formed in this way from a right triangle are known as the lunes of Alhazen .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The quadrature of the lune of Hippocrates is the special case of this result for an isosceles right triangle .

[ 9 ] All lunes constructable by compass and straight-edge can be specified by the two angles formed by the inner and outer arcs on their respective circles; in this notation, for instance, the lune of Hippocrates would have the inner and outer angles (90°, 180°) with ratio 1:2. Hippocrates found two other squarable concave lunes, with angles approximately (107.2°, 160.9°) with ratio 2:3 and (68.5°, 205.6°) with ratio 1:3. Two more squarable concave lunes, with angles approximately (46.9°, 234.4°) with ratio 1:5 and (100.8°, 168.0°) with ratio 3:5 were found in 1766 by Martin Johan Wallenius [ ru ] and again in 1840 by Thomas Clausen .  In the mid-20th century, two Russian mathematicians, Nikolai Chebotaryov and his student Anatoly Dorodnov, completely classified the lunes that are constructible by compass and straightedge and that have equal area to a given square.  As Chebotaryov and Dorodnov showed, these five pairs of angles give the only constructible squarable lunes; in particular, there are no other constructible squarable lunes.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Postnikov, M. M.

(2000), "The problem of squarable lunes", American Mathematical Monthly , 107 (7): 645– 651, doi : 10.2307/2589121 , JSTOR 2589121 . Translated from Postnikov's 1963 Russian book on Galois theory .

^ a b c d Heath, Thomas L.

(2003), A Manual of Greek Mathematics , Courier Dover Publications, pp.

121– 132, ISBN 0-486-43231-9 .

^ a b "Hippocrates of Chios" , Encyclopædia Britannica , 2012 , retrieved 2012-01-12 .

^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Hippocrates of Chios" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Jacobs, Konrad (1992), "2.1 Squaring the Circle", Invitation to Mathematics , Princeton University Press, pp.

11– 13, ISBN 978-0-691-02528-5 .

^ Bunt, Lucas Nicolaas Hendrik; Jones, Phillip S.; Bedient, Jack D. (1988), "4-2 Hippocrates of Chios and the quadrature of lunes", The Historical Roots of Elementary Mathematics , Courier Dover Publications, pp.

90– 91, ISBN 0-486-25563-8 .

^ Hippocrates' Squaring of the Lune at cut-the-knot , accessed 2012-01-12.

^ a b Alsina, Claudi; Nelsen, Roger B. (2010), "9.1 Squarable lunes", Charming Proofs: A Journey into Elegant Mathematics , Dolciani mathematical expositions, vol. 42, Mathematical Association of America, pp.

137– 144, ISBN 978-0-88385-348-1 .

^ Anglin, W. S. (1994), "Hippocrates and the Lunes", Mathematics, a Concise History and Philosophy , Springer, pp.

51– 53, ISBN 0-387-94280-7 .

v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lune_of_Hippocrates&oldid=1286435438 " Categories : Circles Squaring the circle Greek mathematics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 22:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lune of Hippocrates 22 languages Add topic

