Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 His Life 2 His work 3 Works 4 Ptolemy's Geographia editions 5 Gallery 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Giovanni Antonio Magini 17 languages বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Ido Italiano Lëtzebuergesch مصرى Nederlands Piemontèis Português Română Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian mathematician and astronomer (1555–1617) For the crater, see Maginus (crater) . For the saint, see Saint Maginus .

Giovanni Antonio Magini Giovanni Antonio Magini, Italian mathematician Born ( 1555-06-13 ) June 13, 1555 Padua , Republic of Venice Died February 11, 1617 (1617-02-11) (aged 61) Bologna , Papal States Resting place San Domenico, Bologna Alma mater University of Bologna Scientific career Fields Astronomy Cartography Mathematics Institutions University of Bologna Academic advisors Ignazio Danti Notable students Carlo Antonio Manzini [ 1 ] Magini's atlas.

Giovanni Antonio Magini (in Latin , Maginus ) (13 June 1555 – 11 February 1617) was an Italian astronomer , astrologer , cartographer , and mathematician .

His Life [ edit ] He was born in Padua , and completed studies in philosophy in Bologna in 1579. His father was Pasquale Magini, a citizen of Padua. Dedicating himself to astronomy, in 1582 he wrote Ephemerides coelestium motuum , translated into Italian the following year.

[ 2 ] In 1588 he was chosen over Galileo Galilei to occupy the chair of mathematics at the University of Bologna after the death of Egnatio Danti . He died in Bologna on 11 February 1617.

[ 3 ] His work [ edit ] De astrologica ratione , 1607 Magini supported a geocentric system of the world, in preference to Copernicus 's heliocentric system. Magini devised his own planetary theory, in preference to other existing ones. The Maginian System consisted of eleven rotating spheres, which he described in his Novæ cœlestium orbium theoricæ congruentes cum observationibus N. Copernici ( Venice , 1589).

In his De Planis Triangulis (1592), he described the use of quadrants in surveying and astronomy . In 1592 Magini published Tabula tetragonica , and in 1606 devised extremely accurate trigonometric tables. He also worked on the geometry of the sphere and applications of trigonometry, for which he invented calculating devices. He also worked on the problem of mirrors and published on the theory of concave spherical mirrors.

He also published a commentary on Ptolemy’s Geographia (Venice, 1596).

[ 3 ] As a cartographer, his life's work was the preparation of Italia or the Atlante geografico d'Italia (Geographic Atlas of Italy), printed posthumously by Magini's son in 1620. This was intended to include maps of every Italian region with exact nomenclature and historical notes. A major project, its production (begun in 1594) proved expensive and Magini assumed various additional posts in order to fund it, including becoming tutor in mathematics to the sons of Vincenzo I of Gonzaga , Duke of Mantua , a major patron of the arts and sciences. He also served as court astrologer. The Duke of Mantua, to whom the atlas is dedicated, assisted him with this project and allowed for maps of the various states of Italy to be brought to Magini. The governments of Messina and Genoa also assisted Magini financially in this project. Magini did not do any of the mapping himself.

[ citation needed ] He was also interested in pursuits which today would be considered pseudoscientific. A strong supporter of astrology , he defended its use in medicine in his De astrologica ratione [ 4 ] ( Venice , 1607). Magini collaborated closely with Valentine Naibod , and in this book he published De annui temporis mensura in Directionibus [ 5 ] and De Directionibus [ 6 ] from Naibod's unfinished manuscript Claudii Ptolemaei Quadripartitae Constructionis Apotelesmata Commentarius novus et Eiusdem Conversio nova . He was also interested in metoposcopy .

[ 3 ] He corresponded with Tycho Brahe , Clavius , Abraham Ortelius , and Johann Kepler . His correspondence was edited in 1886 by Antonio Favaro.

[ 7 ] Magini was an early critic of Galileo's 1610 identification of the Galilean moons of Jupiter and lunar mountains.

[ 8 ] Magini's one-time secretary, Martin Horký , published an aggressively anti-Galilean pamphlet in 1610, though Magini cut ties with Horký shortly before it was published.

[ 8 ] The lunar crater Maginus is named after him.

A UK Software company takes their name from the Maginus crater named in his honour.

Works [ edit ] Novae coelestium orbium theoricae congruentes cum observationibus N. Copernici , 1589 Ephemerides coelestium motuum (in Latin). Venezia: Damiano Zenaro. 1582.

Novae coelestium orbium theoricae congruentes cum observationibus N. Copernici (in Latin). Venezia: Damiano Zenaro. 1589.

Tabulae primi mobilis, quas directionum vulgo dicunt, quibus non solum directiones, tam secundum viam rationalem, quam iuxta Ptolemaei formam (in Latin). Venezia: Damiano Zenaro. 1604.

Continuatio ephemeridum coelestium motuum (in Latin). Venezia: erede Damiano Zenaro. 1607.

De astrologica ratione, ac vsu dierum criticorum, seu decretoriorum (in Latin). Venezia: erede Damiano Zenaro. 1607.

Confutatio diatribae Ios. Scaligeri De aequinoctiorum praecessione (in Latin). Roma: Guglielmo Facciotti. 1617.

Tabulae novae iuxta Tychonis rationes elaboratae (in Latin). Bologna: Sebastiano Bonomi. 1619.

[Opere. Lettere e carteggi] (in Italian). Bologna: Nicola Zanichelli. 1886.

Ptolemy's Geographia editions [ edit ] Magini is well known for his reduced size edition of Ptolemy's Geographia [ 9 ] published in Italian as "Geografia cioe Descrittione Universale della Terra" 1596 Venice. Latin text. Printer Heredes Simoni Galignani. 64 copper-plate maps.

1597 Cologne. Latin text. Printer Petrus Keschedt. 64 copper-plate maps.

1598 Venice. Italian text. Printer Gio. Battista & Giorgio Galignani Fratelli. Artist Girolamo Porro. 64 copper-plate maps.

[ 10 ] 1608 Cologne. Latin text. Printer Antonius Becker. 63 copper-plate maps.

1617 Arnheim. Latin text. Printer Ioannes Ianssonius. 64 copper-plate maps.

1621 Padua. Italian text. Printer Paolo and Francesco Galignani. 64 copper-plate maps.

Gallery [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ Matt, Luigi (2007).

"MANZINI, Carlo Antonio" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 69: Mangiabotti–Marconi (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

^ "Giovanni Antonio Magini" .

emlo-portal.bodleian.ox.ac.uk . Retrieved 2017-08-21 .

^ a b c Baldini 2006 .

^ "Digitale Bibliothek - Münchener Digitalisierungszentrum" .

www.bsb-muenchen-digital.de .

^ "Digitale Bibliothek - Münchener Digitalisierungszentrum" .

www.bsb-muenchen-digital.de .

^ "Digitale Bibliothek - Münchener Digitalisierungszentrum" .

www.bsb-muenchen-digital.de .

^ Favaro, A. (1886).

Carteggio inedito di Ticone Brahe, Giovanni Keplero e di altri celebri astronomi e matematici dei secoli XVI e XVII con Giovanni Antonio Magini tratto dall'Archivio Malvezzi de' Medici in Bologna . Bologna: N. Zanichelli . Retrieved 20 April 2024 .

^ a b Bucciantini, Massimo; Camerota, Michele; Giudice, Franco (2015).

Galileo's Telescope - A European Story Il telescopio di Galileo: Una storia europea.

Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-73691-7 . pp 89–101 ^ Claudius Ptolemy (1598). Giovanni Antonio Magini of Padua (ed.).

Geographia, Cosmographia, or Universal Geography: An atlas of Claudius Ptolemy's world of the 2nd century, with maps by Giovanni Antonio Magini of Padua . appresso Gio. Battista [et] Giorgio Galignani fratelli. p. 5.

^ Map: Palaestina, vel Terra Sancta , From the "Geography" of Claudius Ptolemy, edited by Magini and printed in 1598 Venice, at Google Books Bibliography [ edit ] Baldini, Ugo (2006).

"MAGINI, Giovanni Antonio" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 67: Macchi–Malaspina (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Biografie: Giovanni Antonio Magini , Mille Anni di Scienza in Italia, Ministero dell'Università e della Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica, Italy, retrieved 2014-02-05.

Meliconi, Ilaria (Spring 1999), "Epact Unpacked: The Quadrants of Giovanni Magini" , Sphaera: The Newsletter of the Museum of the History of Science, Oxford (9) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Giovanni Antonio Magini" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews External links [ edit ] Media related to Giovanni Antonio Magini at Wikimedia Commons The Galileo Project: Magini The Correspondence of Giovanni Antonio Magini in EMLO Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Giovanni Antonio Magini in .jpg and .tiff format.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giovanni_Antonio_Magini&oldid=1285468656 " Categories : 1555 births 1617 deaths Italian astrologers 16th-century astrologers 17th-century astrologers 17th-century Italian astronomers Scientists from Padua 16th-century Italian astronomers 16th-century Italian mathematicians 17th-century Italian mathematicians Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 21:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giovanni Antonio Magini 17 languages Add topic

