Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and career 2 Prince-Primate of the Confederation of the Rhine 3 Death and legacy 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg 26 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German archbishop of Mainz, later of Regensburg (1744–1817) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg Elector of Mainz Arch-Chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire Prince of Regensburg Prince-Primate of the Confederation of the Rhine Grand Duke of Frankfurt Portrait of Karl Theodor von Dalberg by Franz Stirnbrand , 1812 Other post(s) Prince-Bishop of Worms (1787-1817) Bishop of Konstanz (1788-1817) Bishop of Regensburg (1805-1817) Previous post(s) Titular Archbishop of Tarsus (1788–1800) Orders Ordination 3 February 1788 Consecration 31 August 1788 by Friedrich Karl Joseph von Erthal Personal details Born ( 1744-02-08 ) 8 February 1744 Mannheim , Electoral Palatinate , Holy Roman Empire Died 10 February 1817 (1817-02-10) (aged 73) Regensburg , Kingdom of Bavaria Denomination Roman Catholic Signature Coat of arms Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg (8 February 1744 – 10 February 1817) was a Catholic German bishop and statesman . In various capacities, he served as Archbishop of Mainz , Prince of Regensburg , Arch-Chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire , Bishop of Constance and Worms , Prince-Primate of the Confederation of the Rhine [ 1 ] and Grand Duke of Frankfurt . Dalberg was the last Archbishop-Elector of Mainz.

Early life and career [ edit ] Fürstenberg vase commemorating Dalberg's election in 1787 as Coadjutor of Mainz and Worms (Collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art ) Born in Mannheim , [ 2 ] as a member of the House of Dalberg , he was the son of Franz Heinrich von Dalberg (1716–1776), administrator of Worms, one of the chief counsellors of the Prince-elector and Archbishop of Mainz and his wife, Baroness Maria Sophie Anna von Eltz-Kempenich (1722–1763). Karl devoted himself to the study of canon law , and entered the church. At the beginning of 1765 he entered the administrative service of the ministry in Mainz.

Having been appointed in 1772 governor of Erfurt , he won further advancement by his successful administration.

[ 3 ] He was rector of the cathedral school in Würzburg in 1780.

[ 2 ] In 1787 he was elected coadjutor cum iure successionis of the Archbishopric of Mainz and the Bishopric of Worms , and in 1788 of the Bishopric of Constance ; [ 4 ] at the same time, he became titular archbishop of Tarsus in Cilicia and was ordained priest (11/11/1787) and bishop (8/31/1788). After succeeding the respective bishops in Constance (1800) and Worms (1802), he also succeeded in Mainz as the last archbishop-elector, albeit temporally only in the electorate's left bank territories and also, de facto , in the pastoral ones as far as the right bank of the Rhine.

[ 5 ] As statesman, Dalberg was distinguished by his patriotic attitude, whether in ecclesiastical matters, in which he leaned to the Febronian view of a German national church, or in his efforts to galvanize the atrophied machinery of the Holy Roman Empire into some sort of effective central government of Germany . Failing in this, he turned to the rising star of Napoleon , believing that he had found in him the only force strong enough to save Germany from dissolution.

[ 1 ] By the Treaty of Lunéville in 1801, in which all territories on the left bank of the River Rhine were ceded to France , Dalberg's predecessor had to surrender Mainz and Worms; the Concordat of 1801 had reduced Mainz to a simple diocese in the province of Mechelen that conscribed the French department of Mont-Tonnerre (including the city of Worms). For Mainz, Joseph Ludwig Colmar was soon appointed as bishop. (Worms, though it had lost its city, remained an extant diocese on the right bank of the Rhine, so Dalberg could succeed there.) In the Final Recess of the Extraordinary Imperial Deputation of 1803, it was decided to compensate German princes for their losses to France by distributing the church land among them, so Dalberg lost a couple of territories there (among other things, Constance), though (due to his prominent position of the Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, [ 2 ] and perhaps also due to his personality and skilled diplomacy), he would be the only spiritual prince to retain at least some territory for temporal government: the Mainzian lands around Aschaffenburg , the Reichsstadt ( Free Imperial City ) of Wetzlar (with the rank of a Countship) and the Principality of Regensburg containing the Imperial City, the prince-bishopric , and some independent monasteries. (Regensburg was also where the Imperial Deputation had taken place.) In addition, he was designated Archbishop of the (former Salzburg suffragan) Regensburg, [ 4 ] to which (spiritually now) the former Mainz lands on the right bank of the Rhine, and the former Mainzian suffragans were attached.

This was, of course, the decision of a state authority which, in its spiritual part, could not take effect until ratified by the Pope; in any case, Regensburg's bishop, Josef Conrad of Schroffenberg-Mös, was still alive at the time. So, Dalberg did not exercise spiritual authority in the older part of the Regensburg diocese until Bishop Schroffenberg died, at which point he made himself elected vicar capitular of the diocese; finally, on 1 February 1805, he received the papal assent and was Archbishop of Regensburg.

Prince-Primate of the Confederation of the Rhine [ edit ] See also: Prince-primate § Germany - Confederation of the Rhine After the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, Dalberg together with other princes joined the Confederation of the Rhine . He formally resigned the office of Arch-Chancellor in a letter to Emperor Francis II , and was appointed prince-primate of the Confederation of the Rhine by Napoleon.

[ 4 ] At that point, the Reichsstadt of Frankfurt was included among his territories. Not long after, Dalberg appointed Napoleon's uncle, Cardinal Fesch , coadjutor in his archdiocese (an action for which he had no canonical rights).

After the Treaty of Schönbrunn (1810), he was elevated by the French to the rank of Grand Duke of Frankfurt .

[ 1 ] This greatly augmented Dalberg's territories, although he had to cede Regensburg to the Kingdom of Bavaria . As Grand Duke of Frankfurt he ordered all restrictions on the Jews of Frankfurt lifted. This was opposed by the Lutheran town council, until 1811, when Dalberg issued a proclamation ending the requirement that Jews live in the ghetto or pay special taxes.

[ citation needed ] On 14 January 1806 he performed the wedding of Eugène de Beauharnais , Napoleon's stepson, and the Bavarian Princess Augusta of Bavaria . In 1813 he ceded all his temporal offices (about to be overrun by the Sixth Coalition ) to Beauharnais.

[ 3 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] Dalberg died in 1817 in Regensburg. Although his political subservience to Napoleon was resented by a later generation in Germany, as a man and prelate he is remembered as amiable, conscientious and large-hearted. Himself a scholar and author, Dalberg was a notable patron of letters, and was the friend of Goethe , Schiller and Wieland .

[ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Dalberg § 2.

Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

762– 763.

^ a b c Bischof, Franz Xaver. "Dalberg, Karl Theodor Anton Maria v.", Religion Past and Present , 2013 ISBN 9789004146662 ^ a b "Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg ", Art of Travel - 1500-1850, NUI Galway ^ a b c "Karl von Dalberg, Archbishop of Mainz and Prince Primate", The British Museum ^ "Dalberg, Carl Theodor Anton Maria von", Haus der Bayerischen Geschichte External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Karl Theodor von Dalberg .

"Dalberg, Charles Theodor Anton Maria, Prince of" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (9th ed.). 1878.

Catholic Church titles Preceded by Maximilian Christof von Rodt as Prince-Bishop Bishop of Constance Prince-Bishop until 1803 1799–1817 Bishopric dissolved 1 Preceded by Friedrich Karl Joseph von Erthal Elector of Mainz, then Regensburg Arch-Chancellor of Germany 1802–1806 Holy Roman Empire dissolved, territories mediatised Preceded by Friedrich Karl Joseph von Erthal Bishop of Worms Prince-Bishop until 1803 1802–1817 Prince-Bishopric secularised, spiritually returned to Mainz Preceded by Joseph Konrad von Schroffenberg-Mös [ de ] Archbishop of Regensburg Prince-Archbishop until 1810 1803/05–1817 Vacant Sede vacante Title next held by Johann Nepomuk von Wolf [ de ] as Bishop of Regensburg Political offices Preceded by Unknown Kurmainzischer Governor of Erfurt 1772–1787?

Succeeded by Unknown Preceded by Unknown Coadjutor of Mainz and Worms 1787–?

Succeeded by Unknown Preceded by Unknown Coadjutor of Constance 1788–?

Succeeded by Unknown New creation Prince-Primate of the Confederation of the Rhine 1806–1813 Succeeded by Eugène de Beauharnais New office Grand Duke of Frankfurt 1810–1813 Notes and references 1. The Bishopric of Constance was dissolved by Pope Pius VII in 1821, without recognising Ignaz Heinrich von Wessenberg , who had been elected in 1817.

v t e German confederations (1806–1871) Confederation of the Rhine 1806–1813 Protector Napoleon I (1806–1813) Prince primate Karl Theodor von Dalberg (1806–1813) Eugène de Beauharnais (1813) German Confederation 1815–1866 Presidents Francis I of Austria (1815–1835) Ferdinand I of Austria (1835–1848) Francis Joseph I of Austria (1850–1866) Imperial regent Archduke Johann of Austria (1848–1849) North German Confederation 1867–1871 President Wilhelm I of Prussia (1867–1871) Chancellor Otto von Bismarck (1867–1871) List of German monarchs History of Germany House of Habsburg-Lorraine House of Hohenzollern v t e Order of the Illuminati History Age of Enlightenment Liberalism ( Liberalism in Germany ) Rationalism Freemasonry ( Freemasonry in Germany ) Anti-clericalism Secularism French Revolution ( Jacobinism ) Congress of Wilhelmsbad Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria Members Full list of members A–F Jacob Friedrich von Abel Franz von Albini August von Sachsen-Gotha-Altenburg Jens Baggesen Karl Friedrich Bahrdt Aloys Basselet von La Rosée August Batsch Rudolph Zacharias Becker Johann Joachim Bellermann Johann Erich Biester Aloys Blumauer Johann von Böber Johann Joachim Christoph Bode Johann Michael Böck Ignaz von Born Karl Böttiger Joachim Heinrich Campe Christian Cannabich Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach Philipp von Cobenzl Hieronymus von Colloredo Ignaz Cornova Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg Anton Dereser Johann Georg von Dillis Christian Wilhelm von Dohm Karl von Eckartshausen Rudolf Eickemeyer Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg Johann Georg Heinrich Feder Ferdinand, Prince of Brunswick-Lüneburg Junius Frey Frederick Christian II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg Frederick V, Landgrave of Hesse-Homburg Friedrich Ferdinand Constantin von Sachsen-Weimar-Eisenach G–M Christian Garve Friedrich Gedike Otto Heinrich von Gemmingen-Hornberg Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Leopold Friedrich Günther von Goeckingk Johann Casimir Häffelin Karl August von Hardenberg Lorenz Leopold Haschka August Adolph von Hennings Johann Gottfried Herder Andreas Joseph Hofmann Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland Gottlieb Hufeland Isaak Iselin Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Karl von Hesse-Kassel Wenzel Anton, Prince of Kaunitz-Rietberg Martin Gottlieb Klauer Johann Friedrich Kleuker Adolph Knigge Christian Gottfried Körner Karl Heinrich Lang Franz Michael Leuchsenring Justus Christian Loder Ludwig I, Grand Duke of Hesse Jakob Mauvillon Beda Mayr Christoph Meiners August Gottlieb Meißner Ludwig August Mellin Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Daniel Gotthilf Moldenhawer Maximilian von Montgelas Johannes von Müller Friedrich Münter Johann Karl August Musäus N–Z Christian Gottlob Neefe Christoph Friedrich Nicolai Franz Oberthür Dietrich Heinrich Ludwig von Ompteda Christian Adolph Overbeck Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi Karl Leonhard Reinhold Franz Anton Ries Christian Gotthilf Salzmann Friedrich Schlichtegroll Johann Georg Schlosser Ernst Friedrich von Schlotheim Nikolaus Simrock Samuel Thomas von Sömmerring Joseph von Sonnenfels Ludwig Timotheus Spittler Anton Matthias Sprickmann Johan Philip Stadion von Warthausen Maximilian Stoll Gottfried van Swieten Johann Nepomuk von Triva François-Charles de Velbrück Franz Michael Vierthaler Wilderich of Walderdorf Adam Weishaupt Lorenz von Westenrieder Franz Xaver von Zach See also Owl of Minerva Rite of Strict Observance Josephinism Enlightened absolutism Weimar Classicism Sturm und Drang Anti-Catholicism New World Order (conspiracy theory) Augustin Barruel 's Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism John Robison Illuminati in popular culture Category Society portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Leopoldina Artists ULAN ADK FID People BMLO Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Karl_Theodor_Anton_Maria_von_Dalberg&oldid=1304028102 " Categories : 1744 births 1817 deaths Roman Catholic bishops of Worms 19th-century Roman Catholic archbishops in the Holy Roman Empire Archbishop-electors of Mainz Roman Catholic bishops of Constance 19th-century Roman Catholic bishops in Bavaria Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Prince-primate of the Confederation of the Rhine Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013 Commons link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter Articles containing Latin-language text S-bef: 'before' parameter includes the word 'unknown' S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'unknown' Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 14:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg 26 languages Add topic

