Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 In popular culture 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Blackacre 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In law, name for a fictitious estate Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Blackacre , Whiteacre , Greenacre , Brownacre , and variations are the placeholder names used for fictitious estates in land .

The names are used by professors of law in common law jurisdictions, particularly in the area of real property and occasionally in contracts , to discuss the rights of various parties to a piece of land. A typical law school or bar exam question on real property might say: Adam, owner of a fee simple in Blackacre, conveyed the property "to Bill for life, remainder to Charles, provided that if any person should consume alcohol on the property before the first born son of Charles turns twenty-one, then the property shall go to Dwight in fee simple." Assume that neither Bill, Charles, nor Dwight is an heir of Adam, and that Adam's only heir is his son, Edward. Discuss the ownership interests in Blackacre of Adam, Bill, Charles, Dwight and Edward.

Where more than one estate is needed to demonstrate a point – perhaps relating to a dispute over boundaries, easements or riparian rights – a second estate will usually be called Whiteacre, [ 1 ] a third, Greenacre, and a fourth, Brownacre.

Origin [ edit ] Jesse Dukeminier , author of one of the leading series of textbooks on property, traces the use of Blackacre and Whiteacre for this purpose to a 1628 treatise by Sir Edward Coke . Dukeminier suggests that the term might originate with references to colors associated with certain crops (" peas and beans are black, corn and potatoes are white, hay is green"), or with the means by which rents were to be paid, with black rents payable in produce and white rents in silver .

[ 2 ] A 1790 treatise by Francis Buller similarly uses these placeholder names, stating: "If A. have Black Acre and C. have White Acre, and A. has a way over White Acre to Black Acre, and then purchases White Acre, the way will be extinct; and if A. afterwards enfeoff C. of White Acre without excepting the road, it is gone".

[ 3 ] In various law journals and treatises in Louisiana, which uses a unique form of the civil law influenced by but not identical to the Napoleonic Code , authors have used the term " arpent noir" as a placeholder name for the purpose of discussing rights concerning immovables.

One of the more basic theories is that Blackacre and Whiteacre are related to what professors could draw on dark chalkboards in early law-school settings.  A simple outline of the property on the "blackboard" being "blackacre" and a chalk-colored-in property being "whiteacre".

In popular culture [ edit ] Because of its association with legal education, a number of legal publications and events utilize the name. For example, Blackacre was adopted as the name of the literary journal at the University of Texas School of Law .

Blackacre is also the name of a journal at the University of Sydney Law School , published annually by the Sydney University Law Society, the name of the open-air courtyard and weekly student social at Vanderbilt Law School , and the name of a William Mitchell College of Law formal.

Law professor K-Sue Park "found that the terms, infrequent but present in English legal treatises, also constituted the title of a proslavery novel that appeared in 1856, the same year the Court decided Dred Scott , from a prominent Confederate press"–William M. Burwell's White Acre vs. Black Acre (1856). Park writes, '"White Acre' was an incompetent northern farm and 'Black Acre,' a southern plantation labored upon by loyal, hardworking slaves. It seems likely that the deployment of these terms by a member of a high-profile political family to defend slavery so publicly at this turbulent time might have had some influence on their popular connotations and meaning, or at least as much as obscure English planting terminology." [ 4 ] The Blackacre Nature Preserve and Historic Homestead in Kentucky was so named by the donor of the land, Macauley Smith, who had been a judge on the Kentucky Court of Appeals .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In July 2010, a legal humor website wrote an article chronicling the foreclosure sale of Blackacre.

[ 7 ] A group of law students in Indianapolis founded a brewery named Black Acre Brewing Co.

in late 2010 as a homage to their legal schooling.

[ 8 ] Monica Youn 's 2016 book of poetry from Graywolf Press is titled Blackacre , in reference to the legal concept (Youn has a law degree from Yale).

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Dewey, Cheatem & Howe , another legal placeholder name References [ edit ] ^ Black’s Law Dictionary , “blackacre” [ page needed ] ^ Jesse Dukeminier and James E. Krier .

Property, 5th Ed.

Aspen Law and Business, 2002, p. 160n.

^ Francis Buller , An Introduction to the Law Relative to Trials at Nisi Prius (1790), page 74.

^ Park, K-Sue (February 2022).

"The History Wars and Property Law: Conquest and Slavery as Foundational to the Field" .

The Yale Law Journal .

131 (4): 1090 – via www.yalelawjournal.org.

^ Blackacre Foundation website Archived February 2, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "AAC Publications - Macauley Letchfield Smith, 1905-1993" .

publications.americanalpineclub.org . Retrieved 2025-07-15 .

^ Blackacre sold in courthouse foreclosure auction at LawsForAttorneys (via archive.org ); published  July 22, 2010; archived March 10 2012.

^ BlackAcreBrewing.com ^ "Blackacre | Graywolf Press" .

www.graywolfpress.org . Retrieved 2016-09-21 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blackacre&oldid=1300662012 " Categories : Real property law Placeholder names Common law legal terminology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2014 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 17:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blackacre 1 language Add topic

