Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Genre 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Dying Earth (genre) 10 languages Español فارسی Frysk 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subgenre of science fiction, sometimes with elements of science fantasy For the novel by Jack Vance, see The Dying Earth . For Vance's overarching series, see Dying Earth .

Inner artwork depicting cities in flaming ruins, by an uncredited artist, for the short story "Regeneration" by Charles Dye and Katherine MacLean from Future Combined with Science Fiction Stories , September 1951.

Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Creatures History Early history Magic Magic item Magic system Magician Mythopoeia‎ Tropes Fantasy worlds Campaign settings Subgenres Bangsian Children's Comedic Contemporary Dark‎ Fairy tale ‎ Parody ‎ Fantastique Of manners Folklore Gaslamp Ghost story ‎ Grimdark Hard High ‎ Historical ‎ Isekai LitRPG Lovecraftian horror Low Magical girl‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Progression Romantic‎ Science ‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban‎ Weird West‎ern Wuxia‎ Xianxia Fandom Dragon Ball fandom Harry Potter fandom Lovecraft fandom Shrek fandom Tolkien fandom My Little Pony fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e Dying Earth is a subgenre of science fantasy or science fiction which takes place in the far future at either the end of life on Earth or the end of time , when the laws of the universe themselves fail. Dominant themes include world-weariness , innocence , idealism , entropy , heat death of the universe , exhaustion or depletion of many or all resources, and the hope of renewal. A related subgenre set in the distant future of entropic decay is called entropic romance.

[ 1 ] Genre [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this section by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Dying Earth genre differs from the apocalyptic subgenre in that it deals not with catastrophic destruction, but with entropic exhaustion of Earth. It is therefore described as more " melancholic ".

[ 2 ] The genre was prefigured by the works of the Romantic movement.

Jean-Baptiste Cousin de Grainville 's Le Dernier Homme (1805) narrates the tale of Omegarus, the Last Man on Earth. It is a bleak vision of the future when Earth has become totally sterile.

Lord Byron 's poem " Darkness " (1816) shows Earth after the Sun has died.

Mary Shelley 's The Last Man (1826) details a future in which humanity is slowly but inexorably wiped from the face of the planet by an unstoppable outbreak of the Great Plague , killing almost everyone but the protagonist, immune to the disease's effects.

Another early example is La Fin du Monde ( The End of the World , aka Omega: the last days of the world ), written by Camille Flammarion and published in France in 1893. The first half of the novel deals with a comet on a collision course with Earth in the 25th century. The last half focuses on Earth's future history, where civilizations rise and fall, humans evolve, and finally Earth ends as an old, dying, and barren planet.

H. G. Wells 's 1895 novella The Time Machine utilizes Dying Earth imagery. At the end of the novel, the unnamed time traveller travels thirty million years into the far future, where only gigantic crabs, butterflies and lichens exist on a barren Earth, then travels even further into the future to see the Sun go out and Earth freezing over.

[ 2 ] Two brooding works by William Hope Hodgson would elaborate on Wells's vision.

The House on the Borderland (1908) takes place in a house besieged by unearthly forces. The narrator then travels into a distant future in which humanity has died and then even further, past the death of Earth. Hodgson's The Night Land (1912) describes a time, millions of years in the future, when the Sun has gone dark. The last few millions of the human race are gathered together in a gigantic metal pyramid, the Last Redoubt, under siege from unknown forces and Powers outside in the dark.

[ 2 ] Cover of the first edition of Jack Vance 's The Dying Earth A work by the early French science fiction author J.-H. Rosny aîné , La Mort de la Terre (1910), deals with the last, scattered generation of an evolved humankind on an exhausted, desert Earth and their encounter with a new type of mineral-metallic life. In some ways it reads like the inversion of his earlier Les Xipéhuz (1887), in which early humans encounter and battle an utterly alien and incomprehensible form of life.

From the 1930s onwards, Clark Ashton Smith wrote a series of stories situated in Zothique , the last continent of Earth, where its inhabitants live out their lives in a similar manner to the civilisations of the Classical era . Smith said in a letter to L. Sprague de Camp, dated November 3, 1953: Zothique, vaguely suggested by Theosophic theories about past and future continents, is the last inhabited continent of earth. The continents of our present cycle have sunken, perhaps several times. Some have remained submerged; others have re-risen, partially, and re-arranged themselves.
The science and machinery of our present civilization have long been forgotten, together with our present religions. But many gods are worshipped; and sorcery and demonism prevail again as in ancient days. Oars and sails alone are used by mariners. There are no fire-arms—only the bows, arrows, swords, javelins, etc. of antiquity.

Under the influence of Smith, Jack Vance wrote the short story collection The Dying Earth . The collection had several sequels and gave the subgenre its name.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Examples [ edit ] H. P. Lovecraft and Robert H. Barlow – " Till A' the Seas " (1935) is a tale of the slow fading of human civilization and the extinction of all life on Earth as it draws closer to the Sun and its radiance on the surface becomes more intense. The story centers on a male protagonist named Ull, the last of his tribe, and his journey across lands and abandoned cities in hopes of finding water, shelter and other survivors.

Don A. Stuart – Night (1935). Short story. As an unexpected side effect from an experimental anti-gravity device, a test pilot is sent countless billions of years into the future. The Milky Way has been reduced to less than a light-year in diameter, and the dead Earth is tidally locked to a much larger and colder red Sun. All the gas in the atmosphere, except for neon and helium , is frozen solid. A huge city contains the frozen remains of humans, and the machines humanity had perfected are dead due to the superconductivity caused by the cold.

Edmond Hamilton – City at World's End (1951) and the comic book story "Superman Under the Red Sun" from Action Comics #300 (1963).

Arthur C. Clarke – The City and the Stars (1956), a revision and expansion of the earlier novella " Against the Fall of Night ".

John Brunner – Catch a Falling Star, an extended version of The 100th Millennium , first published as "Earth is But a Star" (1958) which features in the Broderick anthology, (2001, below). An early example of a far future tale influenced by Vance.

Brian Aldiss – Hothouse (1962, also known as The Long Afternoon of Earth ). The Earth has locked rotation with the Sun that has increased output, and plants are engaged in a constant frenzy of growth and decay, like a tropical forest enhanced a thousandfold; a few small groups of humans still live, on the edge of extinction, beneath the giant banyan tree that covers the entire day side of Earth.

Poul Anderson – Epilogue (1962). A novella about a starship from Earth on its way to a new planetary system , but which due to malfunction returns to its origin planetary system again three billion years into the future. Earth has drawn closer to the Sun which itself has grown "a little bigger and hotter", and life on Earth has been replaced by cybernetic organisms, descendants of human technology.

Lin Carter – Giant of World's End (1969), and following prequels .

Sword and sorcery fantasy novels set on a decadent far-future Earth in which all the world's landmasses have drifted back together to form a last supercontinent called Gondwane .

M. John Harrison – a series of short stories and novels set in Viriconium from 1971 onwards. Viriconium is the capital city in which much of the action takes place. Viriconium lies on a dying Earth littered with the detritus of the millennia, seemingly now its own hermetic universe where chronology no longer applies.

[ 4 ] Michael Moorcock – The Dancers at the End of Time series (1972–6).

[ 5 ] Hideyuki Kikuchi – Vampire Hunter D series C. J. Cherryh – Sunfall (1977-2004), a collection of short stories set in various locations on Earth in the far future.  The tone, themes and fantasy conventions employed in this collection differ by story. (These were reprinted in The Collected Short Fiction of C. J. Cherryh .) Doris Piserchia – Earthchild (1977), in which the last human being on Earth faces competition from the world-spanning alien creatures that have devastated the planet.

George R.R. Martin – Dying of the Light (1977), a novel set on Worlorn, a world whose course is taking it into the far reaches of space, where all life on the planet will die.

Philip Jose Farmer – In Dark Is the Sun (1979), a tribesman from the distant future quests across the landscape of a dying Earth.  As with much of "Dying Earth" science fiction, this text ruminates on the nature of ending, and the meaning of time itself.

Thundarr the Barbarian (1980-1981) Saturday morning animated series , created by Steve Gerber and produced by Ruby-Spears Productions . Set in a future (c. 3994) post-apocalyptic wasteland divided into kingdoms or territories—the majority of which are ruled by (mostly evil) wizards (who combine magical spells with reanimating technologies from the pre-catastrophe world)—and whose ruins typically feature recognizable geographical features from the United States . The hero Thundarr (voiced by Robert Ridgely ), a muscular warrior, whose companions include Princess Ariel, a formidable young sorceress, and Ookla the Mok ( leonine humanoid ) traveled the world on horseback, battling evil wizards.

Gene Wolfe – The Book of the New Sun (1981–3) chronicles the journey of a disgraced torturer named Severian to the highest position in the land. Severian, who claims to have a perfect memory, tells the story in first person.

The Book takes place in the distant future, where the Sun has dimmed considerably.

[ 6 ] Wolfe stated that Vance's series directly influenced this work.

The Book has several associated volumes.

Darrell Schweitzer – The Shattered Goddess (1983), fantasy novel set at the end of man's dominion over Earth, in the interval between the death of the last deity of the former age and the rise of the first of the new. Followed by Echoes of the Goddess (2013), a prequel short story collection.

Michael Shea – Nifft the Lean (1982), a series of sword and sorcery tales set in a far future age where demons and alien entities vie for dominion over Earth. A later story set in the same universe involved a mash up with Vance's Cugel the Clever.

Alan Grant – King Barman (November 1, 1996), A supreme evil overlord observes as reality itself is falling apart from his castle citadel situated in front of a dying star. He peers back in time featuring a penultimate battle between good and evil which effected the very nature of the universe itself, horrid outcomes leading to the abysmal state in which he surveys. Using his almighty power the last monarch known as He-Who-Dares uses his abilities to torque the outcome of said fateful conflict between Nu-Gotham and its legacy hero/monarch against the assault of an invading horde in goods favor. Causing reality to shift into a form of higher existential consciousness thus bringing about a new dawn.

Alan Moore – Wildstorm Spotlight #1 (February 1, 1997), set at the penultimate heat death of the Universe.

Majestros of Khera/Earth heads up a small conclave of immortal nomads eons in the future as reality dies around them.

Damien Broderick , ed. – Earth is But a Star: Excursions through Science Fiction to the Far Future (2001), an anthology of canonical dying Earth short stories mostly set on Earth in the far future, interwoven with specially commissioned critical essays on the dying Earth theme.

Ian Edginton – The Establishment (November 1, 2002), the end of which being re-visitation of Alan Moore's Wildstorm Spotlight: The Big Chill where Majestros had found a vastly evolved iteration of his former WildC.A.T.s associate Spartan who sought to restart creation itself as it was ending. A deranged scientist from an alternate future would endeavor to co-opt his remaking of the dying continuum for his own purposes, with the British superteam  and main leads of the comic itself mobilizing to stop him.

Greg Bear – City at the End of Time (2008), a novel that is a homage to William Hope Hodgson's The Night Land .

Jason Aaron – The Last Days of Midgard (2013), a comicbook miniseries for Thor: God of Thunder comics in early 2014, where Allfather Thor sits at the end of time overseeing both the rebuilding of Old Asgard and a dying planet Earth after humanity killed its ecosystem, the race itself dying off as a result.

[ 7 ] Rick Remender – Low (July 30, 2014), a comic series set billions of year in the future where the rapid expansion of the Sun forces humanity to live underwater.

Joe Keatinge – Strange Visitor (August 27, 2014), at the ultimate heat death of the prime DC Universe . Earth's denizens of the distant future begin evacuating as the world comes to an end while old friends Rathotis and Kamandi regale each other using old tales of Superman and his feats of courage and hope. Eventually the Starchild of El would return far more powerful than ever to rescue an astronaut crew from being stuck in another dimension in the distant past. The now immortalized Superman would use his newfound abilities to halt the coming bite of entropy long enough to save everyone onboard before letting the old universe wink out so he could ferry them into the next.

Dan Jurgens – Of Tomorrow (Apr 18, 2018), a short story spinning out of Action Comics 1000 . Superman pays final respects to his adopted home planet billions of years in the future where the Sun was in the onset of consuming Earth. He and most of humanity, his wife included, having left for the stars long ago; Kal-El simply leaving a glass mini-figure of his surrogate parents behind at the memorial for Jonathan and Martha Kent before flying off.

Stant Litore - Ansible: A Thousand Faces (2020), a collection of ten novellas and short stories published 2014-2020, partially in homage to the works of Ursula K. Le Guin and William Hope Hodgson ( The Night Land ). Telepathic explorers make first contact and unwittingly open up the twenty-fifth century Earth to a soul-devouring alien species. On a darkened Earth, humanity's survivors take refuge within a huge arcology inspired by the Last Redoubt in The Night Land ; a band of time travelers move up and down humanity's timeline to preserve the species, ranging from prehistory to the eventual heat death of the universe.

See also [ edit ] Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction Far future in fiction References [ edit ] ^ Wolfe, Gary K. (1986-08-18).

Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy: A Glossary and Guide to Scholarship . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0-313-22981-7 .

^ a b c d "Themes : Dying Earth : SFE : Science Fiction Encyclopedia" .

www.sf-encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2021-08-20 .

^ "The Dying Earth | Classic Book Reviews | SCI FI Weekly" . Archived from the original on 2009-03-04 . Retrieved 2008-04-16 .

^ M John Harrison: The Centauri Device and Viriconium – an infinity plus double review ^ The SF Site Featured Review: The Dancers at the End of Time ^ "Lupine Nuncio – Gene Wolfe News and Rumors" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-01 . Retrieved 2008-04-16 .

^ Thor: God of Thunder #19-24 (2014) External links [ edit ] The Eldritch Dark – This website contains almost all of Clark Ashton Smith's written work, as well as a comprehensive selection of his art, biographies, a bibliography, a discussion board, readings, fiction tributes and more.

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐gz9l5
Cached time: 20250812021913
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.424 seconds
Real time usage: 0.539 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1493/1000000
Revision size: 18085/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 154469/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1679/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48564/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.231/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5840815/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  393.256      1 -total
 26.76%  105.223      1 Template:Reflist
 19.60%   77.097      1 Template:Cite_book
 19.44%   76.449      1 Template:Fantasy
 18.96%   74.547      1 Template:Sidebar
 16.98%   66.785     10 Template:Navbox
 16.71%   65.716      1 Template:Short_description
 11.74%   46.182      1 Template:Science_fiction
 11.52%   45.320      2 Template:Ambox
 11.33%   44.571      1 Template:Original_research Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30862769:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021913 and revision id 1256201725. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dying_Earth_(genre)&oldid=1256201725 " Categories : Fantasy genres Science fiction genres Science fantasy Dying Earth (genre) End of the universe in fiction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from July 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 8 November 2024, at 19:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dying Earth (genre) 10 languages Add topic

