Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Struggle against Saddam Hussein 1.3 Execution 2 Scholarship and ideas Toggle Scholarship and ideas subsection 2.1 The Logical Foundations of Induction 3 List of works Toggle List of works subsection 3.1 Jurisprudence 3.2 Fundamentals of the law 3.3 Philosophy 3.4 Logic 3.5 Theology 3.6 Economics 3.7 Qur'anic commentaries 3.8 History 3.9 Islamic culture 3.10 Articles 4 Notable colleagues and students 5 See also 6 Citations 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr 23 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית മലയാളം پنجابی Polski Português Русский Shqip کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iraqi Islamic scholar (1935–1980) Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr Personal life Born ( 1935-03-01 ) March 1, 1935 Kadhimiya , Kingdom of Iraq Died April 9, 1980 (1980-04-09) (aged 45) Baghdad , Ba'athist Iraq Resting place Wadi-us-Salaam , Najaf Nationality Iraqi Citizenship Iraq Religious life Religion Islam Sect Usuli Twelver Shia Islam Muslim leader Based in Najaf , Iraq Post Grand Ayatollah Part of a series on Shia Islam Twelver Shi'ism The Fourteen Infallibles Muhammad Fatimah The Twelve Imams Ali Hasan Husayn al-Sajjad al-Baqir al-Sadiq al-Kazim ar-Rida al-Taqi al-Naqi al-Askari al-Mahdi Principles Monotheism Justice Prophethood Imamate Judgement Day Other beliefs Imamate of the Family Angels Mourning of Muharram Intercession Occultation Wilayat al-Faqih Usul al-fiqh Ijtihad Taqlid Irfan Practices Salat Sawm Hajj Zakat Khums Jihad Amr bi-l maʿrūf Nahy ani l-Munkar Tawalli Tabarri Other practices Mourning of Muharram Arba'een Pilgrimage Intercession Holy cities Mecca Medina Najaf Karbala Mashhad Jerusalem Samarra Kadhimiya Qom Groups Ja'fari Usuli Akhbari Shaykhi Other related sects and groups Alawites Sufi orders and Alevism Qizilbash Safaviyya Bektashism and folk religion Malamatiyya Qalandariyya Hurufism Bektashism Galibi Ni'matullāhī Scholarship Law Marja' ( list ) Hawza Ayatollah ( list ) Allamah Seghatoleslam Hojatoleslam Ijtihad Hadith collections The Four Books Kitab al-Kafi Man La Yahduruhu al-Faqih Tahdhib al-Ahkam Al-Istibsar Other hadith collections Book of Sulaym ibn Qays Bihar al-Anwar Wasā'il al-Shīʿa Reality of Certainty Nahj al-Balagha Mafatih al-Jinan Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya Al-Amali Sources of ijtihad and jurisprudence Qur'an Hadiths of The Infallibles Consensus Reason Related topics List of Twelver Shia books Criticism of Twelver Shi'ism Shia Islam portal v t e Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr ( Arabic : محمد باقر الصدر , romanized : Muḥammad Bāqir al-Ṣadr ; March 1, 1935 – April 9, 1980), also known as al-Shahid al-Khamis ( Arabic : الشهيد الخامس , romanized : al-Shahīd al-Khāmis , lit.

'the fifth martyr'), was an Iraqi Islamic scholar, philosopher, and the ideological founder of the Islamic Dawa Party . He was the father-in-law to Muqtada al-Sadr , a cousin of Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr and Musa al-Sadr . His father Haydar al-Sadr was a well-respected high-ranking Shi'a cleric. His lineage can be traced back to Muhammad through the seventh Shia Imam Musa al-Kazim . Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr was executed in 1980 by the regime of Saddam Hussein along with his sister, Amina Sadr bint al-Huda .

Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr was born in al-Kazimiya , Iraq to the prominent Sadr family, which originated from Jabal Amel in Lebanon. His father died in 1937, leaving the family destitute. In 1945, the family moved to the holy city of Najaf , where al-Sadr would spend the rest of his life. He was a child prodigy who, at 10, was delivering lectures on Islamic history . At eleven, he was a student of logic. He wrote a book criticizing materialist philosophy when he was 24.

[ 1 ] [ self-published source ] [ non-primary source needed ] Al-Sadr completed his religious studies at religious seminaries under al-Khoei and Muhsin al-Hakim , and began teaching at the age of 25.

Struggle against Saddam Hussein [ edit ] Al-Sadr's works attracted the ire of the Baath Party , leading to repeated imprisonment where he was often tortured. Despite this, he continued his work after being released.

[ 2 ] [ failed verification ] When the Ba'athists arrested Al-Sadr in 1977, his sister Amina Sadr bint al-Huda made a speech in the Imam Ali mosque in Najaf inviting the people to demonstrate. Many demonstrations were held, forcing the Ba'athists to release Al-Sadr who was placed under house arrest.

In 1979–1980, anti-Ba'ath riots arose in Iraq's Shia areas by groups who were working toward an Islamic revolution in their country.

[ 3 ] Hussein and his deputies believed that the riots had been inspired by the Iranian Revolution and instigated by Iran's government.

[ 4 ] [ page needed ] In the aftermath of Iran's revolution, Iraq's Shia community called on Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr to be their "Iraqi Ayatollah Khomeini ", leading a revolt against the Ba'ath regime.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Community leaders, tribal heads, and hundreds of ordinary members of the public paid their allegiance to al-Sadr.

[ 5 ] Protests then erupted in Baghdad and the predominantly Shia provinces of the south in May 1979.

[ 5 ] For nine days, protests against the regime unfolded, but were suppressed by the regime.

[ 5 ] The cleric's imprisonment led to another wave of protests in June after a seminal, powerful appeal from al-Sadr's sister, Bint al-Huda. Further clashes unfolded between the security forces and protestors. Najaf was put under siege and thousands were tortured and executed.

[ 5 ] Al-Sadr issued a fatwa prohibiting membership in the ruling Ba'ath party. Called upon by the government to retract it he refused.

[ 7 ] Execution [ edit ] Baqir al-Sadr was arrested on April 5, 1980, with his sister, Sayyidah bint al-Huda.

[ 8 ] They had formed a powerful militant movement in opposition to Saddam Hussein 's regime.

[ 9 ] On April 9, 1980, Al-Sadr and his sister were killed after being severely tortured by their captors.

[ 2 ] Signs of torture could be seen on the bodies.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] An iron nail was hammered into Al-Sadr's head and he was then set on fire in Najaf.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] It has been reported that Saddam Hussein himself killed them.

[ 9 ] The Baathists delivered the bodies of Baqir al-Sadr and Bint al-Huda to their cousin Sayyid Mohammad al-Sadr .

[ 9 ] They were buried in the Wadi-us-Salaam graveyard in the holy city of Najaf the same night.

[ 8 ] His execution raised no criticism from Western countries because Al-Sadr had openly supported Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran.

[ 10 ] In 2024, Saadoun Sabri Jamil Jumaa al-Qaisi, a senior security official during Saddam's regime, was arrested in Erbil for overseeing Al-Sadr's detention and killing.

[ 12 ] Scholarship and ideas [ edit ] The works by Baqir al-Sadr contains traditional Shia thoughts, while they also suggest ways Shia could "accommodate modernity".

The two major works by him are Iqtisaduna on Islamic economics , and Falsafatuna (Our Philosophy).

[ 13 ] They were detailed critiques of Marxism that presented his early ideas on an alternative Islamic form of government. They were critiques of both socialism and capitalism . He was subsequently commissioned by the government of Kuwait to assess how that country's oil wealth could be managed in keeping with Islamic principles. This led to a major work on Islamic banking , which still forms the basis for modern Islamic banks.

[ 14 ] Using his knowledge of the Quran and a subject-based approach to Quranic exegesis , Al-Sadr extracted two concepts from the Holy text in relation to governance: khilafat al-insan (Man as heir or trustee of God) and shahadat al-anbiya (Prophets as witnesses).

Al-Sadr explained that throughout history there have been "...two lines. Man's line and the Prophet's line. The line of Man is the khalifa (trustee) who inherits the earth from God; the line of the Prophet is the shahid (witness)".

[ 15 ] Al-Sadr demonstrated that khilafa (governance) is "a right given to the whole of humanity" and defined it as an obligation given from God to the human race to "tend the globe and administer human affairs". This was a major advancement of Islamic political theory .

[ 16 ] While Al-Sadr identified khilafa as the obligation and right of the people, he used a broad-based explanation of  Quranic verse 5:44 [ 17 ] to identify who held the responsibility of shahada in an Islamic state. First were the Prophets (anbiya'). Second were the Imams who are considered a divine ( rabbani ) continuation of the Prophets in this line. The last were the marja'iyya ( see Marja ).

[ 18 ] While the two functions of khilafa and shahada (supervision and witness ) were united during the times of the Prophets, they diverged during the occultation so that khilafa returned to the people ( umma ) and shahada to the scholars.

[ 19 ] Al-Sadr 's practical application of how khilafa , would be returned to the [Muslim] people in the absence of the twelfth Imam was with the establishment of a democratic system, whereby the people regularly elect their representatives in government: Islamic theory rejects monarchy as well as the various forms of dictatorial government; it also rejects the aristocratic regimes and proposes a form of government, which contains all the positive aspects of the democratic system.

[ 20 ] He continued to champion this point until his final days: Lastly, I demand, in the name of all of you and in the name of the values you uphold, to allow the people the opportunity truly to exercise their right in running the affairs of the country by holding elections in which a council representing the ummah (people) could truly emerge.' [ 21 ] Al-Sadr was executed by Saddam Hussein in 1980 before he was able to provide any details of the mechanism for the practical application of the shahada concept in an Islamic state. A few elaborations of shahada can be found in Al-Sadr's works. In his text Role of the Shiah Imams in the Reconstruction of Islamic Society , Al-Sadr illustrates the scope and limitations of shahada by using the example of the third Shi'i Imam, Hussein ibn Ali (the grandson of Muhammad), who defied Yazid , the ruler at the time. Al-Sadr explained that Yazid was not simply acting counter to Islamic teachings, as many rulers before and after him had done, but he was distorting the teachings and traditions of Islam and presenting his deviant ideas as representative of Islam itself. This, therefore, is what led Imam Hussein to intervene challenging Yazid in order to restore the true teachings of Islam, and consequently laying down his own life. In Al-Sadr's own words, the shahid's (witness – person performing shahada or supervision) duties are "to protect the correct doctrines and to see that deviations do not grow to the extent of threatening the ideology itself".

[ 22 ] The Logical Foundations of Induction [ edit ] Main article: The Logical Foundations of Induction One notable book that is considered by scholars to be a great achievement of al-Sadr is his book entitled The Logical Foundations of Induction.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] This book represents the core of al-Sadr's attempt to give a rational logical foundation for growing knowledge by inductive means, and ultimately establish a new inductive logic termed by al-Sadr as the "Subjectivist Logic" ( Arabic : المنطق الذاتي ), that sets the logical rules for this type of knowledge growth.

[ 26 ] List of works [ edit ] Al-Sadr engaged Western philosophical ideas , challenging them as necessary and incorporating them where appropriate, with the ultimate goal of demonstrating that religious knowledge was not antithetical to scientific knowledge.

[ 27 ] The following is a list of his work: [ 28 ] Jurisprudence [ edit ] Buhuth fi Sharh al- 'Urwah al' Wuthqa (Discourses on the Commentary of al- 'Urwah al-Wuthqa ), four volumes Al-Ta'liqah 'ala Minhaj al-Salihin (Annotation of Ayatullah Hakim's Minhaj al-Salihin ), two volumes Al-Fatawa al-Wadhihah (Clear Decrees).

Mujaz Ahkam al-Hajj (Summarized Rules of Hajj) Al-Ta'liqah 'ala Manasik al-Hajj (Annotation of Ayatullah Khui's Hajj Rites) Al-Ta'liqah 'ala Salah al-Jumu'ah (Annotation on Friday Prayer) Fundamentals of the law [ edit ] Durus fi Ilm al-Usul (Lessons in the Science of Jurisprudence), 3 Parts.

[ 29 ] Al-Ma'alim al-Jadidah lil-Usul (The New Signposts of Jurisprudence) Ghayat al-Fikr (The Highest Degree of Thought) Philosophy [ edit ] Falsafatuna ( [1] ) (Our Philosophy) published in 1959 Logic [ edit ] Al-Usus al-Mantiqiyyah lil-Istiqra ' ( The Logical Foundations of Induction ) Theology [ edit ] Al-Mujaz fi Usul al-Din: al-Mursil, al-Rasul, al-Risalah (The Summarized Principles of Religion: The Sender, The Messenger, The Message) Al-Tashayyu' wa al-Islam - Bahth Hawl al-Wilayah (Discourse on Divine Authority) Bahth Hawl al-Mahdi (Discourse on Imam Mahdi) Economics [ edit ] Iqtisaduna (Our Economy) Al-Bank al-la Ribawi fi al-Islam (Usury-free Banking in Islam) Maqalat Iqtisadiyyah (Essays in Economy) Qur'anic commentaries [ edit ] Al-Tafsir al-Mawzu'i lil-Qur'an al-Karim - al-Madrasah al-Qur'aniyyah (The Thematic Exegesis of the Holy Qur'an) Buhuth fi 'Ulum al-Qur'an (Discourses on Qur'anic Sciences) Maqalat Qur'aniyyah (Essays on Qur'an) History [ edit ] Ahl al-Bayt Tanawwu' Ahdaf wa Wahdah Hadaf (Ahl al- Bayt, Variety of Objectives Towards a Single Goal) Fadak fi al-Tarikh (Fadak in History) Islamic culture [ edit ] Al-Islam Yaqud al-Hayah (Islam Directive to Life) Al-Madrasah al-Islamiyyah (Islamic School) Risalatuna (Our Mission) Nazrah Ammah fi al-Ibadat (General View on Rites of Worship) Maqalat wa Muhazrat (Essays and Lectures) Articles [ edit ] "Al-'Amal wa al-Ahdaf" (The Deeds and the Goals): Min Fikr al- Da'wah. No. 13. Islamic Da'wah Party, central propagation, place and date of publication unknown.

"Al-'Amal al-Salih fi al-Quran" (The Proper Deeds According to Qur'an): Ikhtrna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1982 "Ahl al-Bayt: Tanawu' Adwar wa-Wihdat Hadaf" (The Household of the Prophet: Diversity of Roles But Unified Goal). Beirut: Dar al-Ta'ruf, 1985.

"Bahth Hawla al-Mahdi" (Thesis on Messiah). Beirut: Dar al- Ta'ruf, 1983.

"Bahth Hawla al-Wilayah" (Thesis on Rulership). Kuwait: Dar al- Tawhid, 1977.

"Da'watana il al-Islam Yajeb an Takun Enqilabiyah," (Our Call for Islam Must be Revolutionary): Fikr al-Da'wah, No. 13. Islamic Da'wah Party, central propagation, place and date of publication unknown.

"Dawr al-A'imah fi al-Hayat al-Islamiyah" (The Role of Imams in Muslims' Life): Ikhtarna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1982 "al-Dawlah al-Islamiyah" (The Islamic State), al-Jihad (March 14, 1983): 5 "Hawla al-Marhala al-Ula min 'Amal al-Da'wah" (On the First Stage of Da'wah Political Program): Min Fikr al-Da'wah. No. 13. Islamic Da'wah Party, central propagation, place and date of publishing unknown.

"Hawla al-Ism wa-al-Shakl al-Tanzimi li-Hizb al-Da'wah al- Islamiyah" (On the Name and the Structural Organization of the Islamic Da'wah Party): Min Fikr al-Da'wah. No. 13. Islamic Da'wah Party, central propagation, place and date of publication unknown.

"al-Huriyah fi al-Quran" (Freedom According to the Quran): Ikhtarna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1982 "al-Itijahat al-Mustaqbaliyah li-Harakat al-Ijtihad" (The Future Trends of the Process of Ijtihad): Ikhtarna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1980.

"al-Insan al-Mu'asir wa-al-Mushkilah al-Ijtima'yah" (Contemporary Man and the Social Problem) "al-Janib al-Iqtisadi Min al-Nizam al-Islami" (The Economic Perspective of the Islamic System): Ikhtarna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1982 "Khalafat al-Insan wa-Shahadat al-Anbia ' " (Victory Role of Man, and Witness Role of Prophets): al-Islam Yaqwod al-Hayat. Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"Khatut Tafsiliyah 'An Iqtisad al-Mujtama' al-Islami (General Basis of Economics of Islamic Society): al-Islam Yaqud al-Hayah. Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"Lamha fiqhiyah Hawla Dustur al-Jumhuriyah al-Islamiyah" (A Preliminary Jurisprudence Basis of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic): al-Islam Yaqwod al-Hayat Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"Madha Ta'ruf 'an al-Iqtisad al-Islami" (What Do You Know About Islamic Economics). al-Islam Yaqwod al-Hayat Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"Manabi' al-Qudra fi al-Dawlah al-Islamiyah" (The Sources of Power in an Islamic State). al-Islam Yaqwod al-Hayat Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"al-Mihna" (The Ordeal). Sawt al-Wihdah, Nos. 5, 6, 7. (n.d) "Minhaj al-Salihin" (The Path of the Righteous). Beirut: Dar al- Ta'aruf, 1980.

"Muqaddimat fi al-Tafsir al-Mawdu'i Lil-Quran" (Introductions in Thematic Exegesis of the Quran). Kuwait: Dar al- Tawjyyh al-Islami, 1980.

"Nazarah 'Amah fi al-'Ibadat" (General Outlook on Worship): al-Fatawa al-Wadhiha. Beirut: Dar al-Ta'aruf, 1981.

"al-Nazriyah al-Islamiyah li-Tawzi' al-Masadr al-Tabi'iyah" (Islamic Theory of Distribution of Natural Resources): Ikhtarna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1982.

"al-Nizam al-Islami Muqaranan bil-Nizam al-Ra'smali wa-al- Markisi" (The Islamic System Compared with The Capitalist and The Marxist Systems). Ikhtarna Lak. Beirut: Dar-al Zahra', 1982.

"Risalatuna wa-al-Da'wah" (Our Message and Our Sermon). Risalatuna. Beirut: al-Dar al-Islamiyah, 1981.

"Al-Shakhsiyah al-Islamiyah" (Muslim Personality): Min Fikr al-Da'wah al-Islamiyah (Of the Thoughts of Islamic Da'wah). No. 13. Islamic Da'wah Party, central propagation, place and date of publication unknown.

"Surah 'An Iqtisad al-Mujtama' al-Islami" (A Perspective on the Economy of Muslim Society). al-Islam Yaqwod al-Hayat Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"al-Usus al-Amah li-al-Bank fi al-Mujtam al-Islami" (The General Basis of Banks in Islamic Society). in al-Islam Yaqwod al-Hayat Iran: Islamic Ministry of Guidance, n.d.

"Utruhat al-Marja'iyah al-Salihah" (Thesis on Suitable Marja'iyah ). In Kazim al-Ha'iri, Mabahith fi 'Ilm al-Usul.Qum, Iran: n.p., 1988.

"al-Yaqin al-Riyadi wa-al-Mantiq al-Waz'i" (The Mathematic Certainty and the Phenomenal Logic): Ikhtrna Lak. Beirut: Dar al-Zahra', 1982.

"Preface to al-Sahifah al-Sajadiyah" (of Imam Ali ibn Hussein al-Sajad) Tehran: al-Maktabah al-Islamiyah al-Kubra, n.d.

Notable colleagues and students [ edit ] Hassan Nasrallah Iftikhar Hussain Ansari Muhammad Hussein Fadlullah Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim Muhammad Muhammad Sadiq as-Sadr Mohsen Araki Kazem al-Haeri Abbas al-Musawi Talib Jauhari Syed Sajid Ali Naqvi Allama Syed Zeeshan Haider Jawadi Muhammad al-Tijani See also [ edit ] Iraq portal Five Martyrs of Shia Islam Shahid Awwal Shahid Khamis Shahid Rabay Shahid Salis Shahid Thani Muhammad al-Tijani Sayyid Hibatuddin Shahrestani Citations [ edit ] ^ Baqir Al-Sadr, Our Philosophy , Taylor and Francis , 1987, p. xiii ^ a b c Al Asaad, Sondoss (April 9, 2018).

"38 Years After Saddam's Heinous Execution of the Phenomenal Philosopher Ayatollah Al-Sadr and his Sister" . moderndiplomacy.eu. Modern Diplomacy . Retrieved March 9, 2019 .

^ Karsh, Efraim (April 25, 2002).

The Iran–Iraq War: 1980–1988 . Osprey Publishing. pp.

1– 8, 12– 16, 19– 82.

ISBN 978-1841763712 .

^ Farrokh, Kaveh (December 20, 2011).

Iran at War: 1500–1988 . Oxford: Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-78096-221-4 .

^ a b c d e "Iraq's failed uprising after the 1979 Iranian revolution" . March 11, 2019.

^ Cockburn, Patrick (2008).

Muqtada Al-Sadr and the Battle for the Future of Iraq . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4391-4119-9 . Retrieved March 24, 2020 .

^ Filiu, Apocalypse in Islam , 2011 : p.143 ^ a b c Al Asaad, Sondoss (April 10, 2018).

"The ninth of April, the martyrdom of the Sadrs" . tehrantimes.com. Tehran Times . Retrieved March 9, 2019 .

^ a b c d Ramadani, Sami (August 24, 2004).

"There's more to Sadr than meets the eye" . theguardian.com.

The Guardian . Retrieved March 9, 2019 .

^ a b Aziz, T.M (May 1, 1993). "The Role of Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr in Shii Political Activism in Iraq from 1958 to 1980".

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

25 (2): 207– 222.

doi : 10.1017/S0020743800058499 .

JSTOR 164663 .

S2CID 162623601 .

^ Marlowe, Lara (January 6, 2007).

"Sectarianism laid bare" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved March 9, 2019 .

^ Abdul-Zahra, Qassim (February 1, 2025).

"Iraq arrests former security official over execution of Shiite cleric who opposed Saddam Hussein" .

AP News . Retrieved February 1, 2025 .

^ Nasr, Seyyed Husain (1989).

Expectation of the Millennium: Shi'ism in History . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-88706-843-0 . Retrieved March 22, 2020 .

^ Behdad, Sohrab; Nomani, Farhad (2006).

Islam and the Everyday World: Public Policy Dilemmas . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-20675-9 . Retrieved March 22, 2020 .

^ Muhammed Baqir Al-Sadr, Al-Islam yaqud al-hayat , Qum, 1979, p.132 ^ Walberg, Eric (2013).

From Postmodernism to Postsecularism: Re-emerging Islamic Civilization . SCB Distributors.

ISBN 978-0-9860362-4-8 . Retrieved March 22, 2020 .

^ Quran 5:44 ^ Baqir Al-Sadr, Al-Islam yaqud al-hayat , Qum, 1979, p.24 ^ Faleh A Jabar, The Shi'ite Movement in Iraq, London: Saqi Books, 2003, p.286 ^ Muhammed Baqir Al-Sadr, Lamha fiqhiya, p.20 ^ Muhammed Baqir Al-Sadr, Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence, London: ICAS, 2003, p.15 ^ Hadad, Sama (2008).

"The Development of Shi'ite Islamic Political Theory" .

Dissent and Reform in the Arab World . American Enterprise Institute: 32– 40 . Retrieved March 22, 2020 .

^ مؤذني, أميد (April 9, 2021).

"الشهيد محمد باقر الصدر، شخصية شاملة أذهلت المفكرين من مختلف أنحاء العالم" .

arabic.khamenei.ir (in Arabic) . Retrieved November 4, 2023 .

كذلك يمتلك الشهيد الصّدر مدرسة في الفلسفة، وقد نوقس فكره في المجال الفلسفي في مباحثه الأصوليّة إضافة إلى كتاب فلسفتنا، وبشكل خاصّ الإبداع المُذهل في الساحة المعرفية، أعني كتاب "الأسس المنطقية للاستقراء"، الكتاب الذي أذهل وأثار دهشة الكثيرين من المفكرين من بينهم زكي نجيب محمود الذي يُعدّ أحد أشهر أساتذة الفلسفة في العالم العربي ومن شخصيّات الأزهر الشريف، حيث كان يدعو بعض تلامذته إلى الشهيد الصدر ما دام حيّاً ليواصلوا العمل على أبحاث الدكتوراه الخاصّة بهم تحت إشرافه ويجعلوا الموضوع "الأسس المنطقية للاستقراء" الذي كان حدثاً جديداً للغاية تمكّن من فتح مجال جديد في مجال الفلسفة على المستوى العالمي. هذا الكتاب شديد التعقيد وفيه الكثير من الأفكار الإبداعيّة الحديثة التي تعالج مشكلات بقيت لقرون في دائرة الفلسفة، وقد فتح أبواباً جديدة في الفكر الفلسفي وفي معرض الردّ على الأسئلة الجذريّة.

^ الحيدري, كمال (December 1, 2021).

"تأملات في كتاب "الأسس المنطقية للإستقراء" " .

مركز الأبحاث والدراسات التخصصية للشهيد الصدر (in Arabic) . Retrieved November 17, 2023 .

هذه بعض التأملات والاثارات التي أشير اليها فيما يرتبط بكتاب (الأسس المنطقية للإستقراء) لاستاذنا الشهيد الصدر (والذي لعلّه يعد أضخم مجهود فكري على مستوى نظرية المعرفة في التأريخ الاسلامي).

^ الرفاعي, عبد الجبار (December 3, 2021).

"مدخل منهجي لأطروحة الأسس المنطقية للاستقراء" .

مركز الأبحاث والدراسات التخصصية للشهيد الصدر (in Arabic) . Retrieved November 17, 2023 .

تمركز المشروع الفكري الأساسي في أعمال الشهيد الصدر! على إعادة تشكيل النظام المعرفي الذي تستند إليه مجموعة الرؤى والأفكار، حيث تمثّل هذا المشروع في كتاب «الأسس المنطقيّة للاستقراء»، الذي خصّص الإمام الصدر! سنواتٍ عديدةً من عمره الشريف للتفكير في بنائه النظريّ[6]، وإشادة أركانه، وإكمال صياغته، بعد أن درّسه للنابهين من تلامذته، ووجّههم نحو الدور الكبير الذي ينبغي أن يناط بالمذهب المعرفيّ الذي بشّر به هذا الكتاب[7]، حيث يشتمل هذا الكتاب «على أبدع أفكار وابتكارات الشهيد الإمام محمد باقر الصدر! وهو من أحلى ثمار ذهن الشهيد الصدر!، الذهن الوقّاد الباحث والمبدع، ويمكن القول بجرأة إنّ هذا الكتاب أوّل كتاب في تاريخ الثقافة الإسلامية حرّره فقيهٌ مسلمٌ متناولاً فيه إحدى أهمّ مشكلات «فلسفة العلم والمنهج العلميّ» المصيريّة، مع وضوح وبصيرة وشمول في عرض ونقد نظريّات حكماء الغرب والشرق..»[8]، مضافاً إلى أنّه «كتابٌ تحقيقيٌّ علميٌّ لفقيه فيلسوف، أثبت عمق بصيرته ودقّة فكره، في ميدان قضايا الفلسفة الحديثة، ويشتمل الكتاب على ابتكارات وإبداعات تليق لطرحها على مستوى النوادي العلميّة العالميّة. إنّ هجمات الشهيد الصدر! الجريئة والمدروسة على أغوال نظير «لاپلاس» و«كينـز» و«رسل»، وفي قضيّة في غاية التعقيد والدقّة، أثبتت شجاعته الفكريّة، واقتداره العلمي..»[9].

^ فرج, مرتضى (2022).

الاعتقاد العقلاني والاحتمال (1st ed.). دار روافد.

ISBN 9786144805657 .

^ Walbridge, Linda S. (2001).

The Most Learned of the Shi'a: The Institution of the Marja Taqlid . USA: Oxford University Press. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-19-513799-6 .

^ "The Super Genius Personality of Islam" . Archived from the original on October 5, 2016 . Retrieved August 22, 2009 .

^ This has been translated into English twice: by Roy Mottahedeh as Lessons in Islamic Jurisprudence (2005) ISBN 978-1-85168-393-2 (Part 1 only) and anonymously as The Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence according to Shi'i Law (2003) ISBN 978-1-904063-12-4 .

Sources [ edit ] Mallat, Chibli. "Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr".

Pioneers of Islamic Revival . Ali Rahnema (ed.). London: Zed Books, 1994 v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muhammad_Baqir_al-Sadr&oldid=1299626122 " Categories : 1935 births 1980 deaths 20th-century executions by Iraq Iraqi Shia clerics Iraqi people of Lebanese descent Islamic philosophers Iraqi ayatollahs People from Kadhimiya Iraqi Shia Muslims Musawis Islamic Dawa Party politicians Shia scholars of Islam Iraqi Islamists Shia Islamists Executed politicians Executed philosophers People executed by Iraq by hanging Twelvers Iraqi dissidents Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2020 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Arabic-language text All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from April 2022 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2022 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from April 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2022 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 13:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr 23 languages Add topic

