Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variations Toggle Variations subsection 1.1 Community of acquests and gains 1.2 Community of profit and loss 1.3 Community of personal and marital property 1.4 Limited community property 1.5 Universal or absolute community property 2 Jurisdictions Toggle Jurisdictions subsection 2.1 Custom of Paris in New France 2.2 Russia 2.3 South Africa 2.4 United States 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Community property 9 languages Čeština ChiShona Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano Polski اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marital property regime Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Community property (United States) also called community of property (South Africa) is a marital property regime whereby property acquired during a marriage is considered to be owned by both spouses and subject to division between them in the event of divorce. Conversely, property owned by one spouse before the marriage, along with gifts and inheritances they receive during marriage, are treated as that spouse's separate property in the event of divorce. In some cases, separate property can be "transmuted" into community property, or be included in the marital estate for reasons of equity. Community property can also be relevant in probate law, during the disposition of a will .

The concept of community property originated in civil law jurisdictions but is now also found in some common law jurisdictions. Community property regimes can be found in countries around the world including Sweden , [ 1 ] Germany , [ 2 ] Italy , [ 3 ] France , [ 4 ] South Africa [ 5 ] and parts of the United States .

[ 6 ] In civil law countries such as Spain, France and Germany, spouses can generally select one of several matrimonial regimes to divide property, with community property being one option, along with the separate property system and a participation system .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Variations [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Further information: Matrimonial regime Community of acquests and gains [ edit ] Each spouse owns an undivided half-interest in all property acquired during the marriage, except for property acquired by gift or inheritance during the marriage, which is separate property; or which traces to separate property acquired before the marriage, which remains separate property; or which is acquired during a period when the couple are permanently living separately and apart (e.g., legal separation, actual, or de facto ), which is also separate property.  This genre of community property is also called "ganancial community property." French : communauté réduite aux acquêts Spanish : sociedad de gananciales Dutch : gemeenschap van aanwinst van goederen Dutch : gemeenschap van vruchten en inkomsten German : Errungenschaftsgemeinschaft Italian : comunione degli acquisti Community of profit and loss [ edit ] This is similar to the above, but liabilities ("losses") are separate property.

Dutch : gemeenschap van winst en verlies Afrikaans : gemeenskap van wins en verlies Community of personal and marital property [ edit ] Community property consists of all property, personalty and realty, acquired during the marriage; and all personalty acquired before the marriage. Realty acquired before marriage is separate property.

French : communauté de meubles et acquêts Dutch : gemeenschap van inboedel German : Fahrnisgemeinschaft Limited community property [ edit ] Similar to community of acquests and gains but certain marital property is separate property.

French : communauté de biens limitée Dutch : beperkte gemeenschap van goederen Swiss Standard German : Ausschlussgemeinschaft Universal or absolute community property [ edit ] All pre-marital and marital property is community property. However, if there are children from a prior marriage, the property associated with that marital community may be segregated from the community property of a subsequent marriage, to ensure the children of the prior spouse have an inheritance.

French : communauté universelle Spanish : comunidad absoluta de bienes Dutch : algehele gemeenschap van goederen German : allgemeine Gütergemeinschaft Italian : comunione universale dei beni Jurisdictions [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2019 ) Custom of Paris in New France [ edit ] Main article: Marriage community This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2019 ) Russia [ edit ] In Russia, community property was introduced by the Soviet government in 1926. Prior to that, laws evolved by the late 18th century dictated separate property regime, so a married woman was (at least in theory) in full charge of her property, including the dowry and whatever she acquired personally during the marriage. The new Soviet system replaced this with a limited form of community property, namely community of acquisitions , and it survives to the present day. The only significant change, made in 1995, was the introduction of marital agreement which didn't exist under the Soviet law. Such an agreement may be signed at any time before or after conclusion of the marriage. It may regulate the spouses' rights on a basis entirely alien to the statutory regime, but shouldn't put any of them (especially one who cannot provide for themselves) into a clearly unfavorable position.

[ 10 ] South Africa [ edit ] Main article: Marriage in South Africa § Financial consequences In South Africa, if a couple does not sign an antenuptial contract, before a notary public , which is subsequently registered at a deeds office , prior to marriage, they are married in community of property, which means that all of their assets and liabilities (even those acquired before the marriage) are merged into a joint estate during their marriage, in which each spouse has an undivided half-share. Each spouse has equal power to deal independently with the estate, except that certain major transactions require the consent of both spouses.

[ 11 ] One of the consequences of community of property in South Africa is that if one spouse is declared insolvent (bankrupt) during the marriage, the other also becomes insolvent, a potentially devastating consequence.

[ 12 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Community property in the United States Map of the United States with community property states in red. Additionally, Alaska , Florida , Kentucky , and Tennessee are elective community property states, and of the five inhabited US territories, Puerto Rico and Guam are community property jurisdictions.

The United States has nine community property states: Arizona , California , Idaho , Louisiana , Nevada , New Mexico , Texas , Washington , and Wisconsin .

[ 13 ] Four other states have adopted optional community property systems.

Alaska allows spouses to create community property by entering into a community property agreement or by creating a community property trust.

[ 14 ] In 2010, Tennessee adopted a law similar to Alaska's and allows residents and non-residents to opt into community property through a community property trust.

[ 15 ] More recently, Kentucky adopted an optional community property system in 2020, allowing residents and non-residents to establish community property trusts.

[ 16 ] Finally, in 2021 Florida adopted a similar law, allowing citizens and noncitizens to establish community property trusts.

[ 17 ] The commonwealth of Puerto Rico allows property to be owned as community property also [ 13 ] as do several Native American jurisdictions.

Division of community property may take place by item by splitting all items or by values. In some jurisdictions, such as California , a 50/50 division of community property is strictly mandated by statute [ 18 ] so the focus then shifts to whether particular items are to be classified as community or separate property. In other jurisdictions, such as Texas , a divorce court may decree an " equitable distribution " of community property, which may result in an unequal division of such. In non-community property states property may be divided by equitable distribution. Generally speaking, the property that each partner brings into the marriage or receives by gift, bequest or devise during marriage is called separate property (not community property). See division of property . Division of community debts may not be the same as division of community property. For example, in California, community property is required to be divided "equally" while community debt is required to be divided "equitably".

[ 19 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Morley, Jeremy.

"Marrying a Swede? Or Swedish and Getting Married? Don't You Need a Prenuptial Agreement?" .

^ "Is there a statutory matrimonial property regime and if so, what does it provide? - Couples in Germany" .

www.coupleseurope.eu .

^ "Is there a statutory matrimonial property regime and if so, what does it provide? - Couples in Italy" .

www.coupleseurope.eu .

^ "Is there a statutory matrimonial property regime and if so, what does it provide? - Couples in France" .

www.coupleseurope.eu .

^ "Marriage in Community of property - Family law" .

^ "Marital Property: Who Owns What?" .

Findlaw .

^ Gerhard, Ute (1997).

Frauen in der Geschichte des Rechts von der frühen Neuzeit bis zur Gegenwart (in German). München.

ISBN 978-3-406-42866-1 .

OCLC 243866547 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Ramos Pazos, René (2007).

Derecho de Familia . Santiago: Editorial Jurídica de Chile. pp. 158–160.

^ Tous, P., and Éric Fongaro.

Droit international privé patrimonial de la famille . LexisNexis, 2017.

^ Prof. Masha Antokolskaia (2008).

"Property relationship between spouses — Russia" (PDF) . CEFL Online . Retrieved 24 September 2022 .

^ "Marriage: the legal aspects" (PDF) . Law Society of South Africa. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 2 February 2013 .

^ "Getting Married in Community of Property – Your Rights and Liabilities" .

^ a b "Internal Revenue Manual – 25.18.1 Basic Principles of Community Property Law" .

www.irs.gov . Retrieved 2016-08-05 .

^ See Alaska Stat. §§ 34.77.020 – 34.77.995 ^ McDaniel, A. Stephen; Adams Jr, C. Michael.

"Community Property Joint Revocable Trust" (PDF) . Wyatt Tarrant & Combs.

^ Kentucky Revised Statutes §§ 386.620 , 622 , 624 .

^ Moore, Blakely.

"Everything You Need to Know About Florida's Community Property Trust Act" . PTM Trust and Estate Law.

^ See California Family Code section 2550 .

^ See In re Marriage of Eastis , 47 Cal. App. 3d 459 (1975).

References [ edit ] Gail Boreman-Bird.

Cases and Materials on California Community Property , 10th edn. Revised by Jo Carrillo. St. Paul, Minn.: West Academic Publishing, 2011.

Jo Carrillo.

Understanding California Community Property Law . New Providence, NJ: LexisNexis, 2015.

Jan P Charmatz & Harriet Spiller Daggett, eds.

Comparative Studies in Community Property Law . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1955 (repr: Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1977).

Charlotte K. Goldberg.

Examples & Explanations: California Community Property , 5th edn. NY: Wolters Kluwer, 2016.

Robert L. Mennell & Jo Carrillo.

Community Property in a Nutshell , 3rd edn. St. Paul, Minn.: West Academic Publishing, 2014.

William A. Reppy Jr.

Community Property , 18th edn. Chicago: Thomson/BarBri Group, 2003.

William A. Reppy Jr., Cynthia A. Samuel, & Sally Brown Richardson.

Community Property in the United States , 8th edn. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2015.

v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐ftmb9
Cached time: 20250814214836
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.563 seconds
Real time usage: 0.703 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1697/1000000
Revision size: 13991/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 81406/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1039/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77570/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.401/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16647167/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  607.021      1 -total
 24.69%  149.844      1 Template:Reflist
 21.84%  132.582     19 Template:Langx
 20.37%  123.623     12 Template:Cite_web
 14.02%   85.102      1 Template:Property_law
 13.68%   83.015      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.89%   66.101      1 Template:Short_description
  8.43%   51.192      1 Template:Property_navbox
  8.33%   50.542      2 Template:Navbox
  8.01%   48.603      1 Template:Unreferenced_section Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:219872:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214836 and revision id 1293835211. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_property&oldid=1293835211 " Categories : Property law Marriage law Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Afrikaans-language text Articles containing Swiss Standard German-language text Articles to be expanded from January 2019 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 23:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Community property 9 languages Add topic

