Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Magic words Toggle Magic words subsection 2.1 Udug-hul 3 In folklore and fiction 4 Modern uses and interpretations 5 Examples of charms 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Incantation 40 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lombard Nederlands Олык марий Polski Русский Sicilianu Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formula intended to trigger a magical effect For other uses, see Incantation (disambiguation) .

"Spellcasting" redirects here. For the video game series, see Spellcasting (series) .

"Spellcraft" redirects here. For the video game, see Spellcraft: Aspects of Valor .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Incantation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 19th century book of incantations, written by a Welsh physician An incantation , spell , charm , enchantment , or bewitchery is a magical formula intended to trigger a magical effect on a person or objects. The formula can be spoken, sung, or chanted . An incantation can also be performed during ceremonial rituals or prayers . In the world of magic, wizards , witches , and fairies are common performers of incantations in culture and folklore.

[ 1 ] In medieval literature , folklore , fairy tales , and modern fantasy fiction, enchantments are charms or spells. This has led to the terms "enchanter" and "enchantress" for those who use enchantments.

[ 2 ] The English language borrowed the term "incantation" from Old French in the late 14th century; the corresponding Old English term was gealdor or galdor , "song, spell", cognate to ON galdr . The weakened sense "delight" (compare the same development of "charm") is modern, first attested in 1593 ( OED ).

Words of incantation are often spoken with inflection and emphasis on the words being said. The tone and rhyme of how the words are spoken and the placement of words used in the formula may differ depending on the desired outcome of the magical effect.

[ 3 ] Surviving written records of historical magic spells were largely obliterated in many cultures by the success of the major monotheistic religions ( Islam , Judaism , and Christianity ), which label some magical activity as immoral or associated with evil.

[ 4 ] [ unreliable source?

] Etymology [ edit ] The Enchanted Garden of Messer Ansaldo by Marie Spartali Stillman The Latin incantāre , which meant “to consecrate with spells, to charm, to bewitch, to ensorcel” among other meanings, is the source of the English verb incant (“to chant solemnly or recite an incantation”) as well as the derived noun incantation . From the same Latin word via Old French also comes English enchant (the original meaning of enchantment is the casting of a magic spell or the effects thereof (on a person), now less common than the more figurative and positive meaning due to semantic drift ), making it a doublet with incant . Latin incantāre is a prefixed form of the root word cantāre , which meant “to sing or chant”, itself going back to the Proto-Indo-European root *kan- “to sing, to cry out”, likely onomatopoeic for the sound of a calling voice.

Magic words [ edit ] Classic magic words Main article: Magic word Magic words or words of power are words which have a specific, and sometimes unintended, effect. They are often nonsense phrases used in fantasy fiction or by stage prestidigitators . Frequently such words are presented as being part of a divine , adamic , or other secret or empowered language . Certain comic book heroes use magic words to activate their powers.

Examples of traditional magic words include Abracadabra , Alakazam , Hocus Pocus , Open Sesame and Sim Sala Bim .

In Babylonian, incantations can be used in rituals to burn images of one's own enemies. An example would be found in the series of Mesopotamian incantations of Šurpu and Maqlû . In the Orient, the charming of snakes have been used in incantations of the past and still used today. A person using an incantation would entice the snake out of its hiding place in order to get rid of them.

[ 1 ] Udug-hul [ edit ] Main article: Udug In Mesopotamian mythology, Udug Hul incantations are used to exorcise demons (evil Udug) who bring misfortune or illnesses, such as mental illness or anxiety. These demons can create horrible events such as divorce, loss of property, or other catastrophes.

[ 5 ] In folklore and fiction [ edit ] The enchantress Alcina makes herself appear beautiful, in Orlando Furioso .

In traditional fairy tales magical formulas are sometimes attached to an object.

[ citation needed ] When the incantation is uttered, it helps transform the object. In such stories, incantations are attached to a magic wand used by wizards, witches and fairy godmothers . One example is the spell that Cinderella 's Fairy Godmother used to turn a pumpkin into a coach, " Bibbidi-Bobbidi-Boo ", a nonsense rhyme which echoes more serious historical incantations.

[ 6 ] Modern uses and interpretations [ edit ] The performance of magic almost always involves the use of language. Whether spoken out loud or unspoken, words are frequently used to access or guide magical power. In The Magical Power of Words (1968), S. J. Tambiah argues that the connection between language and magic is due to a belief in the inherent ability of words to influence the universe. Bronisław Malinowski, in Coral Gardens and their Magic (1935), suggests that this belief is an extension of man's basic use of language to describe his surroundings, in which "the knowledge of the right words, appropriate phrases and the more highly developed forms of speech, gives man a power over and above his own limited field of personal action." [ 7 ] : 235 Magical speech is therefore a ritual act and is of equal or even greater importance to the performance of magic than non-verbal acts.

[ 8 ] : 175–176 Not all speech is considered magical. Only certain words and phrases or words spoken in a specific context are considered to have magical power.

[ 8 ] : 176 Magical language, according to C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards 's (1923) categories of speech, is distinct from scientific language because it is emotive and it converts words into symbols for emotions; whereas in scientific language words are tied to specific meanings and refer to an objective external reality.

[ 8 ] : 188 Magical language is therefore particularly adept at constructing metaphors that establish symbols and link magical rituals to the world.

[ 8 ] : 189 Malinowski argues that "the language of magic is sacred, set and used for an entirely different purpose to that of ordinary life." [ 7 ] : 213 The two forms of language are differentiated through word choice, grammar, style, or by the use of specific phrases or forms: prayers , spells, songs , blessings , or chants , for example. Sacred modes of language often employ archaic words and forms in an attempt to invoke the purity or "truth" of a religious or a cultural "golden age". The use of Hebrew in Judaism is an example.

[ 8 ] : 182 Another potential source of the power of words is their secrecy and exclusivity. Much sacred language is differentiated enough from common language that it is incomprehensible to the majority of the population and it can only be used and interpreted by specialized practitioners ( magicians , priests , shamans , or Imams ).

[ 7 ] : 228 [ 8 ] : 178 In this respect, Tambiah argues that magical languages violate the primary function of language: communication.

[ 8 ] : 179 Yet adherents of magic are still able to use and to value the magical function of words by believing in the inherent power of the words themselves and in the meaning that they must provide for those who do understand them. This leads Tambiah to conclude that "the remarkable disjunction between sacred and profane language which exists as a general fact is not necessarily linked to the need to embody sacred words in an exclusive language." [ 8 ] : 182 Examples of charms [ edit ] A complete history of magik, sorcery, and wi Wellcome L0026620 The Anglo-Saxon metrical charms Thoth's Tarot Card deck by Aleister Crowley The Carmina Gadelica , a collection of Gaelic oral poetry , much of it charms The Atharvaveda , a collection of charms, and the Rigveda , a collection of hymns or incantations Hittite ritual texts The Greek Magical Papyri Maqlû ,  Akkadian incantation text The Merseburg charms , two medieval magic spells, charms written in Old High German Cyprianus , a generic term for a book of Scandinavian folk spells Pow-Wows; or, Long Lost Friend Babylonian incantations [ 9 ] Mesopotamian incantations were composed to counter anything from witchcraft ( Maqlû ) to field pests ( Zu-buru-dabbeda ).

See also [ edit ] Carmen , a term for an Ancient Roman incantation Curse (disambiguation) Dharani , common term for Mahayana Buddhist mantras Finnic incantations Hex (disambiguation) Incantations in the Harry Potter series Incantation bowl , an ancient Middle Eastern protective magical tool Jinx (disambiguation) Kotodama , the Japanese belief in the power of words and names Lorica , Irish protective prayer Mantra , a sacred sound, word, or phrase, often repeated multiple times, in meditation Paritta , common term for Theravada Buddhist mantras Spell (ritual) Yajna , Hindu sacrificial offering Zagovory , East Slavic spells References [ edit ] ^ a b Cushman, Stephen (2012).

Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics : Fourth Edition . Princeton, ProQuest Ebook Central: Princeton University Press. p. 681.

^ Conley, Craig (2008).

Magic Words, A Dictionary . San Francisco: Weiser Books. p. 40.

ISBN 978-1-57863-434-7 .

^ Conley, Craig (2008).

Magic Words:a dictionary . San Francisco: Weiser Books. pp.

23– 27.

ISBN 978-1-57863-434-7 .

^ Davies, Owen (8 April 2009).

"The top 10 grimoires" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 24 October 2017 .

^ Markham, Geller (2015).

Healing Magic and Evil Demons : Canonical Udug-Hul Incantations . De Gruyter, Inc. pp.

3– 5.

ISBN 9781614515326 .

^ Garry, Jane (2005).

Archetypes and Motifs in Folklore and Literature . Armonk: M.E. Sharp. p. 162.

ISBN 0-7656-1260-7 .

^ a b c Malinowski, Bronislaw (2013).

Coral Gardens and Their Magic: A Study of the Methods of Tilling the Soil and of Agricultural Rites in the Trobriand Islands . Hoboken, New Jersey: Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 978-1136417733 .

^ a b c d e f g h Tambiah, S. J. (June 1968). "The Magical Power of Words".

Man .

3 (2): 175– 208.

doi : 10.2307/2798500 .

JSTOR 2798500 .

^ "The Recordings: BAPLAR: SOAS" .

speechisfire.com . Archived from the original on 2011-07-16 . Retrieved 2010-06-19 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Incantations at Wikimedia Commons v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category v t e Magic and witchcraft Types Region Africa Azande Ghana Witch smeller Asia Jhākri Philippines Europe Italy Akelarre Benandanti Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva Witch-cult hypothesis Anglo-Saxon England Britain Latin America Middle East Oceania Mākutu Form Chaos magic Goetia Hoodoo Medieval Neopagan Wicca Renaissance Solitary practitioner Warlock Witch doctor Practices Animism Apotropaic magic Black magic Ceremonial magic Magical formula Coven Curse Anathema Damnation Jinx Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Gray magic Incantation Jinn Love magic Mediumship Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Shamanism Black Regional Yellow Sex magic Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Sympathetic magic Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Athame Broom besom Censer Cloak of invisibility Crystal ball Flying ointment Goofer dust Grimoire Incense Julleuchter Kitchen witch Love charm Magic carpet Magic circle Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Mojo bag Nkisi Nkondi Poppet Potions Sator Square Talisman Wand Witch ball Witch's ladder Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Circe Dayan Drude Elbow witch Hecate Huld Kalku Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Pasiphaë Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witches of Benevento Witch of Endor Yama-uba Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Persecution Modern Jamyi Witch hiring controversy accusations against children India Nepal Papua New Guinea Witch camp Early Modern Americas Maryland New York Salem Virginia Eastern Europe Hungary Northern Moravia Poland Russia Northern Europe Baltic Denmark England Finland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Western Europe France Geneva Italy Spain Basque Classical Witch trials in the Holy Roman Empire Related Witch hunt Witch's mark Pricking List of people executed for witchcraft In popular culture Magic in fiction Witches in fiction Related Witch (word) Witch (archetype) Christian views on magic Magical organization Maleficium Left-hand path and right-hand path Feminist interpretations of witch trials in the early modern period Folk religion Adept v t e Neopagan witchcraft History History of Wicca Etymology of Wicca Wicca and LGBT people Dettmer v. Landon Traditions British Traditional Alexandrian Wicca Blue Star Wicca Central Valley Wicca Chthonioi Alexandrian Wicca Gardnerian Wicca Other 1734 Tradition Celtic Wicca Church and School of Wicca Cochrane's Craft Coven of Atho Dianic Wicca Faery Wicca Feri Georgian Wicca Odyssean Wicca Reclaiming Seax-Wica Stregheria Universal Eclectic Wicca Notable figures Gerald Gardner Doreen Valiente Alex Sanders Maxine Sanders Sybil Leek Dafo Margot Adler Victor Anderson Artemis Gavin Bone Lois Bourne Jack Bracelin Raymond Buckland Eddie Buczynski Zsuzsanna Budapest Charles Cardell Ipsita Roy Chakraverti Patricia Crowther Vivianne Crowley Robert Cochrane Scott Cunningham Phyllis Curott Cerridwen Fallingstar Janet Farrar Stewart Farrar Raven Grimassi Gavin Frost Yvonne Frost Philip Heselton Frederic Lamond Rosaleen Norton Silver RavenWolf Starhawk Joseph Wilson Deities Triple Goddess Horned God Green Man Spirit of nature Holly King / Oak King Mother goddess Key concepts Wicca Wiccan morality Wiccan Rede Rule of Three Wiccan views of divinity Coven Craft name Magic Witchcraft White magic Otherworld The Summerland Reincarnation Karma Skyclad Summoner Watchtower Familiar Animism Rites and ritual Drawing down the Moon Great rite Handfasting Wiccaning Fivefold kiss Magic circle Cone of power Herbal medicine Scrying Spellwork / Incantation Banishing Divination Invocation Initiation Rite of passage Eko Eko Azarak Solitary practitioner Spiral dance Holidays Wheel of the Year Solstice Equinox Imbolc Ostara Beltane Midsummer Lughnasadh Mabon Samhain Yule Esbat Wild Hunt Paraphernalia Magical tools in Wicca Altar Amulet Athame Bell Besom Boline Book of Shadows Candles Cauldron Censer Chalice/Goblet Horn Incense Parchment Pentacle Runes Scourge Statue Talisman Tarot deck Wand Witch's ladder Literature Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches The Meaning of Witchcraft The Spiral Dance What Witches Do Witchcraft Today Charge of the Goddess Enchanted Feminism Related List of Wiccan organisations Bricket Wood coven New Forest coven Neopagan witchcraft Witch-cult hypothesis Left-hand path and right-hand path Cunning folk in Britain European witchcraft Malleus Maleficarum Granny woman Cunning folk Magical alphabets Runes Theban Hebrew Witching hour Witch hunt Witches' Sabbath Flying ointment Museum of Witchcraft and Magic Witchcraft Research Association v t e Paganism (and modern paganism ) Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions ( list ) (existing and extinct) Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawèn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Scythian Slavic Uralic Baltic Finnic Hungarian Mari Sami Middle-Eastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Māori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan Sub-Saharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern paganism ( movements ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu Italo-Roman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochrane's Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blót Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8fjwk
Cached time: 20250817222920
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.656 seconds
Real time usage: 0.850 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5438/1000000
Revision size: 12821/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 244120/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3422/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83515/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.374/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21859080/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  641.340      1 -total
 20.49%  131.383      1 Template:Reflist
 20.35%  130.538     18 Template:Navbox
 14.61%   93.682      6 Template:Cite_book
 13.05%   83.709      7 Template:Wktl
 11.67%   74.816      1 Template:Fantasy_fiction
 10.55%   67.651      1 Template:Short_description
  8.48%   54.362     11 Template:Rp
  7.66%   49.127     11 Template:R/superscript
  7.42%   47.597      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:766715:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222920 and revision id 1305766627. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Incantation&oldid=1305766627 " Categories : Incantation Magic (supernatural) Magic rituals Prayer Witchcraft Recurrent elements in fairy tales Fantasy tropes Recurring elements in folklore Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 00:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Incantation 40 languages Add topic

