Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Political alignment 3 Outlets Toggle Outlets subsection 3.1 Television 3.2 Radio 3.3 Online 3.4 Fox Nation 4 Ratings and reception Toggle Ratings and reception subsection 4.1 Demographics 4.2 Wikipedia consensus on reliability 5 Slogan 6 Content Toggle Content subsection 6.1 Benghazi attack and aftermath 6.2 Uranium One 6.3 Pro-Republican and pro-Trump bias 6.4 Coverage of Russia investigation 6.5 False claims about other media 6.5.1 CNN's Jake Tapper 6.5.2 The New York Times 6.6 Climate change 6.7 Murder of Seth Rich conspiracy 6.8 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville 6.9 Glenn Beck's comments about George Soros 6.10 COVID-19 pandemic 6.11 2020 election fraud allegations and lawsuits by Dominion and Smartmatic 6.12 Compulsory reductions in meat consumption 6.13 Report that Biden administration was continuing to build the Mexico–United States border wall 6.14 Crime reporting 7 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 7.1 Sexual harassment 7.2 Obama administration conflict 7.3 Journalistic ethical standards 7.4 NYC Human Rights Law violations 7.5 Climate denial and misinformation 8 International transmission Toggle International transmission subsection 8.1 Australia 8.2 Brazil 8.3 Canada 8.4 France 8.5 India 8.6 Indonesia 8.7 Ireland 8.8 Israel 8.9 Italy 8.10 Japan 8.11 Mexico 8.12 Netherlands 8.13 New Zealand 8.14 Pakistan 8.15 Philippines 8.16 Portugal 8.17 Scandinavia 8.18 Singapore 8.19 South Africa 8.20 Spain 8.21 United Kingdom and Ireland 9 Notable personalities Toggle Notable personalities subsection 9.1 Program hosts 9.2 Correspondents and substitute anchors 9.3 Regular guests and contributors 9.4 Former hosts and contributors 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Fox News 61 languages Alemannisch Ænglisc العربية Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative cable news channel For other uses, see Fox News (disambiguation) .

Television channel Fox News Channel Country United States Broadcast area United States Canada Headquarters 1211 Avenue of the Americas New York City , New York 10036 Programming Language(s) English Picture format 720p ( 16:9 HDTV ) [ 1 ] Ownership Owner News Corporation (1996–2013) 21st Century Fox (2013–2019) Fox Corporation (2019–present) Parent Fox News Media Sister channels Fox Business Network Fox Weather Fox Broadcasting Company LiveNOW from Fox History Launched October 7, 1996 ; 28 years ago ( 1996-10-07 ) [ 2 ] Links Website foxnews .com Availability Streaming media Affiliated Streaming Service(s) Fox One Online stream Fox News Go (pay-TV subscribers only) Service(s) DirecTV Stream , Fox One, Hulu + Live TV , Sling TV , YouTube TV The Fox News Channel ( FNC ), commonly known as Fox News , is an American multinational conservative news and political commentary television channel and website based in New York City , U.S.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It is owned by Fox News Media , which itself is owned by Fox Corporation .

[ 5 ] It is the most-watched cable news network in the U.S., [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and as of 2023 it generates approximately 70% of its parent company's pre-tax profit.

[ 8 ] The channel broadcasts primarily from studios at 1211 Avenue of the Americas in Midtown Manhattan . Fox News provides service to 86 countries and territories, [ 9 ] with international broadcasts featuring Fox Extra segments during advertising breaks.

[ 10 ] The channel was created by Australian-born American media mogul Rupert Murdoch in 1996 to appeal to a conservative audience, hiring former Republican media consultant and CNBC executive Roger Ailes as its founding CEO.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] It launched on October 7, 1996, to 17-million cable subscribers .

[ 13 ] Fox News grew during the late 1990s and 2000s to become the dominant United States cable news subscription network.

[ 14 ] By September 2018, 87-million U.S. households (91% of television subscribers) could receive Fox News.

[ 15 ] In 2019, it was the top-rated cable network, averaging 2.5-million viewers in prime time.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Murdoch, the executive chairman since 2016, [ 19 ] [ 20 ] said in 2023 that he would step down and hand responsibilities to his son, Lachlan .

[ 21 ] Suzanne Scott has been the CEO since 2018.

[ 22 ] It has been identified as engaging in biased and false reporting in favor of the Republican Party, its politicians, and conservative causes, [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] while portraying the Democratic Party in a negative light.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Researchers have argued that the channel is damaging to the integrity of news overall, [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and acts de facto as the broadcasting arm of the Republican Party.

[ 26 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] The channel has knowingly endorsed false conspiracy theories to promote Republican and conservative causes.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] These include, but are not limited to, false claims regarding fraud with Dominion voting machines during their reporting on the 2020 presidential election , [ 36 ] [ 37 ] climate change denial , [ a ] and COVID-19 misinformation .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] It has also been involved in multiple controversies , including accusations of permitting sexual harassment and racial discrimination by on-air hosts, executives, and employees, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] ultimately paying out millions of dollars in legal settlements.

[ 44 ] History Main article: History of Fox News In May 1985, Australian publisher Rupert Murdoch announced that he and American industrialist and philanthropist Marvin Davis intended to develop "a network of independent stations as a fourth marketing force" to directly compete with CBS , NBC , and ABC through the purchase of six television stations owned by Metromedia .

[ 45 ] In July 1985, 20th Century Fox announced Murdoch had completed his purchase of 50% of Fox Filmed Entertainment , the parent company of 20th Century Fox Film Corporation.

[ 46 ] Subsequently, and prior to founding FNC, Murdoch had gained experience in the 24-hour news business when News Corporation 's BSkyB subsidiary began Europe's first 24-hour news channel ( Sky News ) in the United Kingdom in 1989.

[ 47 ] With the success of his efforts establishing Fox as a TV network in the United States, [ 48 ] [ 49 ] experience gained from Sky News and the turnaround of 20th Century Fox, Murdoch announced on January 30, 1996, that News Corp. would launch a 24-hour news channel on cable and satellite systems in the United States as part of a News Corp. "worldwide platform" for Fox programming: "The appetite for news – particularly news that explains to people how it affects them – is expanding enormously".

[ 50 ] In February 1996, after former U.S. Republican Party political strategist and NBC executive [ 51 ] Roger Ailes left cable television channel America's Talking (now MSNBC ), Murdoch asked him to start Fox News Channel. Ailes demanded five months of 14-hour workdays and several weeks of rehearsal shows before its launch on October 7, 1996.

[ 2 ] At its debut 17-million households were able to watch FNC; [ 13 ] however, it was absent from the largest U.S. media markets of New York City and Los Angeles. Rolling news coverage during the day consisted of 20-minute single-topic shows such as Fox on Crime or Fox on Politics , surrounded by news headlines. Interviews featured facts at the bottom of the screen about the topic or the guest. The flagship newscast at the time was The Schneider Report , with Mike Schneider 's fast-paced delivery of the news. During the evening, Fox featured opinion shows: The O'Reilly Report (later The O'Reilly Factor ), The Crier Report (hosted by Catherine Crier ) and Hannity & Colmes . From the beginning, FNC has placed heavy emphasis on visual presentation. Graphics were designed to be colorful and gain attention; this helped the viewer to grasp the main points of what was being said, even if they could not hear the host (with on-screen text summarizing the position of the interviewer or speaker, and "bullet points" when a host was delivering commentary). Fox News also created the "Fox News Alert", which interrupted its regular programming when a breaking news story occurred.

[ citation needed ] Fox News Studios in 2009 To accelerate its adoption by cable providers, Fox News paid systems up to $11 per subscriber to distribute the channel.

[ 52 ] This contrasted with the normal practice, in which cable operators paid stations carriage fees for programming. When Time Warner bought Ted Turner 's Turner Broadcasting System , a federal antitrust consent decree required Time Warner to carry a second all-news channel in addition to its own CNN on its cable systems . Time Warner selected MSNBC as the secondary news channel, not Fox News. Fox News claimed this violated an agreement (to carry Fox News). Citing its agreement to keep its U.S. headquarters and a large studio in New York City, News Corporation enlisted the help of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani 's administration to pressure Time Warner Cable (one of the city's two cable providers) to transmit Fox News on a city-owned channel.

[ 53 ] City officials threatened to take action affecting Time Warner's cable franchises in the city.

[ 54 ] In 2001, during the September 11 attacks , Fox News was the first news organization to run a news ticker on the bottom of the screen to keep up with the flow of information that day. The ticker has remained, and has proven popular with viewers.

[ 55 ] In January 2002, Fox News surpassed CNN in ratings for the first time.

[ 56 ] Accelerating in the 2000s, the role of conservative media and Fox News led to it being trusted by the Republican Party's base over that of traditional conservative elites, and partly led to Donald Trump's victory in the Republican primaries against the wishes of a very weak party establishment and traditional power brokers.

[ 57 ] : 27–28 Fox News subsequently became solidly pro-Trump, and cultivated deep ties between itself and the government.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] For his first term, nearly 20 current and former Fox News hosts received administrative and cabinet-level positions in his administration, and his second term also featured 23 current and former Fox News hosts appointed and nominated.

[ 60 ] In 2023, The Economist reported that Murdoch had "ditched a plan" to remerge News Corporation with Fox because it "faced resistance from News Corp investors unhappy at the prospect of being lumped together with Fox News, which they consider a toxic brand." [ 61 ] Later that year, Murdoch said he would step down and that his son Lachlan would take over both Fox Corporation and News Corp, [ 21 ] although the succession is disputed legally .

Political alignment This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Further information: Media bias in the United States Fox News has been identified as practicing biased and false reporting in favor of the Republican Party, its politicians, and conservative causes, [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] while portraying the Democratic Party in a negative light.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Fox News has been characterized by critics, commentators, and researchers as an advocacy news [ b ] or propaganda [ c ] organization and damaging to the integrity of news overall.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The network is pro-Trump .

[ 25 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 78 ] [ 91 ] By 2017, a growing number of studies and academic literature found Fox's prime-time programming engaging in rhetorical and nonfactual themes similar to propaganda and not journalism or persuasion.

[ 27 ] Academic studies have argued that it has played a major role in boosting Republican turnout in American elections and that its role in American politics has been underestimated by political and communications scholars.

[ 79 ] Fox has been described as operating in an information silo where its audience views other media sources as "too liberal", and thus rely on Fox and no other forms of news media.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Researchers and commentators have compared conservative Fox News as similar in purpose to liberal MSNBC , [ 65 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 73 ] but that "the proportion of Fox News statements that are mostly false or worse is almost 50 percent higher than for MSNBC, and more than twice that of CNN".

[ 78 ] [ 70 ] Its news coverage has gradually shifted further rightwards over time.

[ 99 ] Fox's most popular programs such as Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight do not make any claims to be accurate or fact-checked , and have little to no distinction between news and commentary.

[ 97 ] Media analyst Brian Stelter , who has written extensively about the network, observed in 2021 that in more recent years it had adjusted its programming to present "less news on the air and more opinions-about-the-news" throughout the day, on concerns it was losing viewers to more conservative competitors that were presenting such content.

[ 100 ] Outlets FNC airport newsstand at Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport FNC's newsroom , November 15, 2007 FNC maintains an archive of most of its programs. This archive also includes Movietone News series of newsreels from its now Disney-owned namesake movie studio, 20th Century Studios . Licensing for the Fox News archive is handled by ITN Source, the archiving division of ITN .

[ 101 ] Television Main article: List of programs broadcast by Fox News Channel FNC presents a variety of programming, with up to 15 hours of live broadcasting per day in addition to programming and content for the Fox Broadcasting Company . Most programs are broadcast from Fox News headquarters in New York City (at 1211 Avenue of the Americas ), in its streetside studio on Sixth Avenue in the west wing of Rockefeller Center , sharing its headquarters with sister channel Fox Business Network . Fox News Channel has eight studios at its New York City headquarters that are used for its and Fox Business' programming: Studio B (used for Fox Business programming), Studio D (which has an area for studio audiences; no longer in current use), Studio E (used for Gutfeld!

and The Journal Editorial Report ), Studio F (used for The Story with Martha MacCallum , The Five , Fox Democracy 2020, Fox & Friends , Outnumbered , The Faulkner Focus , and Fox News Primetime ), Studio G (which houses Fox Business shows, The Fox Report , Your World with Neil Cavuto , and Cavuto Live ), Studio H (Fox News Deck used for breaking news coverage, no longer in current use), Studio J (used for America's Newsroom , Hannity , Fox News Live , Fox & Friends First , and Sunday Morning Futures ) Starting in 2018 , Thursday Night Football had its pregame show, Fox NFL Thursday , originating from Studio F. Another Fox Sports program, First Things First , also broadcasts from Studio E.

Other such programs (such as Special Report with Bret Baier , The Ingraham Angle , Fox News @ Night , Media Buzz , and editions of Fox News Live not broadcast from the New York City studios) are broadcast from Fox News's Washington, D.C. studios, located on Capitol Hill across from Washington Union Station in a secured building shared by a number of other television networks, which includes NBC News and C-SPAN .

The Next Revolution is broadcast from Fox News' Los Angeles bureau studio, which is also used for news updates coming from Los Angeles.

Life, Liberty & Levin is done from Levin's personal studio in Virginia . Audio simulcasts of the channel are aired on SiriusXM Satellite Radio .

In an October 11, 2009, in a New York Times article, Fox said its hard-news programming runs from "9 AM to 4 PM and 6 to 8 PM on weekdays". However, it makes no such claims for its other broadcasts, which primarily consist of editorial journalism and commentary.

[ 102 ] Fox News Channel began broadcasting in the 720p resolution format on May 1, 2008.

[ 103 ] This format is available on all major cable and satellite providers.

Fox News Media produces Fox News Sunday , which airs on Fox Broadcasting and re-airs on FNC. Fox News also produces occasional special event coverage that is broadcast on FBC.

Radio Main article: Fox News Radio With the growth of the FNC, the company introduced a radio division, Fox News Radio , in 2003.

[ 104 ] Syndicated throughout the United States, the division provides short newscasts and talk radio programs featuring personalities from the television and radio divisions. In 2006, the company also introduced Fox News Talk , a satellite radio station featuring programs syndicated by (and featuring) Fox News personalities.

Online Introduced in December 1995, [ 105 ] the Fox News website features news articles and videos about national and international news. Content on the website is divided into politics, media, U.S., and business. Fox News' articles are based on the network's broadcasts, reports from Fox affiliates and articles produced by other news agencies, such as the Associated Press . Articles are usually accompanied by a video related to the article.

[ 106 ] Fox News Latino is the version aimed at a Hispanic audience, although presented almost entirely in English, with a Spanish section.

[ 107 ] According to NewsGuard , "Much of FoxNews.com's content, particularly articles produced by beat reporters and broadcasts produced by network correspondents, is accurate and well-sourced ... However, FoxNews.com has regularly advanced false and misleading claims on topics including the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol , the Russo-Ukrainian War , COVID-19 , and U.S. elections ".

[ 106 ] In September 2008, FNC joined other channels in introducing a live streaming segment to its website: The Strategy Room , designed to appeal to older viewers. It airs weekdays from 9 AM to 5 PM and takes the form of an informal discussion, with running commentary on the news. Regular discussion programs include Business Hour , News With a View and God Talk .

[ 108 ] In March 2009, The Fox Nation was launched as a website intended to encourage readers to post articles commenting on the news.

[ 109 ] Fox News Mobile is the portion of the FNC website dedicated to streaming news clips formatted for video-enabled mobile phones.

[ 110 ] Fox Nation Main article: Fox Nation In 2018, FNC announced that it would launch a subscription video on demand service known as Fox Nation . It serves as a companion service to FNC, carrying original and acquired talk, documentary, and reality programming designed to appeal to Fox News viewers. Some of its original programs feature Fox News personalities and contributors.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] Ratings and reception In 2003, Fox News saw a large ratings jump during the early stages of the U.S. invasion of Iraq . At the height of the conflict, according to some reports, Fox News had as much as a 300% increase in viewership (averaging 3.3 million viewers daily).

[ 115 ] In 2004, Fox News' ratings for its broadcast of the Republican National Convention exceeded those of the three major broadcast networks. During President George W. Bush 's address, Fox News attracted 7.3 million viewers nationally; NBC , ABC , and CBS had a viewership of 5.9 million, 5.1 million, and 5.0 million respectively.

Between late 2005 and early 2006, Fox News saw a brief decline in ratings. One was in the second quarter of 2006, when it lost viewers for every prime-time program compared with the previous quarter. The audience for Special Report with Brit Hume , for example, dropped 19%. Several weeks later, in the wake of the 2006 North Korean missile test and the 2006 Lebanon War , Fox saw a surge in viewership and remained the top-rated cable news channel.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Fox produced eight of the top ten most-watched nightly cable news shows, with The O'Reilly Factor and Hannity & Colmes finishing first and second respectively.

[ 118 ] FNC ranked No. 8 in viewership among all cable channels in 2006, and No. 7 in 2007.

[ 119 ] The channel ranked number one during the week of Barack Obama's election (November 3–9) in 2008, and reached the top spot again in January 2010 (during the week of the special Senate election in Massachusetts ).

[ 120 ] Comparing Fox to its 24-hour-news-channel competitors in May 2010, the channel drew an average daily prime-time audience of 1.8 million viewers (versus 747,000 for MSNBC and 595,000 for CNN).

[ 121 ] In September 2009, the Pew Research Center published a report on the public view of national news organizations. In the report, 72% of polled Republican Fox viewers rated the channel as "favorable", while 43% of polled Democratic viewers and 55% of all polled viewers shared that opinion. However, Fox was given the highest "unfavorable" rating of all national outlets studied (25% of all polled viewers). The report went on to say that "partisan differences in views of Fox News have increased substantially since 2007".

[ 122 ] A January 2020 Pew Research Center study found that 43% of all American adults trusted Fox News, including 65% of Republicans and people who lean Republican, while 61% of Democrats and people who lean Democratic distrusted Fox News.

[ 123 ] A Public Policy Polling poll concluded in 2013 that positive perceptions of FNC had declined from 2010. 41% of polled voters said they trust it, down from 49% in 2010, while 46% said they distrust it, up from 37% in 2010. It was also called the "most trusted" network by 34% of those polled, more than had said the same of any other network.

[ 124 ] Then-Fox anchor Megyn Kelly covering the 2012 Democratic National Convention On the night of October 22, 2012, Fox set a record for its highest-rated telecast , with 11.5 million viewers for the third U.S. presidential debate .

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] In prime time the week before, Fox averaged almost 3.7 million viewers with a total day average of 1.66 million viewers.

[ 127 ] In prime time and total day ratings for the week of April 15 to 21, 2013, Fox News, propelled by its coverage of the Boston Marathon bombing , was the highest-ranked network on U.S. cable television, for the first time since August 2005, when Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast of the United States .

[ 128 ] January 2014 marked Fox News's 145th consecutive month as the highest-rated cable news channel. During that month, Fox News beat CNN and MSNBC combined in overall viewers in both prime time hours and the total day.

[ 129 ] In the third quarter of 2014, the network was the most-watched cable channel during prime time hours.

[ 130 ] During the final week of the campaign for the United States elections, 2014 , Fox News had the highest ratings of any cable channel, news or otherwise. On election night itself, Fox News' coverage had higher ratings than that of any of the other five cable or network news sources among viewers between 25 and 54 years of age.

[ 131 ] The network hosted the first prime-time GOP candidates' forum of the 2016 campaign on August 6. The debate reached a record-breaking 24 million viewers, by far the largest audience for any cable news event.

[ 132 ] A 2017 study by the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University found that Fox News was the third most-shared source among supporters of Donald Trump on Twitter during the 2016 presidential election , behind The Hill and Breitbart News .

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] In 2018, Fox News was rated by Nielsen as America's most watched cable network, averaging a record 2.4 million viewers in prime time and total day during the period of January 1 to December 30, 2018.

[ 135 ] In an October 2018 Simmons Research survey of the trust in 38 news organizations, Fox News was ranked roughly in the center, with 44.7% of surveyed Americans saying they trusted it.

[ 136 ] The COVID-19 pandemic led to increased viewership for all cable news networks. For the first calendar quarter of 2020 (January 1 – March 31), Fox News had their highest-rated quarter in the network's history, with Nielsen showing a prime time average total audience of 3.387 million viewers.

Sean Hannity 's program, Hannity , weeknights at 9 pm ET was the top-rated show in cable news for the quarter averaging 4.2 million viewers, a figure that not only beat out all of its cable news competition but also placed it ahead of network competition in the same time slot. Fox ended the quarter with the top five shows in prime time, with Fox's Tucker Carlson Tonight finishing the quarter in second overall with an average audience of 4.2 million viewers, followed by The Five , The Ingraham Angle , and Special Report with Bret Baier .

The Rachel Maddow Show was the highest non-Fox show on cable, coming in sixth place. Finishing the quarter in 22nd place was The Lead with Jake Tapper , CNN 's highest rated show.

[ 137 ] According to a Fox News article on the subject, Fox & Friends averaged 1.8 million viewers, topping CNN's New Day and MSNBC's Morning Joe combined. The same Fox News article said that the Fox Business Network also had its highest-rated quarter in history and that Fox News finished March as the highest-rated network in cable for the 45th consecutive month.

[ 138 ] According to the Los Angeles Times on August 19, 2020: "Fox News Channel had six of last week's 11 highest-rated prime-time programs to finish first in the network ratings race for the third time since June" 2020.

[ 139 ] A Morning Consult survey the week after Election Day 2020 showed 30 percent of Republicans in the United States had an unfavorable opinion of Fox News, while 54 percent of Republicans viewed the network favorably, compared to 67 percent before the election. A McClatchy news story suggested criticism from Donald Trump as a major reason, as well as the network's early calling of Arizona for Joe Biden , and later joining other networks in declaring Biden the winner of the 2020 election .

[ 140 ] Ratings were also down for Fox News. Although it remained ahead of other networks overall, its morning show fell out of first place for the first time since 2001. Trump recommended OANN , which was gaining viewers.

Newsmax was also increasing in popularity.

[ 140 ] Following a decline in ratings after the 2020 U.S. presidential election , in 2021, Fox News regained its lead in cable news ratings ahead of CNN and MSNBC.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] Demographics As indicated by a 2013 New York Times article, based on Nielsen statistics, Fox appears to have a mostly aged demographic.

[ 143 ] In March 2024, Fox was the most watched news network in total day and prime time viewers in primetime, with 2.135 million/1.306 million viewers respectively, compared to MSNBC with A25-54 demo, 1.307 million in primetime and 830,000 in day viewers, and CNN with 601,000 in primetime and 462,000 in day viewers. In the Adults age 25-54 category, Fox also leads with 246,000 in primetime and 158,000 in day viewers, followed by MSNBC with 133,000 viewers in primetime and 86,000 viewers in day, and CNN with 124,000 viewers in primetime and 85,000 in day viewers.

[ 144 ] According to the same Nielsen analysis, MSNBC is the second most watched news network.

In 2008, in the 25–54 age group, Fox News had an average of 557,000 viewers, but dropped to 379,000 in 2013 while increasing its overall audience from 1.89 million in 2010 to 2.02 million in 2013. The median age of a prime-time viewer was 68 as of 2015 [update] .

[ 145 ] A 2019 Pew Research Center survey showed that among those who named Fox News as their main source for political news, 69% are aged 50 or older.

[ 146 ] According to a 2013 Gallup poll, 94% of Fox viewers "either identify as or lean Republican".

[ 147 ] The 2019 Pew survey showed that among people who named Fox News as their main source for political and election news, 93% identify as Republicans. Among the top eight political news sources named by at least 2% of American adults, the results show Fox News and MSNBC as the two news channels with the most partisan audiences.

[ 146 ] Wikipedia consensus on reliability This section is an excerpt from Perennial sources list § Fox News .

[ edit ] As of 2022, thousands of articles on Wikipedia use Fox News as a source. In 2010, the Wikipedia community held its first major discussion of Fox News' reliability. The community decided that Fox News was politically biased, but generally reliable. Since 2010, Fox News has been the subject of numerous debates on Wikipedia about its reliability. Discussions have run over hundreds of thousands of words and have included the input of over 100 editors. Many conversations have sought to establish, or enforce, a distinction between bias and reliability. The latter having more to do with fact-checking and accuracy, though some argued that a consistent amount of errors and retractions in reporting are normal for a reliable media outlet.

[ 148 ] In July 2020, the Wikipedia community announced that Fox News would no longer be considered "generally reliable" in its reporting of science and politics, and that it "should be used with caution to verify contentious claims" about those topics.

[ 149 ] The decision was made because Fox News downplayed the COVID-19 pandemic , because of allegations that it spread misinformation about climate change , and that it reported on the false concept of " no-go zones " for non-Muslims in British cities. The decision did not affect Fox News' reliability on other topics.

[ 150 ] In 2022, the Wikipedia community announced that Fox News would now be considered "marginally reliable" in its reporting on science and politics. This meant that it cannot be used as a source for "exceptional claims", and that its reliability would be decided on a case-by-case basis for other scientific and political claims. The decision applies only to articles on Fox News' website and articles about topics that are scientific or political.

[ 148 ] As of June 2024, Fox News and its talk shows are considered generally unreliable sources for scientific and political coverage.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] These assessments do not apply to local affiliates owned by Fox.

[ 148 ] Slogan Fox News Channel originally used the slogan "Fair and Balanced", which was coined by network co-founder Roger Ailes while the network was being established.

The New York Times described the slogan as being a "blunt signal that Fox News planned to counteract what Mr. Ailes and many others viewed as a liberal bias ingrained in television coverage by establishment news networks".

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] In a 2013 interview with Peter Robinson of the Hoover Institution , Rupert Murdoch defended the company's "Fair and Balanced" slogan, saying, "In fact, you'll find just as many Democrats as Republicans on and so on".

[ 155 ] In August 2003, Fox News sued comedian Al Franken over his use of the slogan as a subtitle for his book, Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right , which is critical of Fox News Channel.

[ 156 ] The lawsuit was dropped three days later, after Judge Denny Chin refused its request for an injunction . In his decision, Chin ruled the case was "wholly without merit, both factually and legally". He went on to suggest that Fox News' trademark on the phrase "fair and balanced" could be invalid.

[ 157 ] In December 2003, FNC won a legal battle concerning the slogan, when AlterNet filed a cancellation petition with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to have FNC's trademark rescinded as inaccurate. AlterNet included Robert Greenwald 's documentary film Outfoxed (2004) as supporting evidence in its case.

[ 158 ] After losing early motions, AlterNet withdrew its petition; the USPTO dismissed the case.

[ 159 ] In 2008, FNC used the slogan "We Report, You Decide", referring to "You Decide 2008" (FNC's original slogan for its coverage of election issues).

In August 2016, Fox News Channel began to quietly phase out the "Fair and Balanced" slogan in favor of "Most Watched, Most Trusted"; when these changes were reported in June 2017 by Gabriel Sherman (a writer who had written a biography on Ailes), a network executive said the change "has nothing to do with programming or editorial decisions". It was speculated by media outlets that Fox News Channel was wishing to distance itself from Ailes' tenure at the network.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 160 ] In March 2018, the network introduced a new ad campaign, Real News. Real Honest Opinion.

The ad campaign is intended to promote the network's opinion-based programming and counter perceptions surrounding " fake news ".

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] In mid-November 2020, following the election, Fox News began to use the slogan "Standing Up For What's Right" to promote its primetime lineup.

[ 163 ] Content Benghazi attack and aftermath Further information: 2012 Benghazi attack Fox News provided extensive coverage of the 2012 Benghazi attack , which host Sean Hannity described in December 2012 as "the story that the mainstream media ignores" and "obviously, a cover-up. And we will get to the bottom of it." [ 164 ] Programming analysis by media watchdog Media Matters , which has declared a "War on Fox News", found that during the twenty months following the Benghazi attacks, FNC ran 1,098 segments on the issue, including: [ 165 ] 478 segments involving Susan Rice's September 16, 2012, Sunday news show appearances, during which she was falsely accused of lying 382 segments on Special Report , the network's flagship news program 281 segments alleging a "cover-up" by the Obama administration 144 interviews of GOP members of Congress, but five interviews of Democratic members of Congress and Obama administration officials 120 comparisons to Iran-Contra , Watergate , and the actions of the Nixon administration 100 segments falsely suggesting the administration issued a "stand-down order" to prevent a rescue operation in Benghazi Over nearly four years after the Benghazi attack, there were ten official investigations , including six by Republican-controlled House committees. None of the investigations found any evidence of scandal, cover-up or lying by Obama administration officials.

Uranium One Further information: Uranium One controversy From 2015 into 2018, Fox News broadcast extensive coverage of an alleged scandal surrounding the sale of Uranium One to Russian interests, which host Sean Hannity characterized as "one of the biggest scandals in American history".

[ 166 ] According to Media Matters, the Fox News coverage extended throughout the programming day, with particular emphasis by Hannity.

[ 167 ] The network promoted an ultimately unfounded narrative asserting that, as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton personally approved the Uranium One sale in exchange for $145 million in bribes paid to the Clinton Foundation .

Donald Trump repeated these allegations as a candidate and as president.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] No evidence of wrongdoing by Clinton had been found after four years of allegations, an FBI investigation, and the 2017 appointment of a Federal attorney to evaluate the investigation. In November 2017, Fox News host Shepard Smith concisely debunked the alleged scandal, infuriating viewers who suggested he should work for CNN or MSNBC.

[ 169 ] Hannity later called Smith "clueless", while Smith stated: "I get it, that some of our opinion programming is there strictly to be entertaining. I get that. I don't work there. I wouldn't work there." [ 171 ] [ 172 ] Pro-Republican and pro-Trump bias Fox News has been described as conservative media, [ 173 ] [ 174 ] and as providing biased reporting in favor of conservative political positions, [ 99 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] the Republican Party , [ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] and President Donald Trump.

[ 25 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Political scientist Jonathan Bernstein described Fox News as an expanded part of the Republican Party.

[ 26 ] Political scientists Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins wrote that Fox News helped "Republicans communicate with their base and spread their ideas, and they have been effective in mobilizing voters to participate in midterm elections (as in 2010 and 2014)." [ 26 ] Prior to 2000, Fox News lacked an ideological tilt, and had more Democrats watch the channel than Republicans.

[ 180 ] During the 2004 United States presidential election , Fox News was markedly more hostile in its coverage of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry , and distinguished itself among cable news outlets for heavy coverage of the Swift Boat smear campaign against Kerry.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] During President Obama's first term in office, Fox News helped launch and amplify the Tea Party movement , a conservative movement within the Republican Party that organized protests against Obama and his policies.

[ 189 ] In the 2004 documentary Outfoxed , four people identified as former employees said that Fox News made them "slant the news in favor of conservatives".

[ 190 ] Fox News said that the film misrepresented the employment of these employees.

[ 191 ] During the Republican primaries , Fox News was perceived as trying to prevent Trump from clinching the nomination.

[ 174 ] Under Trump's presidency, Fox News remade itself into his image, as hardly any criticism of Trump could be heard on Fox News' prime-time shows.

[ 95 ] [ 192 ] In Fox News' news reporting, the network dedicated far more coverage to Hillary Clinton-related stories, which critics argued was intended to deflect attention from the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections .

[ 192 ] Trump provided significant access to Fox News during his presidency, giving 19 interviews to the channel while only 6 in total to other news channels by November 2017; The New York Times described Trump's Fox News interviews as "softball interviews" and some of the interviewers' interview styles as "fawning".

[ 193 ] In July 2018, The Economist has described the network's coverage of Trump's presidency as "reliably fawning".

[ 194 ] From 2015 to 2017, the Fox News prime-time lineup changed from being skeptical and questioning of Trump to a "Trump safe space, with a dose of Bannonist populism once considered on the fringe".

[ 195 ] The Fox News website has also become more extreme in its rhetoric since Trump's election; according to Columbia University 's Tow Center for Digital Journalism, the Fox News website has "gone a little Breitbart " over time.

[ 196 ] At the start of 2018, Fox News mostly ignored high-profile scandals in the Trump administration which received ample coverage in other national media outlets, such as White House Staff Secretary Rob Porter 's resignation amid domestic abuse allegations, the downgrading of Jared Kushner 's security clearance, and the existence of a non-disclosure agreement between Trump and the porn star Stormy Daniels .

[ 197 ] In March 2019, Jane Mayer reported in The New Yorker that Fox News.com reporter Diana Falzone had the story of the Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal before the 2016 election, but that Fox News executive Ken LaCorte told her: "Good reporting, kiddo. But Rupert [Murdoch] wants Donald Trump to win. So just let it go." The story was killed; LaCorte denied making the statement to Falzone, but conceded: "I was the person who made the call. I didn't run it upstairs to Roger Ailes or others. ... I didn't do it to protect Donald Trump." She added that "[Falzone] had put up a story that just wasn't anywhere close to being something I was comfortable publishing." Nik Richie , who claimed to be one of the sources for the story, called LaCorte's account "complete bullshit", adding that "Fox News was culpable. I voted for Trump, and I like Fox, but they did their own ' catch and kill ' on the story to protect him." [ 198 ] [ 199 ] A 2008 study found Fox News gave disproportionate attention to polls suggesting low approval for President Bill Clinton .

[ 200 ] A 2009 study found Fox News was less likely to pick up stories that reflected well on Democrats, and more likely to pick up stories that reflected well on Republicans.

[ 201 ] A 2010 study comparing Fox News Channel's Special Report With Brit Hume and NBC's Nightly News coverage of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan during 2005 concluded "Fox News was much more sympathetic to the administration than NBC", suggesting "if scholars continue to find evidence of a partisan or ideological bias at FNC ... they should consider Fox as alternative, rather than mainstream, media".

[ 202 ] Research finds that Fox News increases Republican vote shares and makes Republican politicians more partisan.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] A 2007 study, using the introduction of Fox News into local markets (1996–2000) as an instrumental variable, found that in the 2000 presidential election "Republicans gained 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points in the towns that broadcast Fox News", suggesting "Fox News convinced 3 to 28 percent of its viewers to vote Republican, depending on the audience measure".

[ 173 ] These results were confirmed by a 2015 study.

[ 32 ] A 2014 study, using the same instrumental variable, found congressional "representatives become less supportive of President Clinton in districts where Fox News begins broadcasting than similar representatives in similar districts where Fox News was not broadcast." [ 31 ] Another 2014 paper found Fox News viewing increased Republican vote shares among voters who identified as Republican or independent.

[ 203 ] A 2017 study, using channel positions as an instrumental variable, found "Fox News increases Republican vote shares by 0.3 points among viewers induced into watching 2.5 additional minutes per week by variation in position." [ 30 ] This study used a different methodology for a later period and found an ever bigger effect and impact, leading Matthew Yglesias to write in the Political Communication academic journal that they "suggest that conventional wisdom may be greatly underestimating the significance of Fox as a factor in American politics." [ 204 ] Fox News publicly denies it is biased, [ 205 ] with Murdoch and Ailes saying to have included Murdoch's statement that Fox has "given room to both sides, whereas only one side had it before".

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] In June 2009, [ 208 ] Fox News host Chris Wallace said: "I think we are the counter-weight [to NBC News] ... they have a liberal agenda, and we tell the other side of the story." [ 209 ] [ 210 ] [ 211 ] In 2004, Robert Greenwald 's documentary film Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch's War on Journalism argued Fox News had a conservative bias and featured clips from Fox News and internal memos from editorial vice president John Moody directing Fox News staff on how to report certain subjects.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] Fox News' most popular programs such as Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson do not make any claims to be accurate or fact-checked, and have little to no distinction between news and commentary.

[ 97 ] A leaked memo from Fox News vice president Bill Sammon to news staff at the height of the health care reform in the United States debate has been cited as an example of the pro- Republican Party bias of Fox News. His memo asked the staff to "use the term 'government-run health insurance,' or, when brevity is a concern, 'government option,' whenever possible". The memo was sent shortly after Republican pollster Frank Luntz advised Sean Hannity on his Fox show: "If you call it a public option, the American people are split. If you call it the government option, the public is overwhelmingly against it." [ 214 ] Surveys suggest Fox News is widely perceived to be ideological. A 2009 Pew survey found Fox News is viewed as the most ideological channel in America, with 47 percent of those surveyed said Fox News is "mostly conservative", 14 percent said "mostly liberal" and 24 percent said "neither". In comparison, MSNBC had 36 percent identify it as "mostly liberal", 11 percent as "mostly conservative" and 27 percent as "neither".

CNN had 37 percent describe it as "mostly liberal", 11 percent as "mostly conservative" and 33 percent as "neither".

[ 215 ] A 2004 Pew Research Center survey found FNC was cited (unprompted) by 69 percent of national journalists as a conservative news organization.

[ 216 ] A Rasmussen poll found 31 percent of Americans felt Fox News had a conservative bias, and 15 percent that it had a liberal bias. It found 36 percent believed Fox News delivers news with neither a conservative or liberal bias, compared with 37 percent who said NPR delivers news with no conservative or liberal bias and 32 percent who said the same of CNN.

[ 217 ] David Carr , media critic for The New York Times , praised the 2012 United States presidential election results coverage on Fox News for the network's response to Republican adviser and Fox News contributor Karl Rove challenging its call that Barack Obama would win Ohio and the election. Fox's prediction was correct. Carr wrote: "Over many months, Fox lulled its conservative base with agitprop: that President Obama was a clear failure, that a majority of Americans saw [Mitt] Romney as a good alternative in hard times, and that polls showing otherwise were politically motivated and not to be believed. But on Tuesday night, the people in charge of Fox News were confronted with a stark choice after it became clear that Mr. Romney had fallen short: was Fox, first and foremost, a place for advocacy or a place for news? In this moment, at least, Fox chose news." [ 218 ] A May 2017 study conducted by Harvard University 's Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy examined coverage of Trump's first 100 days in office by several major mainstream media outlets including Fox.

[ 219 ] It found Trump received 80% negative coverage from the overall media, and received the least negative coverage on Fox – 52% negative and 48% positive.

[ 220 ] On March 14, 2017, Andrew Napolitano , a Fox News commentator, claimed on Fox & Friends that British intelligence agency GCHQ had wiretapped Trump on behalf of Barack Obama during the 2016 United States presidential election .

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] On March 16, 2017, White House spokesman Sean Spicer repeated the claim.

[ 221 ] When Trump was questioned about the claim at a news conference, he said "All we did was quote a certain very talented legal mind who was the one responsible for saying that on television. I didn't make an opinion on it." [ 223 ] On March 17, 2017, Shepard Smith , a Fox News anchor, admitted the network had no evidence that Trump was under surveillance. British officials said the White House was backing off the claim.

[ 223 ] Napolitano was later suspended by Fox News for making the claim.

[ 224 ] In June 2018, Fox News executives instructed producers to head off inappropriate remarks made on the shows aired by the network by hosts and commentators.

[ 225 ] The instructions came after a number of Fox News hosts and guests made incendiary comments about the Trump administration's policy of separating migrant children from their parents .

[ 225 ] Fox News host Laura Ingraham had likened the child detention centers that the children were in to "summer camps". Guest Corey Lewandowski mocked the story of a 10-year-old child with Down syndrome being separated from her mother; the Fox News host did not address Lewandowski's statement.

[ 225 ] Guest Ann Coulter falsely claimed that the separated children were "child actors"; the Fox News host did not challenge her claim.

[ 225 ] In a segment on Trump's alleged use of racial dog whistles, one Fox News contributor told an African-American whom he was debating: "You're out of your cotton-picking mind." [ 225 ] According to the 2016 book Asymmetric Politics by political scientists Matt Grossmann and David A. Hopkins, "Fox News tends to raise the profile of scandals and controversies involving Democrats that receive scant attention in other media, such as the relationship between Barack Obama and William Ayers ... Hillary Clinton's role in the fatal 2012 attacks on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya; the gun-running scandal known as 'Fast and Furious' ; the business practices of federal loan guarantee recipient Solyndra ; the past activism of Obama White House operative Van Jones ; the 2004 attacks on John Kerry by the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth ; the controversial sermons of Obama's Chicago pastor Jeremiah Wright ; the filming of undercover videos of supposed wrongdoing by the liberal activist group ACORN ; and the 'war on Christmas' supposedly waged every December by secular, multicultural liberals." [ 185 ] In October 2018, Fox News ran laudatory coverage of a meeting between Trump-supporting rapper Kanye West and President Trump in the Oval Office . Fox News had previously run negative coverage of rappers and their involvement with Democratic politicians and causes, such as when Fox News ran headlines describing conscious hip-hop artist Common as "vile" and a "cop-killer rapper", and when Fox News ran negative coverage of Kanye West before he became a Trump supporter.

[ 226 ] On November 4, 2018, Trump's website, DonaldJTrump.com, announced in a press release that Fox News host Sean Hannity would make a "special guest appearance" with Trump at a midterm campaign rally the following night in Cape Girardeau, Missouri .

[ 227 ] The following morning, Hannity tweeted "To be clear, I will not be on stage campaigning with the President." [ 228 ] Hannity appeared at the president's lectern on stage at the rally, immediately mocking the "fake news" at the back of the auditorium, Fox News reporters among them. Several Fox News employees expressed outrage at Hannity's actions, with one stating that "a new line was crossed".

[ 229 ] Hannity later asserted that his action was not pre-planned, and Fox News stated it "does not condone any talent participating in campaign events".

[ 230 ] Fox News host Jeanine Pirro also appeared on stage with Trump at the rally. The Trump press release was later removed from Trump's website.

[ 227 ] [ 231 ] Fox News released a poll of registered voters, jointly conducted by two polling organizations, on June 16, 2019. The poll found some unfavorable results for Trump, including a record high 50% thought the Trump campaign had coordinated with the Russian government, and 50% thought he should be impeached – 43% saying he should also be removed from office – while 48% said they did not favor impeachment.

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] The next morning on Fox & Friends First , host Heather Childers twice misrepresented the poll results, stating "a new Fox News poll shows most voters don't want impeachment" and "at least half of U.S. voters do not think President Trump should be impeached," while the on-screen display of the actual poll question was also incorrect. Later that morning on America's Newsroom , the on-screen display showed the correct poll question and results, but highlighted the 48% of respondents who opposed impeachment rather than the 50% who supported it (the latter being broken-out into two figures). As host Bill Hemmer drew guest Byron York 's attention to the 48% opposed figure, they did not discuss the 50% support figure, while the on-screen chyron read: "Fox News Poll: 43% Support Trump's Impeachment and Removal, 48% Oppose." [ 234 ] Later that day, Trump tweeted: "@FoxNews Polls are always bad for me...Something weird going on at Fox." [ 235 ] In April 2017, it became known that former Obama administration national security advisor Susan Rice sought the unmasking of Trump associates who were unidentified in intelligence reports, notably Trump's incoming national security advisor Michael Flynn , during the presidential transition .

[ 236 ] In May 2020, acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell , a Trump loyalist, declassified a list of Obama administration officials who had also requested unmasking of Trump associates, which was subsequently publicly released by Republican senators.

[ 237 ] That month, attorney general Bill Barr appointed federal prosecutor John Bash to examine the unmaskings.

[ 238 ] Fox News primetime hosts declared the unmaskings a "domestic spying operation" for which the Obama administration was "exposed" in the "biggest abuse of power" in American history.

[ 239 ] The Bash inquiry closed months later with no findings of substantive wrongdoing.

[ 240 ] However, certain Fox personalities have not had as much of a favorable reception from Trump: news anchors Shepard Smith (who retired from Fox in 2019) and Chris Wallace have been criticized by Trump for allegedly being adversarial, [ 241 ] [ 242 ] alongside Fox analyst Andrew Napolitano , who said Trump's actions in the Trump–Ukraine scandal were "both criminal and impeachable behavior".

[ 243 ] Trump was also critical of the network hiring former DNC chair Donna Brazile , in 2019.

[ 244 ] The relationship between Trump and Fox News, as well as other Rupert Murdoch -controlled outlets, soured following the 2020 United States presidential election , as Trump refused to concede that Joe Biden had been elected President-elect .

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] This negative tonal shift led to increased viewership of Newsmax and One America News among Trump and his supporters due to their increased antipathy towards Fox; [ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] [ 250 ] and as a result, Fox released promotional videos of their opinion hosts disputing the election results, promoting a Trump-affiliated conspiracy theory about voter fraud .

[ 251 ] By one measure, Newsmax saw a 497% spike in viewership, while Fox News saw a 38% decline.

[ 252 ] Writing for the Poynter Institute for Media Studies in February 2021, senior media writer Tom Jones argued that the primary distinction between Fox News and MSNBC is not right bias vs. left bias, but rather that much of the content on Fox News, especially during its primetime programs, "is not based in truth".

[ 253 ] The Tampa Bay Times reported in August 2021 that it had reviewed four months of emails indicating Fox News producers had coordinated with aides of Florida governor Ron DeSantis to promote his political prospects by inviting him for frequent network appearances, exchanging talking points and, in one case, helping him to stage an exclusive news event.

[ 254 ] In February 2024, Alan Rosenblatt of Johns Hopkins University said that Fox News "is an entertainment company that has a news division, not a news company", adding that it "not only does not provide that distinction, it goes out of its way to make it difficult to see the difference. They make their opinion programs look like news programs, and they incorporate enough opinion content on their news programs to further that deception." [ 35 ] In early 2024, Fox News host Jesse Watters promoted a conspiracy theory involving Taylor Swift , Travis Kelce , and the American Democratic party in hopes of influencing voters ahead of the U.S. presidential primary season.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Fox News has published headlines accusing the English Wikipedia of having a left-wing and socialist bias.

[ 255 ] Coverage of Russia investigation Further information: Mueller special counsel investigation On October 30, 2017, when special counsel Robert Mueller indicted Paul Manafort and Rick Gates , and revealed George Papadopoulos had pleaded guilty (all of whom were involved in the Trump 2016 campaign), this was the focus of most media's coverage, except Fox News'.

[ 256 ] Hosts and guests on Fox News called for Mueller to be fired.

[ 256 ] [ 257 ] Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson focused their shows on unsubstantiated allegations that Clinton sold uranium to Russia in exchange for donations to the Clinton Foundation and on the Clinton campaign's role in funding the Steele dossier .

[ 256 ] [ 258 ] Hannity asserted: "The very thing they are accusing President Trump of doing, they did it themselves." [ 256 ] During the segment, Hannity mistakenly referred to Clinton as President Clinton.

[ 256 ] [ 259 ] Fox News dedicated extensive coverage to the uranium story, which Democrats said was an attempt to distract from Mueller's intensifying investigation.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] CNN described the coverage as "a tour de force in deflection and dismissal".

[ 258 ] On October 31, CNN reported Fox News employees were dissatisfied with their outlet's coverage of the Russia investigation, with employees calling it an "embarrassment", "laughable", and saying it "does the viewer a huge disservice and further divides the country" and that it is "another blow to journalists at Fox who come in every day wanting to cover the news in a fair and objective way".

[ 262 ] [ 263 ] When the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election intensified in October 2017, the focus of Fox News coverage turned "what they see as the scandal and wrongdoing of President Trump's political opponents. In reports like these, Bill and Hillary Clinton are prominent and recurring characters because they are considered the real conspirators working with the Russians to undermine American democracy." [ 264 ] Paul Waldman of The Washington Post described the coverage as "No puppet. You're the puppet", saying it was a "careful, coordinated, and comprehensive strategy" to distract from Mueller's investigation.

[ 265 ] German Lopes of Vox said Fox News' coverage has reached "levels of self-parody" as it dedicated coverage to low-key stories, such as a controversial Newsweek op-ed and hamburger emojis, while other networks had wall-to-wall coverage of Mueller's indictments.

[ 266 ] A FiveThirtyEight analysis of Russia-related media coverage in cable news found most mentions of Russia on Fox News were spoken in close proximity to "uranium" and "dossier".

[ 267 ] On November 1, 2017, Vox analyzed the transcripts of Fox News, CNN and MSNBC, and found Fox News "was unable to talk about the Mueller investigation without bringing up Hillary Clinton", "talked significantly less about George Papadopoulos—the Trump campaign adviser whose plea deal with Mueller provides the most explicit evidence thus far that the campaign knew of the Russian government's efforts to help Trump—than its competitors", and "repeatedly called Mueller's credibility into question".

[ 268 ] In December 2017, Fox News escalated its attacks on the Mueller investigation, with hosts and guest commentators suggesting the investigation amounted to a coup .

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] [ 271 ] [ 272 ] [ 273 ] Guest co-host Kevin Jackson referred to a right-wing conspiracy theory claiming Strzok's messages are evidence of a plot by FBI agents to assassinate Trump, a claim which the other Fox co-hosts quickly said is not supported by any credible evidence.

[ 274 ] [ 275 ] Fox News host Jeanine Pirro called the Mueller investigation team a "criminal cabal" and said the team ought to be arrested.

[ 269 ] Other Fox News figures referred to the investigation as "corrupt", "crooked", and "illegitimate", and likened the FBI to the KGB, the Soviet-era spy organization that routinely tortured and summarily executed people.

[ 270 ] Political scientists and scholars of coups described the Fox News rhetoric as scary and dangerous.

[ 270 ] Experts on coups rejected that the Mueller investigation amounted to a coup; rather, the Fox News rhetoric was dangerous to democracy and mirrored the kind of rhetoric that occurs before purges .

[ 270 ] A number of observers argued the Fox News rhetoric was intended to discredit the Mueller investigation and sway President Donald Trump to fire Mueller.

[ 276 ] In August 2018, Fox News was criticized for giving more prominent coverage of a murder committed by an undocumented immigrant than the convictions of Donald Trump's former campaign manager, Paul Manafort, and his long-term personal attorney, Michael Cohen .

[ 277 ] At the same time, most other national mainstream media gave wall-to-wall coverage of the convictions.

[ 278 ] Fox News hosts Dana Perrino and Jason Chaffetz argued that voters care far more about the murder than the convictions of the President's former top aides, and hosts Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity downplayed the convictions.

[ 279 ] [ 277 ] [ 280 ] False claims about other media CNN's Jake Tapper In November 2017, following the 2017 New York City truck attack wherein a terrorist shouted "Allahu Akbar", Fox News distorted a statement by Jake Tapper to make it appear as if he had said " Allahu Akbar " can be used under the most "beautiful circumstances". Fox News omitted that Tapper had said the use of "Allahu Akbar" in the terrorist attack was not one of these beautiful circumstances. A headline on FoxNews.com was preceded by a tag reading "OUTRAGEOUS". The Fox News Twitter account distorted the statement further, saying "Jake Tapper Says 'Allahu Akbar' Is 'Beautiful' Right After NYC Terror Attack" in a tweet that was later deleted. Tapper chastised Fox News for choosing to "deliberately lie" and said "there was a time when one could tell the difference between Fox and the nutjobs at Infowars . It's getting tougher and tougher. Lies are lies." [ 281 ] In 2009, Tapper had come to the defense of Fox News while he was a White House correspondent for ABC News, after the Obama administration claimed that the network was not a legitimate news organization.

[ 282 ] Fox News guest host Jason Chaffetz apologized to Tapper for misrepresenting his statement.

[ 283 ] After Fox News had deleted the tweet, Sean Hannity repeated the misrepresentation and called Tapper "liberal fake news CNN's fake Jake Tapper" and mocked his ratings.

[ 282 ] [ 283 ] The New York Times In July 2017, a report by Fox & Friends falsely said The New York Times had disclosed intelligence in one of its stories and that this intelligence disclosure helped Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , the leader of the Islamic State , to evade capture.

[ 284 ] [ 285 ] [ 286 ] The report cited an inaccurate assertion by Gen.

Tony Thomas , the head of the United States Special Operations Command , that a major newspaper had disclosed the intelligence.

[ 284 ] [ 287 ] Fox News said it was The New York Times , repeatedly running the chyron "NYT Foils U.S. Attempt To Take Out Al-Bahgdadi".

[ 287 ] Pete Hegseth , one of the show's hosts, criticized the "failing New York Times ".

[ 287 ] President Donald Trump tweeted about the Fox & Friends report shortly after it first aired, saying "The Failing New York Times foiled U.S. attempt to kill the single most wanted terrorist, Al-Baghdadi. Their sick agenda over National Security." [ 284 ] Fox News later updated the story, but without apologizing to The New York Times or responding directly to the inaccuracies.

[ 287 ] In a Washington Post column, Erik Wemple said Chris Wallace had covered The New York Times story himself on Fox News Sunday , adding: "Here's another case of the differing standards between Fox News's opinion operation", which has given "a state-run vibe on all matters related to Trump", compared to Fox News's news operation, which has provided "mostly sane coverage".

[ 288 ] Climate change Further information: Climate change denial and Media coverage of climate change Fox News has often been described as a major platform for climate change denial .

[ a ] A 2011 study by Lauren Feldman and Anthony Leiserowitz found Fox News "takes a more dismissive tone toward climate change than CNN and MSNBC".

[ 293 ] A 2008 study found Fox News emphasized the scientific uncertainty of climate change more than CNN, was less likely to say climate change was real, and more likely to interview climate change skeptics.

[ 293 ] Leaked emails showed that in 2009 Bill Sammon , the Fox News Washington managing editor, instructed Fox News journalists to dispute the scientific consensus on climate change and "refrain from asserting that the planet has warmed (or cooled) in any given period without IMMEDIATELY pointing out that such theories are based upon data that critics have called into question." [ 294 ] According to climate scientist Michael E. Mann , Fox News "has constructed an alternative universe where the laws of physics no longer apply, where the greenhouse effect is a myth, and where climate change is a hoax, the product of a massive conspiracy among scientists, who somehow have gotten the polar bears, glaciers, sea levels, superstorms, and megadroughts to play along." [ 291 ] According to James Lawrence Powell 's 2011 study of the climate science denial movement, Fox News provides "the deniers with a platform to say whatever they like without fear of contradiction." [ 292 ] Fox News employs Steve Milloy , a prominent climate change denier with close financial and organizational ties to oil companies, as a contributor. In his columns about climate change for FoxNews.com , Fox News has failed to disclose his substantial funding from oil companies.

[ 295 ] In 2011, the hosts of Fox & Friends described climate change as "unproven science", a "disputed fact", and criticized the Department of Education for working together with the children's network Nickelodeon to teach children about climate change.

[ 296 ] In 2001, Sean Hannity described the scientific consensus on climate change as "phony science from the left".

[ 297 ] In 2004, he falsely alleged that "scientists still can't agree on whether the global warming is scientific fact or fiction".

[ 297 ] In 2010, Hannity said the so-called "Climategate" – the leaking of e-mails by climate scientist that climate change skeptics claimed demonstrated scientific misconduct but which all subsequent enquiries have found no evidence of misconduct or wrongdoing – a "scandal" that "exposed global warming as a myth cooked up by alarmists".

[ 298 ] Hannity frequently invites contrarian fringe scientists and critics of climate change to his shows.

[ 299 ] In 2019, a widely shared Fox News news report falsely claimed that new climate science research showed that the Earth might be heading to a new Ice Age; the author of the study that Fox News cited said that Fox News "utterly misrepresents our research" and the study did not in any way suggest that Earth was heading to an Ice Age. Fox News later corrected the story.

[ 300 ] Shepard Smith drew attention for being one of few voices formerly on Fox News to forcefully state that climate change is real, that human activities are a primary contributor to it and that there is a scientific consensus on the issue.

[ 301 ] [ 302 ] His acceptance of the scientific consensus on climate change drew criticism from Fox News viewers and conservatives.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] Smith left Fox News in October 2019.

[ 305 ] In a 2021 interview with Christiane Amanpour on her eponymous show in CNN , he stated that his presence on Fox had become "untenable" due to the "falsehoods" and "lies" intentionally spread on the network's opinion shows.

[ 306 ] [ 307 ] Murder of Seth Rich conspiracy See also: Murder of Seth Rich On May 16, 2017, a day when other news organizations were extensively covering Donald Trump's revelation of classified information to Russia , [ 308 ] Fox News ran a lead story about a private investigator's uncorroborated claims about the murder of Seth Rich , a DNC staffer.

[ 309 ] [ 310 ] [ 311 ] The private investigator said he had uncovered evidence that Rich was in contact with WikiLeaks and law enforcement were covering it up.

[ 309 ] The killing of Rich has given rise to conspiracy theories in right-wing circles that Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party had Seth Rich killed allegedly because he was the source of the DNC leaks .

[ 309 ] U.S. intelligence agencies determined Russia was the source of the leaks.

[ 312 ] In reporting the investigator's claims, the Fox News report reignited right-wing conspiracy theories about the killing.

[ 309 ] [ 311 ] The Fox News story fell apart within hours.

[ 313 ] Other news organizations quickly revealed the investigator was a Donald Trump supporter and had according to NBC News "developed a reputation for making outlandish claims, such as one appearance on Fox News in 2007 in which he warned that underground networks of pink pistol-toting lesbian gangs were raping young women." [ 309 ] [ 314 ] The family of Seth Rich, the Washington D.C. police department, the Washington D.C. mayor's office, the FBI, and law enforcement sources familiar with the case rebuked the investigator's claims.

[ 309 ] [ 310 ] Rich's relatives said: "We are a family who is committed to facts, not fake evidence that surfaces every few months to fill the void and distract law enforcement and the general public from finding Seth's murderers." [ 309 ] The spokesperson for the family criticized Fox News for its reporting, alleging the outlet was motivated by a desire to deflect attention from the Trump-Russia story: "I think there's a very special place in hell for people that would use the memory of a murder victim in order to pursue a political agenda." [ 308 ] The family has called for retractions and apologies from Fox News for the inaccurate reporting.

[ 314 ] [ 315 ] Over the course of the day, Fox News altered the contents of the story and the headline, but did not issue corrections.

[ 314 ] [ 316 ] When CNN contacted the private investigator later that day, the investigator said he had no evidence that Rich had contacted WikiLeaks.

[ 311 ] The investigator claimed he only learned about the possible existence of the evidence from a Fox News reporter.

[ 311 ] Fox News did not respond to inquiries by CNN, and the Washington Post.

[ 310 ] [ 311 ] Fox News later on May 23, seven days after the story was published, retracted its original report, saying the original report did not meet its standards.

[ 313 ] [ 317 ] Nicole Hemmer , then assistant professor at the Miller Center of Public Affairs , wrote that the promotion of the conspiracy theory demonstrated how Fox News was "remaking itself in the image of fringe media in the age of Trump, blurring the lines between real and fake news." [ 318 ] Max Boot of the Council on Foreign Relations said while intent behind Fox News, as a counterweight to the liberal media was laudable, the culmination of those efforts have been to create an alternative news source that promotes hoaxes and myths, of which the promotion of the Seth Rich conspiracy is an example.

[ 319 ] Fox News was also criticized by conservative outlets, such as The Weekly Standard , [ 320 ] National Review , [ 321 ] [ 322 ] and conservative columnists, such as Jennifer Rubin , [ 323 ] Michael Gerson , [ 324 ] and John Podhoretz .

[ 325 ] Rich's parents, Joel and Mary Rich, sued Fox News for the emotional distress it had caused them by its false reporting. In 2020, Fox News settled with Rich family, making a payment that was not officially disclosed but which was reported to be in the seven figures.

[ 326 ] Although the settlement had been agreed to earlier in the year, Fox News arranged to delay the public announcement until after the 2020 presidential election.

[ 326 ] [ 327 ] Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville Further information: Unite the Right rally Fox News hosts and contributors defended Trump's remarks that "many sides" were to blame for violence at a gathering of hundreds of white nationalists in Charlottesville, Virginia.

[ 328 ] [ 329 ] Some criticized Trump.

[ 329 ] [ 330 ] In a press conference on August 15, Trump used the term "alt-left" to describe counterprotesters at the white supremacist rally, a term which had been used in Fox News' coverage of the white supremacist rally.

[ 328 ] Several of Trump's comments at the press conference mirrored those appearing earlier on Fox News.

[ 331 ] According to Dylan Byers of CNN, Fox News' coverage on the day of the press conference "was heavy with " whataboutism ". The average Fox viewer was likely left with the impression that the media's criticism of Trump and leftist protestors' toppling of some Confederate statues were far greater threats to America than white supremacism or the president's apparent defense of bigotry." [ 330 ] Byers wrote "it showed that if Fox News has a line when it comes to Trump's presidency, it was not crossed on Tuesday." [ 330 ] Glenn Beck's comments about George Soros During Glenn Beck 's tenure at Fox News, he became one of the most high-profile proponents of conspiracy theories about George Soros , a Jewish Hungarian-American businessman and philanthropist known for his donations to American liberal political causes.

[ 332 ] Beck regularly described Soros as a "puppet-master" and used common anti-Semitic tropes to describe Soros and his activities.

[ 332 ] In a 2010 three-part series, Beck depicted George Soros as a cartoonish villain trying to "form a shadow government, using humanitarian aid as a cover", and that Soros wanted a one-world government.

[ 333 ] [ 334 ] Beck promoted the false and anti-Semitic conspiracy theory that Soros was a Nazi collaborator as a 14-year-old in Nazi-occupied Hungary.

[ 335 ] Beck also characterized Soros's mother as a "wildly anti-Semitic" Nazi collaborator.

[ 333 ] According to The Washington Post : "Beck's series was largely considered obscene and delusional, if not outright anti-Semitic", but Beck's conspiracy theory became common on the right-wing of American politics.

[ 333 ] Amid criticism of Beck's false smears, Fox News defended Beck, stating "information regarding Mr. Soros's experiences growing up were taken directly from his writings and from interviews given by him to the media, and no negative opinion was offered as to his actions as a child." [ 334 ] [ 336 ] Roger Ailes, then-head of Fox News, dismissed criticism levied at Beck by hundreds of rabbis, saying that they were "left-wing rabbis who basically don't think that anybody can ever use the word, Holocaust, on the air." [ 337 ] COVID-19 pandemic Main articles: Fox News coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic and Media coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic During the first few weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States , Fox News was considerably more likely than other mainstream news outlets to promote misinformation about COVID-19 .

[ 38 ] The network promoted the narrative that the emergency response to the pandemic was politically motivated or otherwise unwarranted, [ 39 ] with Sean Hannity explicitly calling it a "hoax" (he later denied doing so) and other hosts downplaying it.

[ 40 ] This coverage was consistent with the messaging of Trump at the time.

[ 338 ] Only in mid March did the network change the tone of its coverage, [ 339 ] after President Trump declared a national emergency.

[ 338 ] At the same time that Fox News commentators downplayed the threat of the virus in public, Fox's management and the Murdoch family took a broad range of internal measures to protect themselves and their employees against it.

[ 340 ] [ 341 ] [ 342 ] [ 343 ] Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham , two of Fox News's primetime hosts, promoted use of the drug hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19, an off-label usage which at the time was supported only by anecdotal evidence , after it was touted by Trump as a possible cure.

[ 344 ] Fox News promoted a conspiracy theory that coronavirus death toll numbers were inflated with people who would have died anyway from preexisting conditions. This was disputed by White House coronavirus task force members Anthony Fauci and Deborah Birx , with Fauci describing conspiracy theories as "nothing but distractions" during public health crises.

[ 345 ] Later in the pandemic, Hannity, Ingraham and Carlson promoted the use of livestock dewormer ivermectin as a possible COVID-19 treatment.

[ 346 ] Studies have linked trust in Fox News, [ 347 ] as well as viewership of Fox News, [ 348 ] with fewer preventive behaviors and more risky behaviors related to COVID-19.

[ 349 ] Once a COVID-19 vaccine became widely available, Fox News consistently questioned the efficacy and safety of the vaccine, celebrated evidence-free skepticism, and blasted attempts to promote vaccinations.

[ 350 ] More than 90% of Fox Corporation's full-time employees had been fully vaccinated by September 2021.

[ 351 ] 2020 election fraud allegations and lawsuits by Dominion and Smartmatic See also: Dominion Voting Systems v. Fox News Network and Big lie § Donald Trump's false claims of a stolen election After Trump's defeat in the 2020 presidential election, Fox News host Jeanine Pirro promoted baseless allegations on her program that voting machine company Smartmatic and its competitor Dominion Voting Systems had conspired to rig the election against Trump. Hosts Lou Dobbs and Maria Bartiromo also promoted the allegations on their programs on sister network Fox Business .

[ 352 ] In December 2020, Smartmatic sent a letter to Fox News demanding retractions and threatening legal action, specifying that retractions "must be published on multiple occasions" so as to "match the attention and audience targeted with the original defamatory publications." [ 353 ] Days later, each of the three programs aired the same three-minute video segment consisting of an interview with an election technology expert who refuted the allegations promoted by the hosts, responding to questions from an unseen and unidentified man. None of the three hosts personally issued retractions. Smartmatic filed a $2.7 billion defamation suit against the network, the three hosts, Powell and Trump attorney Rudy Giuliani in February 2021.

[ 354 ] In an April 2021 court brief seeking dismissal of the suit, Fox attorney Paul Clement argued that the network was simply "reporting allegations made by a sitting President and his lawyers." [ 355 ] A New York State Supreme Court judge ruled in March 2022 that the suit could proceed, though he dismissed allegations against Sidney Powell and Pirro, and some claims against Giuliani. The judge allowed allegations against Bartiromo and Dobbs to stand.

[ 356 ] The New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division unanimously rejected a Fox News bid to dismiss the Smartmatic suit in February 2023. The court reinstated defamation allegations against Giuliani and Pirro.

[ 357 ] [ 358 ] In December 2020, Dominion Voting Systems sent a similar letter demanding retractions to Trump attorney Sidney Powell, [ 359 ] [ 360 ] [ 361 ] who had promoted the allegations on Fox programs.

[ 362 ] [ 363 ] [ 364 ] On March 26, 2021, Dominion filed a $1.6 billion defamation lawsuit against Fox News, alleging that Fox and some of its pundits spread conspiracy theories about Dominion, and allowed guests to make false statements about the company.

[ 365 ] On May 18, 2021, Fox News filed a motion to dismiss the Dominion Voting Systems lawsuit, asserting a First Amendment right "to inform the public about newsworthy allegations of paramount public concern." [ 366 ] The motion to dismiss was denied on December 16, 2021, by a Delaware Superior Court judge.

[ 367 ] In addition to Bartiromo, Dobbs, and Pirro, the suit also names primetime hosts Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity.

[ 368 ] Venezuelan businessman Majed Khalil sued Fox, Dobbs and Powell for $250 million in December 2021, alleging they had falsely implicated him in rigging Dominion and Smartmatic machines.

[ 369 ] Dobbs and Fox News reached a confidential settlement with Khalil in April 2023.

[ 370 ] Fox News was the only major network or cable news outlet to not carry the first televised prime time hearing of the January 6 committee live; its regular programming of Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity was aired without commercial breaks. During the weeks following the election, Carlson and Hannity often amplified Trump's election falsehoods on their programs; previously disclosed text messages between Hannity and White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany were presented during the hearing. Hannity told his audience, "Unlike this committee and their cheerleaders in the media mob, we will actually be telling you the truth," while Carlson said, "This is the only hour on an American news channel that won't be covering their propaganda live. They are lying and we are not going to help them do it." [ 371 ] [ 372 ] [ 373 ] [ 374 ] In June 2022, a Delaware Superior Court judge again declined to dismiss the Dominion suit against Fox News, and also allowed Dominion to sue the network's corporate parent, Fox Corporation. The judge ruled that Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch may have acted with actual malice because there was a reasonable inference they "either knew Dominion had not manipulated the election or at least recklessly disregarded the truth when they allegedly caused Fox News to propagate its claims about Dominion." He noted a report that Rupert Murdoch spoke with Trump a few days after the election and informed him that he had lost.

[ 375 ] The New York Times reported in December 2022 that Dominion had acquired communications between Fox News executives and hosts, and between a Fox Corporation employee and the Trump White House, showing they knew that what the network was reporting was untrue. Dominion attorneys said hosts Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson, and Fox executives, attested to this in sworn depositions. In November 2020, Hannity hosted Sidney Powell , who asserted Dominion machines had been rigged, but said in his deposition, "I did not believe it for one second." [ 376 ] A February 2023 Dominion court filing showed Fox News primetime hosts messaging each other to insult and mock Trump advisers, indicating the hosts knew the allegations made by Powell and Giuliani were false. Rupert Murdoch messaged that Trump's voter fraud claims were "really crazy stuff," telling Fox News CEO Suzanne Scott that it was "terrible stuff damaging everybody, I fear." As a January 2021 Georgia runoff election approached that would determine party control of the U.S. Senate, Murdoch told Scott, "Trump will concede eventually and we should concentrate on Georgia, helping any way we can." [ 377 ] [ 378 ] [ 379 ] [ 380 ] After the 2016 election, the network developed a cutting-edge system to call elections, which proved very successful during the 2018 midterm elections. The network was the first to call the 2020 Arizona race for Biden, angering many viewers. Washington managing editor Bill Sammon supervised the network's Decision Desk that made the call.

Bret Baier and Martha MacCallum , the network's main news anchors, suggested during a high-level conference call that relying solely on data to make the call was inadequate and that viewer reaction should also be considered; MacCallum said, "in a Trump environment, the game is just very, very different." Sammon stood by the 2020 call and was fired by the network after the January 2021 Georgia runoff.

[ 381 ] In 2023, Rupert Murdoch was deposed and testified that some Fox News commentators were endorsing election fraud claims they knew were false.

[ 382 ] [ 383 ] In February 2023, Fox's internal communications were released, showing that its presenters and senior executives privately doubted Donald Trump's claims of a stolen election.

[ 384 ] Chairman Rupert Murdoch once described Trump's voter fraud claims as "really crazy stuff", and also said that Trump advisers Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell's television appearances were "terrible stuff damaging everybody".

[ 384 ] One November 2020 exchange showed Tucker Carlson accusing Powell of "lying ... I caught her. It's insane", with Laura Ingraham responding that "Sidney is a complete nut. No one will work with her. Ditto with Rudy".

[ 384 ] In another exchange that month, Carlson called for Fox journalist Jacqui Heinrich to be "fired" because she fact-checked Trump and said that there was no evidence of voter fraud from Dominion.

[ 384 ] Carlson said that Heinrich's actions "needs to stop immediately, like tonight. It's measurably hurting the company. The stock price is down", while Heinrich deleted the fact-check the next morning.

[ 384 ] In March 2023, more of Fox's internal communications were released.

[ 385 ] One November 2020 communication showed Fox CEO Suzanne Scott criticizing fact-checking, stating that she cannot "keep defending these reporters who don't understand our viewers and how to handle stories ... The audience feels like we crapped on" them, and Fox was losing their audience's "trust and belief" in them.

[ 385 ] Another December 2020 communication showed Scott responding to Fox presenter Eric Shawn's fact-checking of Donald Trump's false 2020 election claims by demanding that the fact-checking "has to stop now ... This is bad business ... The audience is furious." [ 385 ] On March 31, 2023, Delaware Superior Court judge Eric Davis ruled in a summary judgment that it "is CRYSTAL clear that none of the statements relating to Dominion about the 2020 election are true" and ordered for the case to go to trial.

[ 37 ] On April 18, 2023, Fox News reached a settlement with Dominion just before the trial started, concluding the lawsuit; Fox agreed to pay Dominion $787.5 million, and further stated: "We acknowledge the Court's rulings finding certain claims about Dominion to be false".

[ 36 ] Compulsory reductions in meat consumption In April 2021, [ 386 ] at least five Fox News and Fox Business personalities amplified a story published by the Daily Mail , a British tabloid, that incorrectly linked a university study to President Joe Biden's climate change agenda, to falsely assert that Americans would be compelled to dramatically reduce their meat consumption to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions caused by flatulence . Fox News aired a graphic detailing the supposed compulsory reductions, falsely indicating the information came from the Agriculture Department , which numerous Republican politicians and commentators tweeted. Fox News anchor John Roberts reported to "say goodbye to your burgers if you want to sign up to the Biden climate agenda." Days later, Roberts acknowledged on air that the story was false.

[ 387 ] [ 388 ] [ 389 ] Report that Biden administration was continuing to build the Mexico–United States border wall According to analysis by Media Matters, on May 12, 2021, Fox News reported on its website: "Biden resumes border wall construction after promising to halt it". Correspondent Bill Melugin then appeared on Special Report with Bret Baier to report "the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is actually going to be restarting border wall construction down in the Rio Grande Valley" after "a lot of blowback and pressure from local residents and local politicians." After the Corps of Engineers tweeted a clarification, Melugin deleted a tweet about the story and tweeted an "update" clarifying that a levee wall was being constructed to mitigate damage to flood control systems caused by uncompleted wall construction, and the website story headline was changed to "Biden administration to resume border wall levee construction as crisis worsens." Later on Fox News Primetime , host Brian Kilmeade briefly noted the levee but commented to former Trump advisor Stephen Miller : "They're going to restart building the wall again, Stephen." Fox News host Sean Hannity later broadcast the original Melugin story without any mention of the levee.

[ 390 ] [ 391 ] [ 392 ] Crime reporting Media Matters reported in September 2024 that during the Biden presidency Fox News had promoted a false "crime crisis" narrative, particularly directed toward undocumented migrants, which reflected Donald Trump's political rhetoric. The Fox News narrative consisted of reported violent crime anecdotes rather than FBI crime rate statistics showing violent crime had declined significantly since 2020. One Fox host, Ainsley Earhardt , said that even if the FBI data were right, "we're all a little bit more scared than we used to be." Later that month, weeks before the 2024 presidential election, the FBI released crime data for 2023 showing that violent crime had declined 3% from 2022. The report was widely covered by mainstream news outlets that day, though the Fox News coverage was limited to a 28-second segment by evening anchor Bret Baier . He reported "critics say the report is not accurate because it does not include big cities," echoing a false assertion made by Elon Musk and other Trump supporters on social media.

[ 393 ] [ 394 ] Controversies Main article: Fox News controversies Sexual harassment The network has been accused of permitting sexual harassment and racial discrimination by on-air hosts, executives, and employees, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] paying out millions of dollars in legal settlements.

[ 44 ] [ 395 ] Prominent Fox News figures such as Roger Ailes, Bill O'Reilly and Eric Bolling were fired after many women accused them of sexual harassment. At least four lawsuits alleged Fox News co-president Bill Shine ignored, enabled or concealed Roger Ailes' alleged sexual harassment.

[ 396 ] [ 397 ] [ 398 ] Fox News CEO Rupert Murdoch has dismissed the high-profile sexual misconduct allegations as "largely political" and speculated they were made "because we are conservative".

[ 399 ] Bill O'Reilly and Fox News settled six agreements, totaling $45 million, with women who accused O'Reilly of sexual harassment.

[ 400 ] [ 401 ] In January 2017, shortly after Bill O'Reilly settled a sexual harassment lawsuit for $32 million ("an extraordinarily large amount for such cases"), Fox News renewed Bill O'Reilly's contract.

[ 400 ] Fox News's parent company, 21st Century Fox, said it was aware of the lawsuit.

[ 400 ] The contract between O'Reilly and Fox News read he could not be fired from the network unless sexual harassment allegations were proven in court.

[ 402 ] Fox News's extensive coverage of the Harvey Weinstein scandal in October 2017 was seen by some as hypocritical.

[ 403 ] [ 404 ] Fox News dedicated at least 12 hours of coverage to the Weinstein scandal, yet only dedicated 20 minutes to Bill O'Reilly, who just like Weinstein had been accused of sexual harassment by a multitude of women.

[ 403 ] [ 404 ] A few weeks later, when a number of females under the age of 18, including a 14-year-old, accused Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore of making sexual advances, Hannity dismissed the sexual misconduct allegations and dedicated coverage on his television show to casting doubt on the accusers.

[ 405 ] [ 406 ] Other prime-time Fox News hosts Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham queried The Washington Post ' s reporting or opted to bring up sexual misconduct allegations regarding show business figures such as Harvey Weinstein and Louis C.K .

[ 195 ] Fox News figures Jeanine Pirro and Gregg Jarrett questioned both the validity of The Washington Post ' s reporting and that of the women.

[ 407 ] In December 2017, a few days before the Alabama Senate election, Fox News, along with the conspiracy websites Breitbart News and The Gateway Pundit , ran an inaccurate headline which claimed one of Roy Moore's accusers admitted to forging an inscription by Roy Moore in her yearbook; Fox News later added a correction to the story.

[ 408 ] A number of Fox News hosts have welcomed Bill O'Reilly to their shows and paid tributes to Roger Ailes after his death. In May 2017, Hannity called Ailes "a second father" and said to Ailes's "enemies" that he was "preparing to kick your a** in the next life".

[ 409 ] Ailes had the year before been fired from Fox News after women alleged he sexually harassed them.

[ 409 ] In September 2017, several months after Bill O'Reilly was fired from Fox News in the wake of women alleging he sexually harassed them, Hannity hosted O'Reilly on his show.

[ 410 ] [ 411 ] [ 412 ] Some Fox News employees criticized the decision.

[ 411 ] According to CNN, during the interview, Hannity found kinship with O'Reilly as he appeared "to feel that he and O'Reilly have both become victims of liberals looking to silence them." [ 411 ] Obama administration conflict In September 2009, the Obama administration engaged in a verbal conflict with Fox News Channel. On September 20, President Barack Obama appeared on all major news programs except Fox News, a snub partially in response to remarks about him by commentators Glenn Beck and Sean Hannity and Fox coverage of Obama's health-care proposal.

[ 413 ] [ 414 ] In late September 2009, Obama's senior advisor David Axelrod and Roger Ailes met in secret to attempt to smooth out tensions between the two camps. Two weeks later, White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel referred to FNC as "not a news network" and communications director Anita Dunn said "Fox News often operates as either the research arm or the communications arm of the Republican Party".

[ 415 ] [ 416 ] Obama commented: "If media is operating basically as a talk radio format, then that's one thing, and if it's operating as a news outlet, then that's another." [ 417 ] Emanuel said it was important "to not have the CNNs and the others in the world basically be led in following Fox".

[ 418 ] Within days, it was reported that Fox had been excluded from an interview with administration official Ken Feinberg , with bureau chiefs from the White House press pool (ABC, CBS, NBC, and CNN) coming to Fox's defense.

[ 416 ] A bureau chief said: "If any member had been excluded it would have been the same thing, it has nothing to do with Fox or the White House or the substance of the issues." [ 419 ] Shortly after the story broke, the White House admitted to a low-level mistake, saying Fox had not made a specific request to interview Feinberg. Fox White House correspondent Major Garrett said he had not made a specific request, but had a "standing request from me as senior White House correspondent on Fox to interview any newsmaker at the Treasury at any given time news is being made".

[ 420 ] On November 8, 2009, the Los Angeles Times reported an unnamed Democratic consultant was warned by the White House not to appear on Fox News again. According to the article, Dunn claimed in an e-mail to have checked with colleagues who "deal with TV issues" who denied telling anyone to avoid Fox.

Patrick Caddell , a Fox News contributor and former pollster for President Jimmy Carter , said he had spoken with other Democratic consultants who had received similar warnings from the White House.

[ 421 ] On October 2, 2013, Fox News host Anna Kooiman cited on the air a fake story from the National Report parody site, which claimed Obama had offered to keep the International Museum of Muslim Cultures open with cash from his own pocket.

[ 422 ] [ 423 ] Journalistic ethical standards Fox News attracted controversy in April 2018 when it was revealed primetime host Sean Hannity had defended Trump's then personal attorney Michael Cohen on air without disclosing Cohen was his lawyer.

[ 424 ] On April 9, 2018, federal agents from the U.S. Attorney's office served a search warrant on Cohen's office and residence.

[ 425 ] On the air, Hannity defended Cohen and criticized the federal action, calling it "highly questionable" and "an unprecedented abuse of power".

[ 426 ] On April 16, 2018, in a court hearing, Cohen's lawyers told the judge that Cohen had ten clients in 2017–2018 but did "traditional legal tasks" for only three: Trump, Elliott Broidy , and a "prominent person" who did not wish to be named for fear of being "embarrassed".

[ 427 ] [ 428 ] [ 429 ] The federal judge ordered the revelation of the third client, whom Cohen's lawyers named as Hannity.

[ 427 ] Hannity was not sanctioned by Fox News for this breach of journalistic ethics, with Fox News releasing a statement that the channel was unaware of Hannity's relationship to Cohen and that it had "spoken to Sean and he continues to have our full support." [ 424 ] [ 430 ] [ 431 ] [ 432 ] Media ethics experts said that Hannity's disclosure failure was a major breach of journalistic ethics and that the network should have suspended or fired him for it.

[ 432 ] NYC Human Rights Law violations In mid-2021, Fox News agreed to pay a $1 million settlement to New York City after its Commission on Human Rights cited "a pattern of violating the NYC Human Rights Law ". A Fox News spokesperson claimed that "FOX News Media has already been in full compliance across the board, but [settled] to continue enacting extensive preventive measures against all forms of discrimination and harassment." [ 433 ] Climate denial and misinformation During the May 22, 2023, episode of Fox News Tonight, discussing Roman climate protesters drawing attention on drought and floods in Italy, the correspondent Trace Gallagher downplayed the role of climate change for the recent meteorological situation pointing at Italian history.

[ 434 ] [ 435 ] International transmission Countries where Fox News is provided The Fox News Channel feed has international availability via multiple providers, while Fox Extra segments provide alternate programming.

[ 436 ] Fox News is carried in more than 40 countries.

Australia In Australia, FNC is broadcast on the dominant pay television provider Foxtel .

Brazil FNC reached Brazil through Sky Brasil on November 1, 2002, after being introduced at ABTA 2002.

[ 437 ] Commercials on FNC are replaced with Fox Extra . It is available on Vivo TV .

Canada Fox had initially planned to launch a joint venture with Canwest 's Global Television Network , tentatively named Fox News Canada, which would have featured a mixture of U.S. and Canadian news programming.

[ 438 ] As a result, the CRTC denied a 2003 application requesting permission for Fox News Channel to be carried in Canada . However, in March 2004, a Fox executive said the venture had been shelved; in November of that year, the CRTC added Fox News to its whitelist of foreign channels that may be carried by television providers.

[ 439 ] In May 2023, the CRTC announced that it would open a public consultation regarding the channel's carriage in Canada, acting upon complaints by the LGBT advocacy group Egale Canada surrounding an episode of Tucker Carlson Tonight that contained content described as "malicious misinformation" regarding trans, non-binary, gender non-conforming, and two-spirit communities, including "the inflammatory and false claim that trans people are 'targeting' Christians." [ 440 ] France Fox News is available on cable through French Internet provider Free on channel 352.

[ citation needed ] India It is available through streaming service Disney+ Hotstar .

Indonesia In Indonesia , it is available on Channel 397 on pay-TV provider First Media .

Ireland See: United Kingdom & Ireland .

Israel In Israel, FNC is broadcast on Channel 105 of the satellite provider Yes , as well as being carried on Cellcom TV and Partner TV.

[ 441 ] It is also broadcast on channel 200 on cable operator HOT .

[ 442 ] Italy In Italy, FNC is broadcast on Sky Italia . Fox News was launched on Stream TV in 2001, and moved to Sky Italia in 2003.

Japan Although service to Japan ceased in summer 2003, it can still be seen on Americable (distributor for American bases ), [ 443 ] Mediatti ( Kadena Air Base ) [ 444 ] and Pan Global TV Japan.

[ 445 ] Mexico The channel's international feed is being carried by cable provider Izzi Telecom .

Netherlands In the Netherlands, Fox News has been carried by cable providers UPC Nederland and CASEMA, and satellite provider Canaldigitaal ; all have dropped the channel in recent years. At this time, only cable provider Caiway (available in a limited number of towns in the central part of the country) is broadcasting the channel. The channel was also carried by IPTV provider KNIPPR (owned by T-Mobile ).

New Zealand In New Zealand, FNC is broadcast on Channel 088 of pay satellite operator SKY Network Television 's digital platform. It was formerly broadcast overnight on free-to-air UHF New Zealand TV channel Prime ; this was discontinued in January 2010, reportedly due to an expiring broadcasting license.

[ 446 ] Pakistan In Pakistan, Fox News Channel is available on PTCL Smart TV and a number of cable and IPTV operators.

Philippines In the Philippines , Fox News Channel is available on Sky Cable , Cablelink and G Sat Channel 50. It was available on Cignal until January 1, 2021, due to contract expiration; however, the channel returned on June 16, 2022.

Portugal In Portugal, Fox News was available on Meo . The channel is however no longer available on the operator and it is not carried by other Portuguese TV operators.

Scandinavia Between 2003 and 2006, in Sweden and the other Scandinavian countries , FNC was broadcast 16 hours a day on TV8 (with Fox News Extra segments replacing U.S. advertising). Fox News was dropped by TV8 in September 2006.

Singapore In Singapore, FNC is broadcast on pay-TV operator StarHub TV , as well on Singtel TV .

South Africa In South Africa, FNC is broadcast on StarSat .

[ 447 ] The most popular pay television operator, DStv , does not offer FNC in its channel bouquet.

[ 448 ] Spain In Spain, Fox News was available on Movistar Plus+ . The channel was part of the operator since its first incarnation as Canal Satellite Digital in the early 2000s, but was later removed from the operator's satellite offer by March 2023, and ceased transmission to the remaining offers on July 9, 2024.

[ 449 ] The channel is not carried by other Spanish TV operators.

United Kingdom and Ireland FNC was carried in the United Kingdom by Sky . On August 29, 2017, Sky dropped Fox News; the broadcaster said its carriage was not "commercially viable" due to average viewership of fewer than 2,000 viewers per day. The company said the decision was unrelated to 21st Century Fox's proposed acquisition of the remainder of Sky plc (which ultimately led to a bidding war that resulted in its acquisition by Comcast instead).

[ 450 ] The potential co-ownership had prompted concerns from critics of the deal, who felt Sky News could similarly undergo a shift to an opinionated format with a right-wing viewpoint. However, such a move would violate Ofcom broadcast codes, which requires all news programming to show due impartiality. The channel's broadcasts in the country have violated this rule on several occasions.

[ 451 ] [ 452 ] [ 453 ] [ 454 ] Notable personalities Program hosts Bret Baier Maria Bartiromo Shannon Bream Will Cain Rachel Campos-Duffy Emily Compagno Steve Doocy Ainsley Earhardt Harris Faulkner Harold Ford Jr.

Trace Gallagher Paul Gigot Trey Gowdy Greg Gutfeld Sean Hannity Bill Hemmer Charles Hurt Laura Ingraham Lawrence B. Jones Brian Kilmeade Howard Kurtz Mark Levin Martha MacCallum Kayleigh McEnany Arthel Neville Dana Perino John Roberts Jon Scott Eric Shawn Sandra Smith Jessica Tarlov Lara Trump Stuart Varney Jesse Watters Correspondents and substitute anchors Manny Alvarez Julie Banderas Christine Clayburg Kevin Corke Claudia Cowan Janice Dean Peter Doocy Rich Edson Mike Emanuel Anna Gilligan Lauren Green Jennifer Griffin Benjamin Hall Steve Harrigan Aishah Hasnie Jacqui Heinrich Molly Henneberg Brit Hume Griff Jenkins Phil Keating Kennedy Molly Line Bryan Llenas Dagen McDowell Hollie McKay Kate Obenshain Charles Payne Katie Pavlich Carley Shimkus Trey Yingst Regular guests and contributors Keith Ablow Charly Arnolt Raymond Arroyo David Asman Mike Baker William Bennett Guy Benson Jason Chaffetz Matthew Continetti Kellyanne Conway Brett Cooper Alan Dershowitz Miranda Devine Ben Domenech Larry Elder Mo Elleithee [ 455 ] Ezekiel Emanuel [ 455 ] Nigel Farage [ 456 ] Ari Fleischer Steve Forbes Charlie Gasparino Newt Gingrich Bernard Goldberg Victor Davis Hanson Marie Harf [ 455 ] Mollie Hemingway [ 455 ] Hugh Hewitt Steve Hilton Philip A. Holloway Mike Huckabee Santita Jackson Gregg Jarrett Robert Jeffress Jack Keane Keith Kellogg Charlie Kirk Dennis Kucinich Tomi Lahren John Layfield Rich Lowry Frank Luntz Leslie Marshall Andrew C. McCarthy William McGurn Dennis Miller Judith Miller Stephen Moore Jonathan Morris Deroy Murdock Douglas Murray Oliver North Kevin O'Leary Burgess Owens [ 457 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Candace Owens Katie Pavlich Charles Payne Mark Penn Drew Pinsky Jason L. Riley Karl Rove Nicole Saphier Mercedes Schlapp Douglas Schoen Ben Shapiro Tom Shillue Marc Siegel Ben Stein Kimberley Strassel Leo Terrell Marc Thiessen Katherine Timpf Clay Travis Joe Trippi Jonathan Turley Tyrus Brett Velicovich Jason Whitlock Lis Wiehl Juan Williams Chad Wolf Robert Wolf John Yoo Byron York Former hosts and contributors Jim Angle (deceased) Louis Aguirre (former morning host, now at WPLG in Miami) Jennifer Ashton (now at ABC News ) Ellison Barber (now with NBC News ) Tiki Barber (now with CBS Sports Network ) Fred Barnes Rudi Bakhtiar (now PR Director for the Public Affairs Alliance of Iranian Americans) Glenn Beck (former afternoon host; now on TheBlaze ) Bob Beckel (terminated amid racist remarks, deceased) Lisa Bernhard (entertainment correspondent) Jedediah Bila Tony Blankley (deceased) Dan Bongino Eric Bolling (terminated amid sexual harassment allegations) John R. Bolton (left to become U.S. National Security Advisor) Donna Brazile [ 458 ] (now at ABC News) Dave Briggs (now at CNN ) Patti Ann Browne Scott Brown Tammy Bruce Eric Burns (not renewed) Brenda Buttner (deceased) Patrick Caddell (deceased) Joseph A. Cafasso (stepped down over allegations he overrepresented his military record) Herman Cain (deceased) Carl Cameron (retired in August 2017) Alisyn Camerota (now at CNN) Gretchen Carlson Tucker Carlson Ben Carson (joined Trump cabinet) Neil Cavuto Steve Centanni (retired in August 2014) Heather Childers (terminated, now at Newsmax TV ) Liz Cheney (now in public service) Kiran Chetry (later worked for CNN) Wesley Clark (now at CNN) Alan Colmes (deceased) Rita Cosby (later worked at MSNBC ) Catherine Crier (now at TruTV ) Monica Crowley S. E. Cupp (now at CNN) Stacey Dash (not renewed) Lou Dobbs (deceased) Jill Dobson Laurie Dhue (not renewed) Matt Drudge Darby Dunn (now at CNBC ) Erick Erickson (now at WSB Radio in Atlanta ) Donna Fiducia (no longer active in cable news industry, went into Georgia real estate) Kristin Fisher (now at CNN) Rick Folbaum (now at WANF ) Melissa Francis (not renewed) Courtney Friel (now at KTLA-TV ) Neal Gabler Lea Gabrielle Major Garrett (now at CBS News ) John Gibson Alexis Glick (left Fox Business in December 2009; now at CNN) Jonah Goldberg Wendell Goler (deceased) Kimberly Guilfoyle Jane Hall Mary Katharine Ham (now at CNN) [ 459 ] Elisabeth Hasselbeck Stephen F. Hayes Pete Hegseth (now United States Secretary of Defense) Ed Henry (terminated amid sexual harassment allegations) Catherine Herridge (now at CBS News) E. D. Hill (now at CNN) Marc Lamont Hill (now at BET and CNN) Kit Hoover (now at TLC ) Margaret Hoover (now at PBS and CNN) Page Hopkins (left network September 26, 2008; now at MSNBC) Adam Housley Juliet Huddy (now at WABC Radio ) Abby Huntsman (now on The View on ABC) Laura Ingle (now at NewsNation ) Carol Iovanna (now runs production company) Marvin Kalb (not renewed) John Kasich (later served two terms as Governor of Ohio from 2011 to 2019) Terry Keenan (deceased) Greg Kelly (now at Newsmax TV) Megyn Kelly (moved to NBC News; left NBC in January 2019) Mort Kondracke Anna Kooiman (now at Network 10 ) Charles Krauthammer (deceased) Bill Kristol Jenna Lee Rick Leventhal Harvey Levin Andy Levy (now at HLN ) Dana Lewis (now at WSAW-TV in Wausau) G. Gordon Liddy (deceased) Lara Logan Michelle Malkin (now at Newsmax TV) Rachel Marsden (contributor and Red Eye panelist; now lives in France) Meghan McCain Bill McCuddy Doug McKelway Jillian Mele Zell Miller Maria Molina Clayton Morris Dick Morris (contributor, not renewed) Andrew Napolitano Heather Nauert (now Senior Fellow at the Hudson Institute ) Scottie Nell Hughes (terminated) Janette Nesheiwat , MD Reena Ninan (now at CNN, Good Trouble Productions & female bodybuilding ) Joanne Nosuchinsky Robert Novak (deceased) Bill O'Reilly (terminated amid sexual harassment allegations) Barbara Olson (killed in the September 11 attacks in 2001) Morgan Ortagus (now U.S. State Department Spokesperson) Lt. Col.

Ralph Peters Uma Pemmaraju (deceased) Julian Phillips Jeanine Pirro Kirsten Powers (now at CNN) Elizabeth Prann (now at HLN ) Judith Regan Rick Reichmuth Geraldo Rivera Julie Roginsky Ed Rollins (not renewed) James Rosen (now at the Sinclair Broadcast Group ) Sarah Huckabee Sanders (contributor, terminated) Rick Santorum (now with CNN) Rob Schmitt (now at Newsmax TV) Mike Schneider (left for Bloomberg Television , most recently at NJTV ) Laura Schwartz Bob Sellers (was morning co-anchor at WZTV in Nashville until 2016) Suzanne Sena David Shuster (now at i24NEWS) Jane Skinner Shepard Smith (left for CNBC) Tony Snow (became White House Press Secretary , deceased) Todd Starnes Chris Stirewalt (now at NewsNation) John Stossel Andrea Tantaros Cal Thomas (not renewed) Greta Van Susteren (left for MSNBC, now at Gray Television ) Linda Vester Leland Vittert (now at NewsNation) Chris Wallace (now at CNN) George Will (now at NBC News and MSNBC) Brian Wilson (presently morning drive time host on WMAL-FM ) Paula Zahn (left for CNN, now at Investigation Discovery ) See also Companies portal New York City portal Television portal United States portal The Fox Effect Fox Music The Fox Nation Fox News controversies Broadcasting Journalistic objectivity Mass media Media bias Media bias in the United States News media News media in the United States Radio Maria Television studio Notes ^ a b [ 289 ] [ 290 ] [ 291 ] [ 292 ] According to the fact-checking website Climate Feedback , Fox News is part of "a network of unreliable outlets for climate news." [ 290 ] ^ Multiple sources: [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] ^ Multiple sources have described Fox News as propaganda including researchers, [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 27 ] [ 81 ] news organizations, [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] Republican politicians, [ 88 ] [ 89 ] former Fox hosts and employees, [ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] and commentators.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] References ^ "HD Channels | HD Report" .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 9, 2022 .

^ a b "Corporate Information" .

Press.FoxNews.com . Fox News Network, LLC.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 11, 2020 .

^ Nie, Norman H.; Miller, Darwin W. III; Golde, Saar; Butler, Daniel M.

; Winneg, Kenneth (2010). "The World Wide Web and the U.S. Political News Market".

American Journal of Political Science .

54 (2): 428– 439.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2010.00439.x .

ISSN 1540-5907 .

^ Meyers, Christopher (July 2, 2020). "Partisan News, the Myth of Objectivity, and the Standards of Responsible Journalism".

Journal of Media Ethics .

35 (3): 180– 194.

doi : 10.1080/23736992.2020.1780131 .

ISSN 2373-6992 .

S2CID 221538960 .

^ "Media Relations" . Fox News.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Joyella, Mark.

"Fox News Hits 23rd Consecutive Month As Most-Watched In Cable News As CNN Sees Gains In January" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2023 . Retrieved March 11, 2023 .

^ "Fox News Channel had largest cable TV audience for 7th-straight year in 2022" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2023 . Retrieved March 11, 2023 .

^ Ellison, Sarah; Barr, Jeremy (May 3, 2023).

"For the Murdochs, Tucker Carlson became more trouble than he was worth" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2023 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 .

^ "Where in the World is FOX?" . Fox News. March 1, 2011.

Archived from the original on February 6, 2019 . Retrieved February 6, 2019 .

^ "Fox plans to run sponsored stories during ad breaks this fall" .

FierceVideo . June 18, 2018. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 .

^ Mifflin, Lawrie (October 7, 1996).

"At the new Fox News Channel, the buzzword is fairness, separating news from bias" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2019 . Retrieved May 4, 2010 .

^ Richwine, Lisa; Gibson, Ginger (July 21, 2016).

"Divisive Ailes gave conservatives a TV home at Fox News" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ a b King, Angela G. (October 7, 1996). "Fox Hunts TV News Niche with Channel Debut Today".

Daily News . New York.

^ Gillette, Felix (October 1, 2008).

"Viewers Continuing to Flock to Cable News Networks" .

The New York Observer .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Bucholtz, Andrew (September 10, 2018).

"Nielsen coverage estimates for September see gains at ESPN networks, NBCSN, and NBA TV, drops at MLBN and NFLN" . Awful Announcing.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2019 . Retrieved January 17, 2020 .

^ Joyella, Mark (December 11, 2019).

"Fox News Ends 2019 With Biggest Prime Time Ratings Ever" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved January 16, 2020 .

^ Andreeva, Nellie; Johnson, Ted (December 27, 2019).

"Cable Ratings 2019: Fox News Tops Total Viewers, ESPN Wins 18–49 Demo As Entertainment Networks Slide" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2020 . Retrieved January 16, 2020 .

^ Schneider, Michael (December 26, 2019).

"Most-Watched Television Networks: Ranking 2019's Winners and Losers" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 16, 2020 .

^ Reilly, Katie (July 21, 2016).

"Roger Ailes Resigns From Fox News Amid Sexual Harassment Accusations" .

Time .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Redden, Molly (July 21, 2016).

"Roger Ailes leaves Fox News in wake of sexual harassment claims" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2023 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver (September 21, 2023).

"Rupert Murdoch steps down as Fox and News Corp. chairman" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2023 . Retrieved September 21, 2023 .

The channel, however, veered from its roots in conservative news as former President Donald Trump ascended to power in the Republican Party in 2015, becoming an unabashed home of right-wing propaganda aimed at propping up the scandal-ridden White House.

^ Steinberg, Brian (May 17, 2018).

"Suzanne Scott Named CEO of Fox News" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2018 .

^ a b Jamieson, Kathleen Hall; Cappella, Joseph N. (February 4, 2010).

Echo Chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the Conservative Media Establishment . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19539-860-1 .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

We do this to illustrate the ways Fox News, Limbaugh, and the print and web editorial pages of the Wall Street Journal play both offense and defense in service of conservative objectives. As these case studies will suggest, the big three reinforce each other's conservative messages in ways that distinguish them from the other major broadcast media, CBS News, NBC News, ABC News, CNN, MSNBC, CNBC and major print outlets such as the Washington Post and New York Times.

^ a b c Skocpol, Theda; Williamson, Vanessa (September 1, 2016).

The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 5, 8, 86, 123, 125, 130– 140.

ISBN 978-0-19063-366-0 .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

... the challenge of spreading and germinating the Tea Party idea was surmounted with impressive ease because a major sector of the U.S. media today is openly partisan—including Fox News Channel, the right-wing 'blogosphere,' and a nationwide network of right-wing talk radio programs. This aptly named conservative media 'echo chamber' reaches into the homes of many Americans ... Towering above all others is the Fox News empire, the loudest voice in conservative media. Despite its claim to be "fair and balanced", multiple studies have documented FNC's conservative stance ... Fox News's conservative slant encourages a particular worldview.

^ a b c d Kludt, Tom (February 28, 2018).

"Fox News has avoided talking about Jared Kushner's security clearance" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2019 . Retrieved February 28, 2018 .

The network claims a uniquely powerful role in the pro-Trump echo chamber, setting the agenda for both the president and his millions of supporters. In this vein, Trump is rarely cast in an unfavorable light and the so called 'mainstream media' draws little praise. Bad news, like the one surrounding Kushner, routinely gets glossed over.

^ a b c d e Grossman, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (October 13, 2016).

Asymmetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. p. 175.

ISBN 978-0-19062-660-0 .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ a b c d Bard, Mitchell T. (May 22, 2017).

"Propaganda, Persuasion, or Journalism?: Fox News' Prime-Time Coverage of Health-Care Reform in 2009 and 2014" .

Electronic News .

11 (2).

doi : 10.1177/1931243117710278 .

ISSN 1931-2431 . Retrieved May 9, 2025 .

The study finds that in both periods, Fox News' prime-time programs employed multiple themes based on nonfactual premises to oppose health-care reform, which were more in line with propaganda than journalism or persuasion.

^ a b Collings, Anthony (2010).

Capturing the News: Three Decades of Reporting Crisis and Conflict . University of Missouri Press. p.

166 .

ISBN 978-0-8262-7211-9 .

^ a b McCollum, Jonathan; Hebert, David G. (2014).

Theory and Method in Historical Ethnomusicology . Lexington Books. p. 95.

ISBN 978-1-4985-0705-9 .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2023 . Retrieved January 27, 2016 .

^ a b c Martin, Gregory J.; Ali, Yurukoglu (2017).

"Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization" (PDF) .

American Economic Review .

107 (9): 2565– 2599.

doi : 10.1257/aer.20160812 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

S2CID 152704098 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved August 29, 2019 .

^ a b c Clinton, Joshua D.; Enamorado, Ted (October 1, 2014). "The National News Media's Effect on Congress: How Fox News Affected Elites in Congress".

The Journal of Politics .

76 (4): 928– 943.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.720.6672 .

doi : 10.1017/S0022381614000425 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

S2CID 31934930 .

^ a b c Schroeder, Elizabeth; Stone, Daniel F. (June 1, 2015).

"Fox News and Political Knowledge" .

Journal of Public Economics .

126 : 52– 63.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2015.03.009 .

ISSN 0047-2727 .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2022 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ "Rupert Murdoch says Fox stars 'endorsed' lies about 2020. He chose not to stop them" .

NPR . February 28, 2023.

Archived from the original on March 7, 2023 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver; Kaczynski, Andrew (January 30, 2024).

"Right-wing media figures target Taylor Swift with absurd conspiracy theory ahead of the Super Bowl" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2024 . Retrieved February 3, 2024 .

^ a b c Scott, Francesca (February 2, 2024).

"Must be exhausting: How Taylor Swift became a target for misinformation" .

Logically .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2024 . Retrieved February 4, 2024 .

^ a b Mangan, Dan; Breuninger, Kevin; Rizzo, Lillian (April 18, 2023).

"Fox to pay Dominion Voting Systems $787.5 million to settle election defamation lawsuit" .

CNBC . Retrieved April 19, 2023 .

^ a b Peters, Jeremy; Robertson, Katie (March 31, 2023).

"Fox News Suffers Major Setback in Its Defamation Case" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 1, 2023.

^ a b Motta, Matt.

"How Right-Leaning Media Coverage of COVID-19 Facilitated the Spread of Misinformation in the Early Stages of the Pandemic" .

osf.io .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2020 . Retrieved April 18, 2020 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver (March 13, 2020).

"How Fox News misled viewers about the coronavirus" . CNN.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 .

^ a b Rieger, JM (March 19, 2020).

"Sean Hannity denied calling coronavirus a hoax nine days after he called coronavirus a hoax" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 .

^ a b Guthrie, Marisa (July 21, 2016).

"Roger Ailes Resigns as Fox News Chief After Sexual Harassment Accusations" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ a b Steel, Emily; Schmidt, Michael S. (April 19, 2017).

"Bill O'Reilly Is Forced Out at Fox News" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ a b Ember, Sydney (April 25, 2017).

"11 Sue Fox News, Citing 'Intolerable' Racial Bias" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ a b Chappell, Bill (September 6, 2016).

"Fox Will Pay Gretchen Carlson $20 Million To Settle Sexual Harassment Suit" . NPR . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ Lenzner, Robert (May 5, 1985).

"Murdoch, partner plan 4th network" .

The Boston Globe . p. 1.

Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved June 10, 2008 – via nl.newsbank.

The six stations cover many of the nation's major markets – New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Dallas, Houston and Washington.

^ "$55.9 Million Fox Film Loss" .

The New York Times . July 11, 1985. p. D19.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Shah, Saeed (September 24, 2002).

"Business Analysis: Unstoppable Sky machine rolls on as ITV troubles worsen Dawn Airey's free-to-air television experience will be invaluable to BSkyB as it moves beyond its pay-TV model" .

The Independent . p. 21. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Schulberg, Pete (July 15, 1994). "Fox is a business, if not artistic, success".

The Oregonian . p. E1.

^ Braxton, Greg (April 6, 1997).

"How Fox broke from the pack to become cutting-edge network" .

Chicago Sun-Times . Archived from the original on May 15, 2007 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Williams, Scott (January 31, 1996).

"Murdoch taps Ailes for new network; Former CNBC chief set to direct 24-hour news channel, take on CNN" . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on May 22, 2024 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 – via nl.newsbank.

^ Mifflin, Lawrie (October 7, 1996).

"At the new Fox News Channel, the buzzword is fairness, separating news from bias" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2019 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ Katz, Richard (May 1996).

"Bold grab for subs: Murdoch offers $11 to carry Fox News" .

Multichannel News . Archived from the original on November 23, 2010 . Retrieved September 1, 2010 .

^ Landler, Mark (October 4, 1996).

"Giuliani Pressures Time Warner to Transmit a Fox Channel" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2020 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ Levy, Clifford J. (October 5, 1996).

"City Hall Threatens Action if Time Warner Rejects Channel" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ Dudak, Gary (September 11, 2012).

"11 Direct Effects 9/11 Had on the Sports and Entertainment Industries" .

Mandatory.com . Archived from the original on September 20, 2012 . Retrieved September 13, 2012 .

^ "Fox News Channel" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2021 . Retrieved July 6, 2022 .

^ Gidron, Noam; Ziblatt, Daniel (2019).

"Center-Right Political Parties in Advanced Democracies" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

12 .

Annual Reviews : 17– 35.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-090717-092750 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ Thompson, Stuart A. (August 2, 2025).

"For Trump and Fox News, New Policies Are Simply 'Common Sense' " .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

The shared language reflects the deepening ties between the government and the right-wing media, especially Fox News, by far the nation's most popular cable news network.

^ Stelter, Brian; Reilly, Liam (July 11, 2025).

"Trump vows to sue Rupert Murdoch as Epstein report opens new rift in their relationship" .

CNN . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

Murdoch's right-wing media machine played a key role in Trump's path to the presidency. Murdoch initially savored the stunning degree of influence he had with the Trump White House. But he personally soured on Trump by 2020, even as the most popular hosts on Fox continued to promote the Trump agenda. [...] But as the Republican base re-embraced Trump, so too did Murdoch ^ Baragona, Justin (May 9, 2025).

"Trump gets the Fox News band back together for his second administration" .

The Independent .

^ Anon (January 28, 2023). "The world this week".

The Economist . p. 10.

^ Sulzberger, A.G. (May 15, 2023).

"Journalism's Essential Value" .

Columbia Journalism Review . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

But this advocacy model is dangerous when treated as independent journalism's replacement rather than its supplement. The revelations from the Dominion lawsuit against Fox News underscore the dangers of the advocacy model when fully unchecked.

^ Barrett, Liz (June 23, 2008).

"Fox & Friends' Advocacy Journalism" .

Columbia Journalism Review . Retrieved February 15, 2025 .

^ Patterson, Thomas E.

"A Tale of Two Elections: CBS and Fox News' Portrayal of the 2020 Presidential Campaign" .

Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics, and Public Policy .

Harvard University . Retrieved February 15, 2025 .

Economic considerations could push some national news outlets in the direction of advocacy journalism. America's conservative media system – rooted in Fox, right-wing talk shows, and alt-right web outlets – now has an audience that exceeds 50 million Americans, the great majority of whom are Repubicans [sic].

^ a b Atkins, Larry (June 24, 2014).

"Advocacy Journalism Is Polarizing Our Country" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved February 15, 2025 .

TV networks like MSNBC and FOX News and talk radio talk show hosts like Rush Limbaugh and Glenn Beck have a clearly biased agenda. Yet, many people rely on advocacy journalism as their main source of news.

^ Luengo, Marîa (2016).

The Crisis of Journalism Reconsidered: Democratic Culture, Professional Codes, Digital Future . Cambridge University Press. p. 253.

ISBN 1316589234 .

Fox News in the United States is a form of advocacy journalism...

^ Schudson, Michael (2016).

The News Media: What Everyone Needs to Know . Oxford University Press. p. 113.

ISBN 0190206217 .

...Fox News on politics and Univision on immigration reform— are engaged in advocacy journalism...

^ Elder, Linda (2020).

Fact over Fake: A Critical Thinker's Guide to Media Bias and Political Propaganda . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 13.

ISBN 153814395X .

Fox News is an advocacy political news organization ...

^ Atkins, Larry (December 2, 2016).

"The importance of being a savvy media consumer" .

WHYY-TV . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

Mainstream media organizations are even more essential today with the recent explosion of advocacy journalism outlets that have a clear bias in their reporting. These media outlets, such as Fox News...

^ a b c Kumkar, Nils C. (2018).

The Tea Party, Occupy Wall Street, and the Great Recession . Springer. p. 199.

ISBN 3319736884 .

Although some have suggested that MSNBC de facto functions as a kind of left-wing advocacy news network counterpart to Fox News, in the case of ...

^ a b Milani, Ali (2022).

The Unlikely Candidate: What Losing an Election Taught Me about How to Change Politics . Policy Press. p. 87.

ISBN 144736161X .

... much of our media institutions today have begun to more closely resemble the advocacy journalism of Fox News and MSNBC.

^ "Mass News Media and American Culture" (PDF) .

Behavior and Social Issues .

24 : 102. 2015.

Despite both agencies being founded in 1996, FNC adopted the advocacy-frame style of journalism long before MSNBC.

^ a b Schumacher-Matos, Edward (February 6, 2015).

"Last Thoughts: NPR And The Balance Between Ethics And The Nation" .

NPR . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

The digital revolution prizes specialization, not mass appeal. And so we see the rise of advocacy journalism, such as talk radio, Fox News, MSNBC, Huffington Post and a plethora of web sites.

^ Purvis, Hoyt (April 21, 2021).

"Advocacy vs. objectivity" .

Northwest Arkansas Democrat-Gazette . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

Fox News has been a major generator of advocacy journalism, propounded by Trump's seemingly endless supply of invective consistently aimed at the media.

^ Atkins, Larry (July 12, 2018).

"Join the Fight Against Fake News" .

The Progressive . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

Advocacy journalism outlets including Fox News and MSNBC, ideological talk radio, and conspiracy websites like InfoWars make this difficult.

^ A.J. Bauer; Anthony Nadle; Jacob L. Nelson (2022).

"What is Fox News? Partisan Journalism, Misinformation, and the Problem of Classification" .

Electronic News .

16 .

Sage Publishing : 18– 29.

doi : 10.1177/19312431211060426 .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ "The Fox Diet" .

Oxford University Press . October 2018.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ a b c Benkler, Yochai; Faris, Robert; Roberts, Hal (October 18, 2018).

Network Propaganda . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190923624.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-092362-4 .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2024 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

In chapter 2 we showed that the American media ecosystem consists of two distinct, structurally different media ecosystems. One part is the right-wing, dominated by partisan media outlets that are densely interconnected and insular and anchored by Fox News and Breitbart. [...] The Clinton pedophilia story was not primarily a bottom-up, Reddit-imposed, post-truth moment that was then reinforced by higher level media. It was first and foremost the product of a propagandist dynamic between Fox News, as party propaganda organ, and Donald Trump, who, after winning the Indiana primary on May 4, 2016, became the presumptive party nominee. [...] By that point Fox News had become the lead player in what had become the president's personal propaganda network in his battles [...] These data warrant the conclusion that Fox shares little but a few visual trappings with the world of professional journalism at the core of the rest of the U.S. media system. It is, across its online and television properties, America's leading propaganda outlet.

^ a b Yglesias, Matthew (October 2, 2018).

"The Case for Fox News Studies" .

Political Communication .

35 (4): 681– 683.

doi : 10.1080/10584609.2018.1477532 .

ISSN 1058-4609 .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2022 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ Martin, J. (2012). The Fox Effect: How Roger Ailes Turned a Network into a Propaganda Machine.

Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly , 38, 189.

^ Yang, Yunkang; Bennett, Lance (2021). "Interactive Propaganda".

Political Communication in the Time of Coronavirus . New York: Routledge. p. 18.

ISBN 9781003170051 . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

Different from traditional propaganda as top-down communication that typically flows from government to media and other societal echo chambers, interactive propaganda may be a political communication pattern that marks a shift toward an illiberal regime where the state forms partnerships with the media to consolidate its rule.

^ Yochai Benkler; Robert Far; Hal Roberts (April 21, 2023).

"Fox News and the marketing of lies" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on July 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

The case serves nonetheless as a warning of the perils, even in an established democracy, of partisan journalism tipping over into propaganda. Fox pandered to its conservative viewership, but the alternative reality it created fed their tribalism and paranoia. When the Trump narrative parted ways with reality, viewers preferred hearing the lie. Fox continued to give them what they wanted.

^ Illing, Sean (March 22, 2019).

"How Fox News evolved into a propaganda operation" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2021 . Retrieved July 27, 2019 .

Fox News has always been a partisan news network. But people are increasingly questioning whether it has crossed a line in the Trump era and become an outright propaganda operation. [...] It certainly seems like Fox News has essentially become state TV.

^ Mayer, Jane (March 4, 2019).

"The Making of the Fox News White House" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved March 4, 2019 .

Conservative media outlets, however, focus more intently on confirming their audience's biases, and are much more susceptible to disinformation, propaganda, and outright falsehoods (as judged by neutral fact-checking organizations such as PolitiFact). Case studies conducted by the authors show that lies and distortions on the right spread easily from extremist Web sites to mass-media outlets such as Fox, and only occasionally get corrected.

^ Serwer, Adam (February 19, 2024).

"Why Fox News Lied to Its Viewers" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

The Dominion filing drives home a few points. One is that there is a Fox News propaganda feedback loop: The network inflames right-wing conspiracism, but it also bows to it out of partisan commitment and commercial incentive.

^ Darcy, Oliver (May 30, 2024).

"Fox News and right-wing media have already decided the Trump trial verdict" . CNN.

And they're a reminder that if Trump were to return to power, he has a powerful propaganda apparatus at his disposal that will do everything in its power to sanitize his actions — whatever they may be.

^ Darcy, Oliver (August 22, 2023).

"Analysis: Fox News is trying to sugarcoat its right-wing propaganda. Some news outlets are falling for it" .

CNN . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

The right-wing channel, which is in the spotlight as it prepares to host the first GOP primary debate of the 2024 election on Wednesday, was exposed in grand fashion as a dishonest propaganda organ of the Republican Party just months ago when it paid a historic $787 million defamation settlement to Dominion Voting Systems over the lies it spread during the last presidential election.

^ Darcy, Oliver (October 19, 2023).

"Mitt Romney criticizes Fox News and right-wing media for warping Republican Party" . CNN.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ Neammanee, Pocharapon (July 17, 2025).

"Marjorie Taylor Greene Calls Fox News And New York Post 'Propaganda' Supporting 'Foreign Wars' " .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

We've watched propaganda news for decades. I'll call out Fox News and the New York Post. They're known to be the neocon network news," Greene told former Florida GOP lawmaker Matt Gaetz on his show on One America News Network. "We have propaganda news on our side, just like the left does, and the American people have been brainwashed into believing that America has to engage in these foreign wars in order for us to survive, and it's absolutely not true," Greene continued.

^ Haag, Mathew (June 7, 2018).

"Former Fox News Analyst Calls Network a 'Destructive Propaganda Machine' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2024 . Retrieved May 14, 2024 .

^ a b Sarah Ferguson; Lauren Day; Laura Gartry (August 22, 2021).

"Insiders reveal how Fox News became a propaganda outlet for Donald Trump" .

ABC News (Australia) .

Archived from the original on May 21, 2024 . Retrieved May 14, 2024 .

Gretchen Carlson is most famous for her role in exposing former Fox chief executive Roger Ailes as a sexual predator, her story brought to life by Nicole Kidman on the big screen in Bombshell. Now she, along with several other former Fox News insiders, is speaking out about the transformation of the cable news network into a propaganda vehicle for Donald Trump.

^ Mastrangelo, Dominick (June 25, 2025).

"Tucker Carlson takes on Fox News" .

The Hill . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

Carlson has made this argument explicit, saying Fox is engaging in prowar "propaganda" as part of an effort to "scare old people" and benefit the "warmongers" running the network. [...] "They're doing the thing they always do," he said. "Turning up the propaganda hose to full blast and just knock elderly Fox viewers off their feet and make them submit to a new war." ^ Alterman, Eric (March 14, 2019).

"Fox News Has Always Been Propaganda" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2024 . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ Concha, Joe (October 24, 2016).

"Ex-CIA director calls Hannity a 'true propagandist' " .

The Hill .

^ a b c Schwartz, Jason (November 21, 2017).

"Fox adds another pro-Trump host" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2017 .

^ a b Benkler, Yochai; Faris, Robert; Roberts, Hal (November 29, 2018).

Epistemic Crisis (PDF) . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190923624.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19092-366-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

^ a b c Austin, Duke W.; Bowser, Benjamin P., eds. (2021).

"Media: Fox News, Racism, and White America in the Age of Trump" .

Impacts of Racism on White Americans in the Age of Trump . Springer Nature. p. 137-149.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-75232-3_9 .

ISBN 9783030752323 . Retrieved May 9, 2025 .

^ Bartlett, Bruce (May 11, 2015).

"How Fox News Changed American Media and Political Dynamics" .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2604679 .

SSRN 2604679 . Retrieved May 9, 2025 .

^ a b Berry, Jeffrey M.; Sobieraj, Sarah (2014).

The Outrage Industry: Political Opinion Media and the New Incivility . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

110– 111.

ISBN 978-0-19992-897-2 .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

As trade publication Broadcasting & Cable put it, Fox has created 'a clear and strong brand, and an unwavering commitment to stick with it. Viewers, advertisers and cable operators all know what they're getting.' 'Unwavering' is apt; no matter how much it is criticized for the ideological nature of its content, Fox remains unbowed. It continues to deliver a strong conservative perspective throughout its programming ... over the years Fox has actually moved further to the right.

^ Stelter, Brian (June 8, 2021).

" 'We turned so far right we went crazy:' How Fox News was radicalized by its own viewers" . CNN Business.

Archived from the original on May 14, 2024 . Retrieved May 14, 2024 .

^ "ITN Archive Becomes ITN Source" .

FOCAL International . June 19, 2006. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ Stelter, Brian (October 11, 2009).

"Fox's Volley With Obama Intensifying" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved November 16, 2009 .

^ Reynolds, Mike (April 29, 2008).

"Fox News to make HD bow with Time Warner" .

Multichannel News . Archived from the original on December 5, 2010 . Retrieved August 15, 2009 .

^ Christians, Clifford G.; Fackler, Mark; Richardson, Kathy Brittan; Kreshel, Peggy & Woods, Robert H. (October 4, 2016).

Media Ethics: Cases and Moral Reasoning . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-13484-156-1 .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2024 . Retrieved October 31, 2020 .

^ "Privacy Policy" . Fox News. July 1, 2013.

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2013 .

^ a b "FoxNews.com Nutrition Label" .

NewsGuard .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2022 . Retrieved October 16, 2022 .

^ "Fox News Latino" .

Fox News . November 23, 2015. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015.

^ Hansell, Saul (February 15, 2009).

"For Talking Heads, a Spot to Relax and Sip Coffee, on Webcam" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2009 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Welcome to the Fox Nation" . Fox News. March 30, 2009.

Archived from the original on April 2, 2009 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Fox News Mobile website" . Fox News. June 12, 2008. Archived from the original on November 3, 2010 . Retrieved August 15, 2009 .

^ Concha, Joe (May 23, 2019).

"Fox Nation adds five new programs to streaming service" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Network, Special to USA Today.

" 'Duck Dynasty' seasons, more coming soon to FOX Nation streaming service" .

The News-Star .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2020 . Retrieved April 21, 2022 .

^ Malone, Michael (March 25, 2021).

" 'Tucker Carlson Today' Starts on Fox Nation March 29" .

Broadcasting Cable .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2021 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "Fox News Officially Jumps Into OTT Arena With Fox Nation" .

www.multichannel.com . February 20, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 21, 2018 .

^ "War coverage lifts News Corp" .

BBC News . August 13, 2003.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2011 . Retrieved November 29, 2005 .

^ "FNC's 25–54 Prime "Downward Spiral" " .

TVNewser . April 26, 2005. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Cable TV: Content Analysis" .

The State of the News Media . 2005. Archived from the original on August 3, 2010 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Competitive Program Ranker (M-F 6a-11p programs)" (PDF) .

TVNewser . April 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 14, 2007 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Guthrie, Marisa (April 1, 2008).

"Fox News Channel Leads in 2007 Cable News Ratings" .

Broadcasting & Cable . Archived from the original on September 14, 2008 . Retrieved August 27, 2010 .

^ Crupi, Anthony (January 27, 2010).

"Fox News Channel tops USA in cable ratings" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Krashinsky, Susan (June 15, 2010).

" 'Fox News North' primed for launch" .

The Globe and Mail . Archived from the original on June 16, 2010 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Press Accuracy Rating Hits Two-Decade Low" .

Pew Research Center . September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on November 7, 2010 . Retrieved September 16, 2009 .

^ Jurkowitz, Mark; Mitchell, Amy; Shearer, Elisa; Walker, Mason (January 24, 2020).

"U.S. Media Polarization and the 2020 Election: A Nation Divided" (PDF) .

Pew Research Center . pp.

10– 16 . Retrieved April 18, 2025 .

^ "Fox News' Credibility Declines" (PDF) .

Public Policy Polling . February 6, 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 19, 2013 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ O'Connell, Michael (October 23, 2012).

"Final Debate Breaks Fox News Ratings Record With 11.5 Million, Topping Cable Competition" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2014 .

^ Patten, Dominic (October 23, 2012).

"UPDATE: 59.2M Watch Final Presidential Debate; NBC Wins Coverage Battle" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2013 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Flint, Joe (October 23, 2012).

"Fox News scores big ratings win" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2012 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Fox News Tops All Cable For 1st Time Since 2005" .

Deadline Hollywood . April 23, 2007.

Archived from the original on March 7, 2014 . Retrieved September 30, 2014 .

^ "Fox News Channel Tops Cable News Ratings In January" .

Deadline Hollywood . January 28, 2014.

Archived from the original on June 18, 2014 . Retrieved September 30, 2014 .

^ O'Connell, Michael (September 30, 2014).

"Fox News Nabs Historic Cable Ratings Victory" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2014 .

^ Zurawik, David (November 17, 2014).

"New level of Fox News dominance demands analysis, not dismissal" .

The Baltimore Sun . Archived from the original on February 6, 2015 . Retrieved November 23, 2014 .

^ Stelter, Brian (August 7, 2015).

"Fox's GOP debate had record 24 million viewers" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2015 .

^ Blake, Aaron (August 22, 2017).

"Analysis | Trump backers' alarming reliance on hoax and conspiracy theory websites, in 1 chart" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved October 10, 2021 .

^ Faris, Robert; Roberts, Hal; Etling, Bruce (August 8, 2017).

Partisanship, Propaganda, and Disinformation: Online Media and the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election .

Berkman Center for Internet & Society . p. 72.

OCLC 1048396744 .

SSRN 3019414 .

Archived from the original on February 8, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Umstead, R. Thomas (January 2, 2019).

"Fox News Ends 2018 as Most Watched Cable Network" .

Multichannel News .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved April 4, 2019 .

^ Benton, Joshua (October 5, 2018).

"Here's how much Americans trust 38 major news organizations (hint: not all that much!)" .

Nieman Lab .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved July 1, 2021 .

^ Joyella, Mark.

"Fox News Has Highest-Rated Quarter In Network's History" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved April 22, 2020 .

^ Flood, Brian (March 31, 2020).

"Fox News Channel ratings for first quarter of 2020 are the highest in network history" . Fox News.

Archived from the original on January 2, 2021 . Retrieved April 22, 2020 .

^ "Fox News Channel wins the ratings race again" .

Los Angeles Times . August 19, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ a b Stunson, Mike (November 20, 2020).

"Fox News popularity slipping among Republicans, poll shows. Where are viewers going?" .

Miami Herald .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 – via McClatchy .

^ Keveney, Bill (June 30, 2021).

"Cable news race: Fox holds onto top spot in ratings after post-election dip" .

USA TODAY .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2022 .

^ Ellison, Sarah (December 23, 2021).

"A year ago, Fox News considered a breakup with Trump. 2021 changed those plans" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2022 .

^ Carter, Bill (July 22, 2013).

"Fox Viewers May Be Graying, but Their Passion Still Pays" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Mwachiro, Mark (August 16, 2021).

"Here Are the Cable News Ratings for March 2024" .

Ad Week .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2024 . Retrieved April 26, 2024 .

^ Saba, Jennifer (April 4, 2017).

"Fox Scandals May Weaken Murdochs' TV Future" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 12, 2017 .

^ a b Grieco, Elizabeth (April 1, 2020).

"Americans' main sources for political news vary by party and age" .

Pew Research Center .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ Saad, Lydia (July 8, 2013).

"TV Is Americans' Main Source of News" .

Gallup .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved August 10, 2018 .

Two-thirds of core Fox News viewers identify themselves as Republican, and 94% either identify as or lean Republican.

^ a b c Breslow, Samuel (September 29, 2022).

"Wikipedia's Fox News Problem" .

Slate .

ISSN 1091-2339 .

Archived from the original on October 6, 2022 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (July 24, 2020).

"Wikipedia administrators caution editors about using Fox News as source on 'contentious' claims" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2021 . Retrieved June 24, 2021 .

^ Cohen, Noam (August 10, 2020).

"Why Wikipedia Decided to Stop Calling Fox a 'Reliable' Source" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved June 24, 2021 .

^ Elia-Shalev, Asaf (June 18, 2024).

"ADL faces Wikipedia ban over reliability concerns on Israel, antisemitism" .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2024 . Retrieved May 12, 2025 .

^ Brasch, Ben (June 26, 2024).

"Wikipedia defends editors deeming Anti-Defamation League 'unreliable' on Gaza" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 .

^ a b Grynbaum, Michael M. (June 14, 2017).

"Fox News Drops 'Fair and Balanced' Motto" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved June 15, 2017 .

^ a b Sheffield, Matthew (June 15, 2017).

"Fox News no longer "fair and balanced" as network sheds longtime slogan" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved June 16, 2017 .

^ "Rupert Murdoch discusses the future of journalism" .

Hoover Institution .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved September 3, 2020 .

^ de Moraes, Lisa (August 12, 2003).

"Three Little Words: Fox News Sues" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Hirschkorn, Phil (August 22, 2003).

"Fox News loses attempt to block satirist's book" . CNN.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Coyle, Jake (July 19, 2004). "Advocacy Groups Challenge Fox News Slogan". Associated Press.

^ "Cancellation Petition" (PDF) .

Trademark Trial and Appeal Board . December 22, 2003.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 13, 2016 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Fox News drops 'fair and balanced' slogan without announcement" .

BBC News . June 15, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2017 .

^ "Fox News Debuts New Slogan: 'Real News. Real Honest Opinion.' " .

The Daily Beast . March 12, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ Balluck, Kyle (March 12, 2018).

"Fox News launching new ad campaign: 'Real news. Real honest opinion' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ "Fox News says new campaign, 'Standing Up For What's Right,' is not a reaction to Trump's tirades" .

Advertising Age . November 18, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ Wemple, Erik (November 9, 2017).

"Opinion – Why has Fox News abandoned Benghazi?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ Savillo, Rob; Groch-Begley, Hannah (September 9, 2014).

"Report: Fox's Benghazi Obsession By The Numbers" .

Media Matters .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2019 . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ "Hannity: Uranium One Deal 'One of the Biggest Scandals in American History' " . Fox News. October 26, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 3, 2018 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ Gertz, Matt (November 8, 2017).

"Study: Fox spent nearly 12 hours pushing the Uranium One pseudoscandal over the last three weeks" .

Media Matters .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2018 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ "Donald Trump Complete – Search Tweets, Speeches, Policies" .

Factbase . April 16, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ a b Barbash, Fred (November 15, 2017).

"Fox News's Shepard Smith debunks his network's favorite Hillary Clinton 'scandal,' infuriates viewers" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ fb (November 15, 2017).

"Fox News Reports: Sean Hannity Is a Liar" .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 – via YouTube.

^ Tornoe, Rob (March 16, 2018).

"Fox News fight: Shepard Smith, Sean Hannity trade insults" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2018 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ Ecarma, Caleb (March 15, 2018).

"Shepard Smith on Fox News 'Opinion Programming': Shows Exist 'Strictly to Be Entertaining' " .

Mediaite.com .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ a b DellaVigna, Stefano; Kaplan, Ethan (August 1, 2007). "The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

122 (3): 1187– 1234.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.333.4616 .

doi : 10.1162/qjec.122.3.1187 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

S2CID 16610755 .

^ a b Azari, Julia (2016). "How the News Media Helped to Nominate Trump".

Political Communication .

33 (4): 678– 679.

doi : 10.1080/10584609.2016.1224417 .

S2CID 151773937 .

It makes sense to consider whether conservative media (namely, Fox News) function in this institutional capacity.

^ Hemmer, Nicole (2016).

Messengers of the Right: Conservative Media and the Transformation of American Politics . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-81222-430-6 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ a b Rydgren, Jens (2018).

The Oxford Handbook of the Radical Right . Oxford University Press. p. 273.

ISBN 978-0-19027-455-9 .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2024 . Retrieved October 31, 2020 .

The way the conservative media, especially Fox News, reported on the initial Tea Party demonstrations illuminates the momentum the media can give to a start-up movement. Fox became an amplifier of Tea Party activism and rhetoric, giving national momentum to its predominantly local demonstrations.

^ La Monica, Paul (2009).

Inside Rupert's Brain . Peter Lang. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-10101-659-6 .

^ Benkler, Yochai; Faris, Robert; Roberts, Hal (November 29, 2018).

The Fox Diet (PDF) . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190923624.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19092-366-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved August 23, 2020 .

^ Grossmann, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (February 27, 2019). "From Fox News to Viral Views: The Influence of Ideological Media in the 2018 Elections".

The Forum .

16 (4): 547– 567.

doi : 10.1515/for-2018-0037 .

ISSN 1540-8884 .

S2CID 150481237 .

^ Grossman, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (October 13, 2016).

Asymmetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

158– 159.

ISBN 978-0-19062-660-0 .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ Jamieson, Kathleen Hall; Cappella, Joseph N. (February 4, 2010).

Echo Chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the Conservative Media Establishment . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-19539-860-1 .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ Major, Mark; Andersen, David J. (October 27, 2016).

"Polls and Elections: Swift Boating Reconsidered: News Coverage of Negative Presidential Ads" .

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

46 (4): 891– 910.

doi : 10.1111/psq.12324 .

ISSN 0360-4918 .

^ Skinner, Richard M. (January 10, 2005). "Do 527's Add Up to a Party? Thinking About the 'Shadows' of Politics".

The Forum .

3 (3).

doi : 10.2202/1540-8884.1098 .

ISSN 1540-8884 .

S2CID 145781626 .

^ Berry, Jeffrey M.; Sobieraj, Sarah (2014).

The Outrage Industry: Political Opinion Media and the New Incivility . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

156– 160.

ISBN 978-0-19992-897-2 .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ a b Grossman, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (October 13, 2016).

Asymmetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

178– 179.

ISBN 978-0-19062-660-0 .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ Street, Paul; Dimaggio, Anthony R. (2015).

Crashing the Tea Party: Mass Media and the Campaign to Remake American Politics . London, UK: Routledge. pp.

139– 141.

ISBN 978-1-31563-540-8 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ Meyer, David S.; Van Dyke, Nella, eds. (2014).

Understanding the Tea Party Movement . London, UK: Routledge. pp.

41– 42.

ISBN 978-1-31554-908-8 .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ Mudde, Cas; Kaltwasser, Cristóbal Rovira (2017).

Populism: A Very Short Introduction . Very Short Introductions. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. p. 114.

ISBN 978-0-19023-487-4 .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 20, 2018 .

^ [ 24 ] [ 176 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] [ 188 ] ^ Memmott, Mark (September 2, 2004).

"Fox newspeople say allegations of bias unfounded" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on May 13, 2011 . Retrieved August 15, 2009 .

^ "FOX News Channel Statement on 'Outfoxed' " .

Foxnews.com . Archived from the original on September 27, 2006 . Retrieved January 23, 2007 .

^ a b Schwartz, Jason (November 9, 2017).

"Fox, facing new competitors, clings tighter to Trump" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2017 .

^ Poniewozik, James (November 10, 2017).

"President Trump Finds His TV Niche in Softball Interviews" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved November 10, 2017 .

^ "Donald Trump's attacks on the media may have backfired" .

The Economist . July 30, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ a b Grynbaum, Michael M. (November 12, 2017).

"A Rightward Tilt and Big Ratings at Fox News" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved November 13, 2017 .

^ Schwartz, Jason (December 23, 2017).

"Fox News website beefs up and 'goes a little Breitbart' " .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved December 23, 2017 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (March 8, 2018).

"Pro-Trump media sweeps Stormy Daniels story under rug" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved March 8, 2018 .

^ Mayer, Jane (March 4, 2019).

"The Making of the Fox News White House" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ McLaughlin, Aidan (January 18, 2018).

"Former Head of FoxNews.Com Denies Trump-Porn Star Story Was Ignored: 'Easy Call to Make' " .

Mediaite.com .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Groeling, Tim (December 1, 2008). "Who's the Fairest of them All? An Empirical Test for Partisan Bias on ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox News".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

38 (4): 631– 657.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-5705.2008.02668.x .

ISSN 1741-5705 .

^ Baum, Matthew A.; Groeling, Tim (2009). "Shot by the Messenger: Partisan Cues and Public Opinion regarding National Security and War".

Political Behavior .

31 (2): 157– 186.

doi : 10.1007/s11109-008-9074-9 .

JSTOR 40213343 .

S2CID 2429644 .

^ Aday, Sean (February 25, 2010). "Chasing the Bad News: An Analysis of 2005 Iraq and Afghanistan War Coverage on NBC and Fox News Channel".

Journal of Communication .

60 (1): 144– 164.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2009.01472.x .

ISSN 0021-9916 .

^ Hopkins, Daniel J. (March 11, 2014). "The Consequences of Broader Media Choice: Evidence from the Expansion of Fox News".

Quarterly Journal of Political Science .

9 (1): 115– 135.

doi : 10.1561/100.00012099 .

ISSN 1554-0626 .

^ Yglesias, Matthew (October 2, 2018). "The Case for Fox News Studies".

Political Communication .

35 (4): 681– 683.

doi : 10.1080/10584609.2018.1477532 .

ISSN 1058-4609 .

S2CID 149869703 .

^ "News Corp denies Fox News bias" .

The Age . Australian Associated Press. October 26, 2004.

Archived from the original on January 4, 2018 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Interview transcript: Rupert Murdoch and Roger Ailes" .

Financial Times . October 6, 2006. p. 1. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Interview transcript: Rupert Murdoch and Roger Ailes" .

Financial Times . October 6, 2006. p. 2.

Archived from the original on December 10, 2022 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Exclusive: Jon Stewart on 'Fox News Sunday' " .

Fox News Video . June 19, 2011.

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2013 .

^ Corn, David (June 20, 2011).

"Did Chris Wallace Really Say Fox News Isn't Fair and Balanced?" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2016 . Retrieved October 20, 2013 .

^ Johnston, Garth (June 21, 2011).

"Jon Stewart: Chris Wallace Admitted Fox News Was Unbalanced" .

Gothamist . Archived from the original on February 24, 2015 . Retrieved October 20, 2013 .

^ Hayden, Erik (June 21, 2011).

"Jon Stewart Dissects Chris Wallace's Fox News Logic" .

The Atlantic Wire . Archived from the original on August 20, 2013 . Retrieved October 20, 2013 .

^ Kurtz, Howard (July 11, 2004).

"Tilting at the Right, Leaning to the Left" .

The Washington Post . p. D01.

Archived from the original on June 24, 2019 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Christians, Clifford G.; Fackler, Mark; Richardson, Kathy (2015).

Media Ethics: Cases and Moral Reasoning . Routledge. p. 33.

ISBN 978-1-317-34652-4 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2024 . Retrieved January 27, 2016 .

^ MacNicol, Glynnis (December 9, 2010).

"Leaked Fox News Memo Reveals News Division Told To Echo GOP Talking Point" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2014 .

^ "Fox News Viewed as Most Ideological Network" .

Pew Research Center . October 29, 2009. Archived from the original on November 6, 2010 . Retrieved August 27, 2010 .

^ "Bottom-Line Pressures Now Hurting Coverage, Say Journalists: Overview" .

Pew Research Center . May 23, 2004.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2011 . Retrieved September 30, 2014 .

^ "Americans See Liberal Media Bias on TV News" .

Rasmussen Reports . July 13, 2007.

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved August 27, 2010 .

^ Carr, David (November 11, 2012).

"For One Night at Fox, News Tops Agenda" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2012 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Cox, Jeff (May 19, 2017).

"Trump Press Coverage 'Sets New Standard' for Negativity: Study" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 24, 2017 .

^ Richardson, Valerie (May 19, 2017).

"Harvard Agrees: Trump Press Coverage Sets 'New Standard for Negativity' " .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 24, 2017 .

^ a b Grynbaum, Michael M. (March 17, 2017).

"Fox's Andrew Napolitano Stirred the Pot for Trump's British Tempest" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved March 21, 2017 .

^ Napolitano, Andrew (March 16, 2017).

"Did Obama spy on Trump?" . Fox News.

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved March 21, 2017 .

^ a b Baker, Peter; Erlanger, Steven (March 17, 2017).

"Trump Offers No Apology for Claim on British Spying" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved March 21, 2017 .

^ Battaglio, Stephen (March 20, 2017).

"Fox News pulls Judge Napolitano over his Trump wiretap claims" .

Los Angeles Times .

ISSN 0458-3035 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved March 21, 2017 .

^ a b c d e Schwartz, Jason (June 27, 2018).

"New Fox chief cracks down on inflammatory statements" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 28, 2018 .

^ Rosenberg, Eli (October 12, 2018).

"Fox swooned over Kanye West at the White House. Here's how it covered rappers visiting Obama" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 12, 2018 .

^ a b Stelter, Brian (November 5, 2018).

" 'Special Guest' Sean Hannity to appear at Trump rally" . CNN.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2018 .

^ Hannity, Sean [@seanhannity] (November 6, 2018).

"To be clear..." ( Tweet ). Archived from the original on November 6, 2018 . Retrieved November 6, 2018 – via Twitter .

^ Darcy, Oliver (November 6, 2018).

" 'It disturbs me to my core': Fox News staffers express outrage over Hannity's rally appearance" . CNN.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2018 .

^ McLaughlin, Aidan (November 6, 2018).

"Fox News Responds to Hannity at Trump Rally: We Do 'Not Condone' This 'Unfortunate Distraction' " .

Mediaite.com .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2018 .

^ "Rallies" .

DonaldJTrump.com .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Blanton, Dana (June 14, 2019).

"Fox News Poll: Voters doubt impeachment will happen" . Fox News.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Fox News Poll, June 16, 2019" . Fox News.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 – via Scribd.

^ Christopher, Tommy (June 17, 2019).

"WATCH: Fox News Lies About Their Own Poll Showing 50 Percent Want Impeachment" .

Mediaite.com .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Trump, Donald J. [@realDonaldTrump] (June 17, 2019).

"@FoxNews Polls are always bad for me. They were against Crooked Hillary also. Something weird going on at Fox" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved October 17, 2019 – via Twitter .

^ "Susan Rice Sought Names of Trump Associates in Intel" . Bloomberg L.P. April 3, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

^ Barnes, Julian E.; Savage, Charlie (May 13, 2020).

"Republicans Release Names of Obama-Era Officials in 'Unmaskings' That Revealed Flynn" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 13, 2020.

^ David Shortell (May 28, 2020).

"Attorney general launches new 'unmasking' investigation around 2016 election" . CNN.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (October 14, 2020).

"Fox News portrayed it as one of the biggest scandals in American history. Then it fell apart" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved April 19, 2023 .

^ Zapotosky, Matt; Harris, Shane.

" 'Unmasking' probe commissioned by Barr concludes without charges or any public report" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2021 . Retrieved October 14, 2020 .

^ Badkar, Mamta (October 11, 2019).

"Veteran Fox anchor and Trump critic Shepard Smith steps down" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on December 10, 2022 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ Rupar, Aaron (September 29, 2020).

"Trump's adversarial relationship with presidential debate moderator Chris Wallace, explained" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ Pengelly, Martin (August 22, 2020).

"William Barr told Murdoch to 'muzzle' Fox News Trump critic, new book says" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ Collins, Terry (July 8, 2019).

"Trump Rips Into Fox News in Late-Night Twitter Tirade" .

Fortune .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2019 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ McCarthy, Tom (November 7, 2020).

"Rupert Murdoch-owned US outlets turn on Trump, urging him to act with 'grace' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Maass, Peter (November 9, 2020).

"As Trump Is Defeated, the Murdochs Try to Dodge Backlash for Fox News" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ "As the Trump show is cancelled, what next for Fox News?" .

The Economist . November 14, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Folkenflick, David (November 14, 2020).

"Analysis: Is Trump's Next Foe Fox News?" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Wilson, Jason (November 16, 2020).

"OANN: what is the alternative far-right media outlet Trump is pushing?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Klein, Charlotte (November 16, 2020).

"Newsmax Is Going All-in On Trump to Try and "Overtake Fox News" " .

Vanity Fair .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Pengelly, Martin (November 14, 2020).

" 'Can we have America back?' Fox News video echoes Trump election claims" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ Barr, Jeremy.

"Why these Fox News loyalists have changed the channel to Newsmax" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2021 . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Jones, Tom (February 1, 2021).

"No, Fox News and MSNBC are not the same thing" . Poynter Institute for Media Studies.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2021 . Retrieved February 27, 2021 .

^ Company, Tampa Publishing.

"Inside Fox News, DeSantis is 'the future of the party.' And he's taking advantage" .

Tampa Bay Times .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved August 13, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ Harrison, Stephen (June 16, 2022).

"Inside Wikipedia's Historic, Fiercely Contested "Election" " .

Slate .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2022 . Retrieved August 26, 2022 .

Publications like Fox News and OpIndia have a history of running headlines decrying what they view as Wikipedia's leftist, socialist bias.

^ a b c d e Rosenberg, Eli (October 31, 2017).

" 'This is a nothing burger': How conservative media reacted to the Mueller indictments" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Wemple, Erik (October 30, 2017).

"Opinion; The Fox News-Murdoch effect: Mueller must resign! Or be fired!" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ a b Kludt, Tom (October 30, 2017).

"How Fox News is covering the toughest day of the Trump presidency" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Tani, Maxwell (October 31, 2017).

"Trump allies can't stop accidentally referring to Hillary Clinton's nonexistent administration" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2018 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Choi, David (October 28, 2017).

"Fox News host Sean Hannity has Twitter meltdown after report of Robert Mueller's first charges in the Russia probe" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Lizza, Ryan (October 28, 2017).

"As Mueller Pushes Ahead, Trump Distracts" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (October 31, 2017).

" 'I want to quit': Fox News employees say their network's Russia coverage was 'an embarrassment' " .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Tani, Maxwell (October 31, 2017).

" 'I'm watching now and screaming': Fox News employees anonymously trash the network's Russia coverage" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Peters, Jeremy W. (November 3, 2017).

"Alternative Narrative Emerges in Conservative Media as Russia Inquiry Widens" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved November 4, 2017 .

^ Waldman, Paul (October 27, 2017).

"Opinion; The GOP strategy on the Russia scandal: 'No puppet. You're the puppet.' " .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Lopez, German (October 30, 2017).

"Trump's former campaign head was indicted and Fox News talked about cheeseburger emojis" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ Mehta, Dhrumil (November 6, 2017).

"All The Cable News Networks Are Covering The 'Russia Story'—Just Not The Same One" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2017 .

^ Chang, Alvin (October 31, 2017).

"A week of Fox News transcripts shows how they began questioning Mueller's credibility" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2017 .

^ a b Vernon, Pete (December 18, 2017).

"The media today: Fox News's intensifying anti-Mueller rhetoric raises concerns" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ a b c d Schmidt, Samantha (December 18, 2017).

"A 'coup in America?' Fox News escalates anti-Mueller rhetoric" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ Beavers, Olivia (December 17, 2017).

"Fox News host called 'irresponsible' after suggesting US facing a 'coup' from Mueller" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ Hart, Benjamin (December 17, 2017).

"Jesse Watters Says We May 'Have a Coup on Our Hands in America' " .

Daily Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ Borchers, Callum (December 18, 2017).

"Analysis: Trump gets conflicting advice about firing Mueller from Sean Hannity and Fox & Friends " .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ Bowden, John (December 19, 2017).

"Fox guest floats possibility of FBI assassination plot against Trump" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 19, 2017 .

^ Swenson, Kyle (December 20, 2017).

"Fox News contributor, channeling Alex Jones, suggests FBI plot to assassinate Trump" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Heer, Jeet (December 18, 2017).

"Trump Is Sabotaging the Russia Investigation—With Fox News' Help" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ a b Relman, Eliza (August 21, 2018).

"Fox News slammed for covering the killing of a college student more prominently than the convictions of 2 top Trump aides" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ Levine, Jon (August 22, 2018).

"Fox News Slammed for Covering Tooth Fairy Over Paul Manafort, Michael Cohen Convictions" .

TheWrap .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ Cummings, William (August 22, 2018).

"Fox News host says Manafort and Cohen crimes can't sway votes like Tibbetts murder" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved September 20, 2021 .

^ Tani, Maxwell (August 22, 2018).

"Fox News Hosts Wave Off Cohen Plea as 'Nothing That Matters' " .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ Abadi, Mark (November 2, 2017).

"Jake Tapper slams Fox News for misrepresenting comments about New York City terror attack" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2017 . Retrieved November 2, 2017 .

^ a b Tornoe, Rob (November 2, 2017).

"Jake Tapper feuds with Fox News, Sean Hannity over 'Allahu Akbar' comments" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2017 . Retrieved November 2, 2017 .

^ a b Balluck, Kyle (November 2, 2017).

"Tapper hits Fox, Hannity over 'Allahu Akbar' comments after NY terror attack" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2017 . Retrieved November 2, 2017 .

^ a b c Gordon, Michael R. (July 23, 2017).

"How Trump Got It Wrong in Saying The Times 'Foiled' Killing of ISIS Leader" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ "NY Times requests Fox News apology for 'malicious and inaccurate segment' " .

The Guardian . Associated Press. July 24, 2017.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ Disis, Jill (July 24, 2017).

"Why The New York Times wants an apology from Fox News" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ a b c d Bromwich, Jonah Engel (July 24, 2017).

"New York Times Asks Fox for Apology After 'Inaccurate Segment' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ Wemple, Erik (July 24, 2017).

" Fox & Friends issues 'update' on New York Times-ISIS flap. No apology" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ Dryzek, John S.; Norgaard, Richard B.; Schlosberg, David (October 24, 2013).

Climate-Challenged Society . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-19966-011-7 .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2019 .

^ a b "False claims of a coming ice age spread through ecosystem of unreliable news sites, blogs, and social media accounts" .

Climate Feedback . November 21, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 8, 2021 . Retrieved December 22, 2018 .

^ a b Mann, Michael E.; Toles, Tom (2016).

The Madhouse Effect: How Climate Change Denial Is Threatening Our Planet, Destroying Our Politics, and Driving Us Crazy . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-23154-181-7 .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved May 25, 2019 .

^ a b Powell, James Lawrence (2011).

The Inquisition of Climate Science . Columbia University Press. p. 177.

ISBN 978-0-23152-784-2 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 25, 2019 .

^ a b Feldman, Lauren; Leiserowitz, Anthony; Maibach, Edward W.; Roser-Renouf, Connie (January 1, 2012).

"Climate on Cable" (PDF) .

The International Journal of Press/Politics .

17 (1): 3– 31.

doi : 10.1177/1940161211425410 .

ISSN 1940-1612 .

S2CID 53482752 . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2019 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Sandoval, Marisol (2014).

From Corporate to Social Media: Critical Perspectives on Corporate Social Responsibility in Media and Communication Industries . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-41572-256-8 .

^ Oreskes, Naomi ; Conway, Erik M. (2010).

Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-60819-293-9 .

^ Nordyke, Kimberly (August 8, 2011).

" Fox & Friends Slam SpongeBob SquarePants' 'Global Warming Agenda' (Video)" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved February 9, 2018 .

^ a b McKnight, David (December 1, 2010). "A change in the climate? The journalism of opinion at News Corporation".

Journalism .

11 (6): 693– 706.

doi : 10.1177/1464884910379704 .

ISSN 1464-8849 .

S2CID 144001549 .

^ Page, Clarence (July 11, 2010).

"Climate change heats up again" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2010 . Retrieved October 16, 2017 .

^ Dryzek, John S.; Norgaard, Richard B.; Schlosberg, David (August 18, 2011).

The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19956-660-0 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2024 . Retrieved October 31, 2020 .

^ "Claim of a coming ice age misrepresents the study it relies on" .

Climate Feedback . November 1, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 4, 2019 .

^ Guo, Jeff (June 2, 2017).

"Fox News actually acknowledged that climate change is real" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 2, 2017 .

^ Nuccitelli, Dana (August 17, 2015).

"Fox News' inner struggle with climate misinformation" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2020 . Retrieved June 2, 2017 .

^ "Fox News viewers are gunning for Shep Smith. How will Fox News respond?" .

The Week . March 23, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 2, 2017 .

^ Farhi, Paul (March 21, 2017).

"Shepard Smith, the Fox News anchorman who drives the Fox News faithful crazy" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 2, 2017 .

^ Oliver Darcy and Brian Stelter (October 11, 2019).

"Shepard Smith makes shocking announcement that he is leaving Fox News" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2022 . Retrieved January 24, 2022 .

^ Benveniste, Alexis (January 20, 2021).

"Shep Smith breaks his silence about why he left Fox News" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2022 . Retrieved January 22, 2022 .

^ Lonas, Lexi (January 19, 2021).

"Shep Smith on former employment at Fox News: 'I stuck with it for as long as I could' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2022 . Retrieved January 24, 2022 .

^ a b "FACT CHECK: Did DNC Staffer Seth Rich Send 'Thousands of E-Mails' to WikiLeaks Before He Was Murdered?" .

Snopes.com . May 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved May 16, 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g Seitz-Wald, Alex (May 16, 2017).

"DNC staffer's murder draws fresh conspiracy theories" . NBC News.

Archived from the original on December 15, 2020 . Retrieved May 16, 2017 .

^ a b c Hermann, Peter (May 16, 2017).

"Family of slain Seth Rich says reports that he fed DNC info to WikiLeaks are untrue" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved May 16, 2017 .

^ a b c d e Darcy, Oliver (May 16, 2017).

"Story on DNC staffer's murder dominated conservative media – hours later it fell apart" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2017 .

^ "U.S. intel report identifies Russians who gave emails to WikiLeaks – officials" .

Reuters . January 6, 2017.

Archived from the original on January 3, 2021 . Retrieved July 3, 2017 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver (March 14, 2018).

"Family of slain Democratic staffer Seth Rich sues Fox News" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ a b c Bromwich, Jonah Engel (May 17, 2017).

"How the Murder of a D.N.C. Staffer Fueled Conspiracy Theories" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved May 17, 2017 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (May 17, 2017).

"Family of slain DNC staffer demands retraction and apology from Fox News, local TV station" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2017 .

^ Waldron, Travis (May 18, 2017).

"Fox Stands By DNC Murder Conspiracy Theory Even After Main Source Changes Story" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 18, 2017 .

^ "Fox News retracts story alleging DNC staffer Seth Rich leaked information to WikiLeaks before death" .

Los Angeles Times . May 23, 2017.

ISSN 0458-3035 . Archived from the original on May 24, 2017 . Retrieved May 23, 2017 .

^ Hemmer, Nicole (May 23, 2017).

"The Breitbartization of Fox News" .

US News .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Boot, Max (May 22, 2017).

"The Seth Rich 'Scandal' Shows That Fox News Is Morally Bankrupt" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 23, 2017 .

^ McCormack, John (May 26, 2017).

"Prime-Time Conspiracy Theory" .

Weekly Standard . Archived from the original on May 26, 2017 . Retrieved May 27, 2017 .

^ Geraghty, Jim (May 24, 2017).

"The Facts of the Seth Rich Murder That Don't Support Conspiracy Theories" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved May 27, 2017 .

^ French, David (May 24, 2017).

"The Seth Rich Conspiracy Theory Is Shameful Nonsense" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2017 . Retrieved May 27, 2017 .

^ Rubin, Jennifer (May 24, 2017).

"Questions Fox and the right need to answer" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved May 27, 2017 .

^ Gerson, Michael (May 25, 2017).

"The conservative mind has become diseased" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved May 29, 2017 .

^ Podhoretz, John (May 23, 2017).

"The Shameless Conspiracy Theorizing Involving Seth Rich Must Stop" .

Commentary Magazine .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2017 . Retrieved May 28, 2017 .

^ a b Isikoff, Michael (November 24, 2020), Fox paid seven figures to settle lawsuit over bogus Seth Rich conspiracy story , Yahoo! News , archived from the original on December 13, 2020 , retrieved November 28, 2020 ^ Smith, Ben (January 18, 2021).

"Fox Settled a Lawsuit Over Its Lies. But It Insisted on One Unusual Condition" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2021 . Retrieved January 18, 2021 .

^ a b Grynbaum, Michael M. (August 15, 2017).

" 'Wow': Stunned TV Hosts Reacted in Real Time to Trump" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

^ a b Weigel, David (August 17, 2017).

"In conservative media, an amen chorus defends Trump's comments on Charlottesville violence" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved August 18, 2017 .

^ a b c Byers, Dylan (August 16, 2017).

"After Trump's Charlottesville remarks, Fox News focuses on the left and the media" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on September 7, 2020 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

^ Feinberg, Ashley (August 15, 2017).

"Trump Cribbed His Charlottesville Press Conference Straight From Fox News" .

WIRED .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

^ a b Lee, Georgina (February 15, 2018).

"FactCheck: Why the conspiracy theories about George Soros don't stack up" .

Channel 4 News .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

^ a b c Selk, Avi (May 30, 2018).

"Debunking the George Soros-was-a-Jew-killing-Nazi conspiracy theory that Roseanne Barr spreads" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2018 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

^ a b Mirkinson, Jack (November 11, 2010).

"ADL Condemns Glenn Beck For 'Offensive,' 'Horrific' Attacks On George Soros (Video)" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2018 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

^ Emery, David (November 28, 2016).

"Was George Soros an SS Officer or Nazi Collaborator during World War II?" .

Snopes .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Stelter, Brian (November 11, 2010).

"Glenn Beck's Remarks About George Soros Criticized by A.D.L." .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

^ Adams, Richard (November 18, 2010).

"Fox News chief Roger Ailes apologises after describing NPR as 'Nazis' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

^ a b "On Fox News, suddenly a very different tune about the coronavirus" .

The Washington Post . 2020.

Archived from the original on January 3, 2021 . Retrieved March 18, 2020 .

^ Gabbatt, Adam (March 17, 2020).

" 'We have a responsibility': Fox News declares coronavirus a crisis in abrupt U-turn" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 .

^ James, Meg (March 12, 2020).

"Fox News addresses coronavirus threat internally as on-air talent faces criticism" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved April 21, 2020 .

^ Smith, Ben (March 23, 2020).

"As Fox News Played Down the Coronavirus, Its Chief Protected Himself" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ Arciga, Julia (March 24, 2020).

"Murdoch's 89th Birthday Party Canceled While Fox Downplayed Virus: NYT" .

Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ Derysh, Igor (March 25, 2020).

"Murdoch family took serious precautions against coronavirus as Fox News downplayed risk to public" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ Rupar, Aaron (March 24, 2020).

"Fox News's coronavirus coverage slid back off the rails spectacularly on Monday night" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2021 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 .

^ Brewster, Jack (April 9, 2020).

"A Fox News Conspiracy—Are Coronavirus Death Numbers Inflated?—Attacked By Fauci, Birx" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2020 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (August 23, 2023).

"Right-wing media pushed a deworming drug to treat Covid-19 that the FDA says is unsafe for humans" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2021 . Retrieved April 19, 2023 .

^ Zhao, Erfei; Wu, Qiao; Crimmins, Eileen M.; Ailshire, Jennifer A. (October 1, 2020).

"Media trust and infection mitigating behaviours during the COVID-19 pandemic in the USA" .

BMJ Global Health .

5 (10): e003323.

doi : 10.1136/bmjgh-2020-003323 .

ISSN 2059-7908 .

PMC 7545496 .

PMID 33037063 .

S2CID 222229835 .

^ Simonov, Andrey; Sacher, Szymon; Dubé, Jean-Pierre; Biswas, Shirsho (December 16, 2021).

"Frontiers: The Persuasive Effect of Fox News: Noncompliance with Social Distancing During the COVID-19 Pandemic" .

Marketing Science .

41 (2): 230– 242.

doi : 10.1287/mksc.2021.1328 .

ISSN 0732-2399 .

S2CID 245299737 .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021 . Retrieved December 25, 2021 .

^ Ash, Elliott; Galletta, Sergio; Hangartner, Dominik; Margalit, Yotam; Pinna, Matteo (June 27, 2020), The Effect of Fox News on Health Behavior During COVID-19 (PDF) , Rochester, New York, doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3636762 , hdl : 20.500.11850/427768 , S2CID 242785823 , SSRN 3636762 , archived (PDF) from the original on September 20, 2023 , retrieved September 14, 2023 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Thompson, Derek (September 26, 2021).

"How America's Vaccination Campaign Fell Behind the World's" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved September 26, 2021 .

^ "Nearly all Fox staffers vaccinated for Covid even as hosts cast doubt on vaccine" .

Guardian . September 15, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2022 ^ "Fox News and three hosts sued for $2.7 billion by voting machine company over election-fraud claims" . Associated Press. February 4, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 – via USA Today.

^ "Legal Notice and Retraction Demand from Smartmatic USA Corp to Fox News" (PDF) .

Mediaite . December 10, 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 14, 2020 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (February 4, 2021).

"Voting technology company Smartmatic files $2.7 billion lawsuit against Fox News, Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell over 'disinformation campaign' " . CNN . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ "Fox News Lawyers Renew Bid to Get Smartmatic's Billion-Dollar Case Thrown Out of Court: The Real 'Threat' to Democracy Is This Lawsuit" . April 26, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Stempel, Jonathan (March 8, 2022).

"Smartmatic can pursue election-rigging claims against Fox News, Giuliani" . Reuters.

^ Stempel, Jonathan (February 14, 2023).

"Fox News must face Smartmatic's lawsuit over election-rigging claims" . Reuters.

^ Larson, Eric (February 14, 2023).

"Giuliani, Pirro Thrown Back Into 2020 Vote-Fraud Defamation Case" . Bloomberg News.

^ "Days After Smartmatic's Legal Threat, Dominion Voting Systems Follows Suit with Demand Letter to Sidney Powell" . December 17, 2020.

^ "Lou Dobbs Airs Stunning Fact-Check of His Own Election Claims" . December 18, 2020 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ "Lou Dobbs debunks his own claims of election fraud—after a legal demand from Smartmatic" .

The Washington Post . December 19, 2020 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ "Fox News fact-checks Smartmatic voting machine fraud claim in staged video" .

The Guardian . December 20, 2020 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ "Jeanine Pirro's Show Runs Same Fact-Check as Lou Dobbs—At End of Show With Guest Host" . December 20, 2020.

^ "Maria Bartiromo Airs Fact-Check, Adds 'We Will Keep Investigating' " . December 20, 2020.

^ Izadi, Elahe (March 26, 2021).

"Fox News sued by Dominion Voting for $1.6 billion over election fraud claims" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved March 26, 2021 .

^ Folkenflik, David; Romo, Vanessa (May 18, 2021).

"Fox News Moves To Have Dominion Voting Systems Lawsuit Dismissed" .

NPR . Retrieved May 23, 2021 .

^ Keller, Aaron (December 16, 2021).

" 'The Court Can Infer That Fox Intended to Avoid the Truth': Judge Refuses to Dismiss Dominion Lawsuit Against Fox News Over 2020 Election Coverage" .

Law and Crime . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Larson, Erik (December 16, 2021).

"Dominion Defamation Suit Against Fox Can Move Forward" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Shamsian, Jacob (December 28, 2021).

"Venezuelan man files $250 million lawsuit against Fox News and Sidney Powell after baseless accusations that he rigged 2020 election results" .

Business Insider . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Farrell, Maureen (April 9, 2023).

"Fox News Settles Defamation Case With Venezuelan Businessman" .

The New York Times .

^ Folkenflik, David (June 10, 2022).

"Only one major cable news channel did not carry the Jan. 6 hearing live: Fox News" . National Public Radio.

As it turned out, the hearings would also have repeatedly required Fox to have broadcast flat contradictions of what many leading Fox News personalities have told their audiences in the past year and a half—including Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity. Instead, their prime-time shows continued without commercial interruption Thursday, offering an alternate reality to a hearing that showed vivid and bloody detail of a national crisis.

^ Jamie Gangel; Jeremy Herb; Elizabeth Stuart; Brian Stelter (April 30, 2022).

"CNN Exclusive: New text messages reveal Fox's Hannity advising Trump White House and seeking direction" . CNN.

^ Peters, Jeremy W. (June 9, 2022).

"Fox News gives its viewers a revisionist history lesson of Jan. 6" .

The New York Times .

^ Mastrangelo, Dominick (June 9, 2022).

"Tucker Carlson: Jan. 6 panel is 'lying and we are not going to help them do it' " .

The Hill .

^ Erik Larson; Mike Leonard (June 21, 2022).

"Fox News Parent Has to Face Defamation Suit Over Vote-Rigging Claims" . Bloomberg News.

^ Peters, Jeremy W. (December 21, 2022).

"In Testimony, Hannity and Other Fox Employees Said They Doubted Trump's Fraud Claims" .

The New York TImes .

^ Jeremy W. Peters; Katie Robertson (February 16, 2023).

"Fox Stars Privately Expressed Disbelief About Election Fraud Claims. 'Crazy Stuff.' " .

The New York Times .

^ Olivia Rubin; Lucien Bruggeman (February 16, 2023).

"Fox News hosts called 2020 election fraud 'total BS' in private, new Dominion court filing says" . ABC News.

^ Klasfeld, Adam (February 16, 2023).

" 'Really crazy stuff': Rupert Murdoch trashed Rudy Giuliani's election theories, unsealed filing in Fox News suit reveals" .

Law&Crime .

^ "Dominion Voting Systems v. Fox News Network court filing" (PDF) . February 16, 2023.

^ Baker, Peter (March 4, 2023).

"Inside the Panic at Fox News After the 2020 Election" .

The New York Times .

^ Matza, Max (February 28, 2023).

"Rupert Murdoch says Fox News hosts endorsed false election fraud claims" .

BBC News . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ Peters, Jeremy W; Robertson, Katie (February 27, 2023).

"Murdoch Acknowledges Fox News Hosts Endorsed Election Fraud Falsehoods" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ a b c d e Peters, Jeremy; Robertson, Katie (February 16, 2023).

"Fox Stars Privately Expressed Disbelief About Election Fraud Claims. 'Crazy Stuff.' " .

The New York TImes . Archived from the original on April 19, 2023.

^ a b c Levine, Sam (March 29, 2023).

"Angry Fox News chief said fact-checks of Trump's election lies 'bad for business' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 31, 2023 .

^ "Kudlow: Biden's Green New Deal means no meat for the 4th of July, have grilled Brussels sprouts instead" .

Fox Business . April 23, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Dale, Daniel (April 26, 2021).

"Fact check: No, Biden is not trying to force Americans to eat less red meat" . CNN . Retrieved May 8, 2021 .

^ Beauchamp, Zack (April 26, 2021).

"Biden's fake burger ban and the rising culture war over meat" .

Vox . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Vercellone, Chiara (April 27, 2021).

"Fact check: False claim ties Biden's climate plan to reducing meat consumption" .

USA Today . Retrieved February 23, 2022 .

^ Kleefeld, Eric (May 13, 2021).

"Fox News runs false story that Biden administration was building Trump's border wall. It's actually a repair job on flood control systems" .

Media Matters for America .

^ Spencer, Christian (May 13, 2021).

"Biden administration resumes repairing wall on southern border to prevent 'catastrophic flooding' " .

The Hill .

^ "Rio Grande levee repairs not a resumption of Trump border wall" .

AFP Fact Check . May 18, 2021 . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ Gertz, Matt (September 11, 2024).

"Fox's "crime crisis" narrative imploded at the debate and the network is furious" . Media Matters.

^ Passantino, Jon; Reilly, Liam (September 24, 2024).

"Did you know violent crime is down? Not if you're watching right-wing media" . CNN.

^ Noguchi, Yuki (April 19, 2017).

"Fox News Turmoil Highlights Workplace Culture's Role In Sexual Harassment" .

NPR . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ Grynbaum, Michael M.; Steel, Emily (April 27, 2017).

"Sean Hannity Defends Executive as Fox News Turmoil Continues" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ Sakoui, Anousha (April 28, 2017).

"Sean Hannity Defends Boss, Says Ouster Would Be End of Fox News" . Bloomberg L.P . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ Gabbatt, Adam (May 25, 2017).

"Sean Hannity targets media watchdog amid questions over future at Fox News" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved October 13, 2017 .

^ Lima, Cristiano (December 14, 2017).

"Murdoch: Sexual harassment allegations against Fox News 'largely political' " .

Politico . Retrieved December 15, 2017 .

^ a b c Steel, Emily; Schmidt, Michael S. (October 21, 2017).

"Bill O'Reilly Settled New Harassment Claim, Then Fox Renewed His Contract" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved October 28, 2017 .

^ "Fox News: Bill O'Reilly and Megyn Kelly clash over sex claims" .

BBC News . October 24, 2017 . Retrieved October 28, 2017 .

^ Ruddick, Graham (November 8, 2017).

"Fox News' Bill O'Reilly's contract 'shielded him from sex claims sacking' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved November 9, 2017 .

^ a b Rothschild, Neal (October 27, 2017).

"Fox News has spent 35× more time on Weinstein than O'Reilly" .

Axios . Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 28, 2017 .

^ a b Bauder, David (October 26, 2017).

"12 hours vs. 20 minutes: Fox News focuses on Weinstein harassment, ignoring O'Reilly" .

Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on November 1, 2017 . Retrieved October 28, 2017 .

^ Perper, Rosie (November 10, 2017).

"Fox News host Sean Hannity: 'I was not totally clear' while defending Roy Moore over sexual misconduct report" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2017 .

^ Madani, Doha (November 10, 2017).

"Fox News Forgets Its Own Sexual Harassment Problem And Again Attacks Victims" .

HuffPost . Retrieved November 10, 2017 .

^ Obeidallah, Dean (November 13, 2017).

"SNL gets tough on Roy Moore, Fox News defends him" . CNN . Retrieved November 13, 2017 .

^ Tobias, Manuela (December 8, 2017).

"No, Roy Moore accuser didn't admit she forged signature" .

Politifact . Retrieved December 9, 2017 .

^ a b Park, Andrea (May 18, 2017).

"Sean Hannity has message for Roger Ailes' enemies" . CBS News . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ Lejeune, Tristan (September 26, 2017).

"Hannity to host O'Reilly Tuesday on Fox News" .

The Hill . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ a b c Darcy, Oliver (September 26, 2017).

"Bill O'Reilly appears on Fox News for first time since his ouster" .

CNN Money . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ "Bill O'Reilly returns to Fox as Sean Hannity's guest" .

USA Today . September 27, 2017 . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ Stelter, Brian (October 12, 2009).

"Fox's Volley With Obama Intensifying" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ "White House: Fox Pushed Team Obama Over the Brink" .

U.S. News & World Report . October 23, 2009.

Archived from the original on May 5, 2010 . Retrieved July 29, 2010 .

^ Feldmann, Linda (October 23, 2009).

"The Fox News war: What's the upside for Obama?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Archived from the original on October 28, 2009 . Retrieved October 23, 2009 .

^ a b Rutenberg, Jim (October 23, 2009).

"Behind the War Between White House and Fox" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2010 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ "President Obama's Feud with FOX News" . CBS News. October 23, 2009.

Archived from the original on July 21, 2012 . Retrieved July 29, 2010 .

^ Rutten, Tim (October 24, 2009).

"Obama's misguided Fox hunt" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2009 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ Bellantoni, Christina (October 23, 2009).

"WH: We're Happy To Exclude Fox, But Didn't Yesterday With Feinberg Interview" .

TPMDC .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2011 . Retrieved July 29, 2010 .

^ Krakauer, Steve (October 27, 2009).

"Finally Resolved? Major Garrett Reveals His Side of Pay Czar-Gate" .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2010 . Retrieved January 18, 2015 .

^ Nicholas, Peter (November 8, 2009).

"Democratic consultant says he got a warning from White House after appearing on Fox News" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2009 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ Pfeiffer, Eric (October 6, 2013).

"Fox News mistakenly airs parody of Obama offering to personally fund Muslim museum" . Yahoo! News . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ Mikkelson, Barbara (October 5, 2013).

"Obama Uses Own Money to Open Muslim Museum Amid Government Shutdown" .

Snopes . Retrieved October 6, 2013 .

^ a b Grynbaum, Michael M.; Koblin, John (April 17, 2018).

"No Disclosure? No Problem. Sean Hannity Gets a Pass at Fox News" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 28, 2018 .

^ Strobel, Warren; Walcott, John (April 10, 2018).

"FBI raids offices, home of Trump's personal lawyer: sources" .

Reuters . Retrieved April 10, 2018 .

^ Winter, Tom; Edelman, Adam (April 16, 2018).

"Fox News host Sean Hannity revealed as Michael Cohen's mystery client" . NBC News . Retrieved April 16, 2018 .

^ a b Miller, Hayley; Blumberg, Antonia (April 16, 2018).

"Identity Of Michael Cohen's 'Mystery' Client Revealed As Sean Hannity" .

HuffPost . Retrieved April 17, 2018 .

^ Pierson, Brendan; Freifeld, Karen; Stempel, Jonathan (April 18, 2018).

"Fox's Hannity revealed as mystery client of Trump's personal lawyer" .

Reuters . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ Feuer, Alan; Grynbaum, Michael; Koblin, John (April 16, 2018).

"Sean Hannity Is Named as Client of Michael Cohen, Trump's Lawyer" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ Costa, Robert; Ellison, Sarah; Dawsey, Josh (April 17, 2018).

"Hannity's rising role in Trump's world: 'He basically has a desk in the place' " .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved April 28, 2018 .

^ Lima, Cristiano (April 17, 2018).

"Cohen controversy tests Hannity's Teflon Sean reputation" .

Politico . Retrieved April 28, 2018 .

^ a b Breuninger, Kevin (April 17, 2018).

"Fox News gives Sean Hannity 'full support' as critics slam him for hiding link to Trump lawyer" . CNBC . Retrieved April 28, 2018 .

^ Perrett, Connor (June 29, 2021).

"Fox News agrees to pay $1 million fine for human rights law violation in New York City" .

Business Insider . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ "FoxNewsTonight-2023-05-22-Protest-Climate | Media Matters for America" .

www.mediamatters.org . Retrieved September 16, 2023 .

^ Cooper, Evlondo (August 7, 2023).

"National news' scant coverage of climate protests largely overlooked the scientific urgency driving controversial climate actions" .

Media Matters for America . Retrieved September 16, 2023 .

^ "Fox Around the World" . Fox News. March 6, 2012. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012 . Retrieved May 7, 2012 .

^ "Fox News estréia dia 1º na Sky" .

Tela Viva (in Brazilian Portuguese). October 22, 2002.

^ Government of Canada, Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) (December 18, 2003).

"ARCHIVED - Call for comments on proposals for the addition of non-Canadian satellite services to the list of services eligible for digital distribution" .

crtc.gc.ca . Retrieved June 26, 2023 .

^ "CRTC approves Fox News for Canada" . CBC News. November 18, 2004.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2011 . Retrieved August 27, 2010 .

^ "CRTC considering banning Fox News from Canadian cable packages" .

nationalpost . Retrieved May 5, 2023 .

^ "ערוצי הטלוויזיה של סלקום tv – כל הערוצים שצריך במקום אחד" [Cellcom TV's TV channels – all the channels needed in one place]. Cellcom TV. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 24, 2017 .

^ "HOT channel listing" .

Hot.net . Archived from the original on August 13, 2017 . Retrieved September 4, 2017 .

^ "Channel Lineup 2024 – Americable Customer Care" .

Americable . 2024. Archived from the original on April 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 6, 2024 .

^ "Mediatti" . Archived from the original on January 19, 2012.

^ "Pan Global TV Japan" .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2011.

^ "Why is Fox News no longer airing on Prime?" .

Sky Network Television . January 26, 2010. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012 . Retrieved August 27, 2010 .

^ "Bouquet Channels" .

TopTV.co.za . Archived from the original on May 1, 2010 . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "DStv Channels" .

DStv . May 6, 2018. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015.

^ "Movistar Plus+ elimina un canal internacional de noticias de su dial" .

MundoPlus.tv . July 9, 2024.

^ Waterson, Jim (September 26, 2018).

"Rupert Murdoch's Sky reign to end as Fox sells all shares to Comcast" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 27, 2018 .

^ Ruddick, Graham (November 6, 2017).

"Fox News shows broke UK TV impartiality rules, Ofcom finds" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved November 7, 2017 .

^ Sweney, Mark; Ruddick, Graham (August 29, 2017).

"Sky stops broadcasting rightwing US channel Fox News in UK" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved August 29, 2017 .

^ Szalai, Georg (August 30, 2017).

"Fox News Stops Airing in U.K.: A Look at Ofcom Rulings Against It" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved August 30, 2017 .

^ "Sky stops broadcasting Fox News in UK" .

BBC News . August 29, 2017 . Retrieved August 29, 2017 .

^ a b c d Concha, Joe (March 27, 2017).

"Fox News signs Federalist's Mollie Hemingway" .

The Hill . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ "Nigel Farage hired by Fox News as a political analyst" .

BBC News . January 20, 2017 . Retrieved January 21, 2017 .

^ "Burgess Owens (@BurgessOwens) | Twitter" – via Twitter.

^ "Donna Brazile: Why I am excited to join Fox News and take part in a civil – and sensible – debate" . Fox News. March 18, 2019 . Retrieved March 20, 2019 .

^ Feldman, Josh (March 1, 2016).

"Fox News Contributor Mary Katharine Ham Jumps to CNN, Makes Debut with Tapper" .

Mediaite . Retrieved March 12, 2017 .

Further reading Brownell, Kathryn Cramer; Hoewe, Jennifer; Wiemer, Eric C. (October 1, 2020).

"The Role and Impact of Fox News" .

The Forum .

18 (3): 367– 388.

doi : 10.1515/for-2020-2014 .

ISSN 1540-8884 .

S2CID 231955763 .

Cassino, Dan (April 14, 2016).

Fox News and American Politics: How One Channel Shapes American Politics and Society . London, England; New York City, New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-47999-4 .

Davis, Eric (March 31, 2023).

"Upon Dominion's Motion for Summary Judgment on Liability of Fox News Network, LLC and Fox Corporation" (PDF) . Delaware Superior Court . Retrieved April 19, 2023 .

Hopkins, Daniel J.; Ladd, Jonathan M. (March 2014). "The Consequences of Broader Media Choice: Evidence from the Expansion of Fox News".

Quarterly Journal of Political Science .

9 (1): 115– 135.

doi : 10.1561/100.00012099 .

Jones, Jeffrey P. (June 2012). "Fox News and the Performance of Ideology".

Cinema Journal .

51 (4): 178– 185.

doi : 10.1353/cj.2012.0073 .

ISSN 0009-7101 .

JSTOR 23253592 .

S2CID 145669733 .

Morris, Jonathan S. (July 2005). "The Fox News Factor".

Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics .

10 (3): 56– 79.

doi : 10.1177/1081180x05279264 .

ISSN 1081-180X .

S2CID 145143605 .

Peck, Reece (2019).

Fox Populism: Branding Conservatism as Working Class . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108634410 .

ISBN 978-1-108-63441-0 .

S2CID 158299043 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fox News .

Official website "Fox+News" , Core.ac.uk , Open access research papers FOX NEWS West Internet Archive Links to related articles v t e Current White House James S. Brady Press Briefing Room seating chart # Podium 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 NBC News The Wall Street Journal Politico CNBC / MSNBC / Telemundo Bloomberg Government Washington Examiner The Boston Globe / Washington Blade Fox News CBS News Radio PBS / AP Radio Voice of America Time Gray TV / Scripps News EWTN / The Daily Caller CBS News Bloomberg News McClatchy New York Post / TheGrio The Washington Times CBN / Salem Radio Hearst Television Associated Press NPR Foreign pool The Hill Regional media Newsmax Spectrum News ABC News The Washington Post Agence France-Presse Fox News Radio / Fox Business Roll Call / The Christian Science Monitor Al Jazeera NewsNation Reuters The New York Times Los Angeles Times AURN / Univision RealClearPolitics The Daily Beast / The Independent BBC News / Newsweek CNN USA Today ABC News Radio Daily Mail National Journal HuffPost Financial Times / The Guardian White House Correspondents' Association v t e Television news in the United States Broadcast Network ABC News CBS News NBC News Noticias Univision Noticias Telemundo PBS News Hour Organizational CBN News Channel Court TV Cable / Linear Domestic news CNN CNN en Español Fox News Free Speech TV MSNBC Newsmax TV NewsNation One America News Real America's Voice International news BBC World News CGTN America CNN International Fox News International France 24 i24NEWS NHK Sky News Business Bloomberg TV Cheddar CNBC CNBC World Fox Business Network Public affairs C-SPAN C-SPAN2 C-SPAN3 Weather AccuWeather Network AccuWeather NOW Fox Weather The Weather Channel Local Now WeatherNation TV Streaming Domestic news ABC News Live CBS News 24/7 LiveNow from Fox Local News Live NBC News Now Noticias Univision 24/7 Telemundo Ahora Al Dia Specialty AJ+ BlazeTV Fox Nation Reuters TV Vice News Outsourcing AerisWeather News Hub Weather Services International WeatherVision Defunct ABC channels ABC News Now SNC Al Jazeera America All News Channel Black News Channel BlazeTV CNN channels CNN+ CNNfn CNN Pipeline CNNSI CNN Airport Current TV E! News FNN - SCORE Fox channels Noticias MundoFox Fusion TV Independent News Network Link TV The Local AccuWeather Channel NBC channels America's Talking NBC Weather Plus Shift NewsNet Newsworld International RT America TouchVision UPI Newstime Univision Noticias The Weather Cast The Weather Channel Latin America Weatherscan v t e Fox News programming Weekday America's Newsroom America Reports The Five Fox & Friends Fox & Friends First Fox News @ Night Gutfeld!

Hannity The Ingraham Angle Jesse Watters Primetime Outnumbered Special Report The Story with Martha MacCallum The Will Cain Show Weekend Fox News Live Fox Report The Big Weekend Show One Nation with Brian Kilmeade Life, Liberty & Levin Cavuto Live Fox & Friends Weekend Journal Editorial Report Sunday Night in America with Trey Gowdy Fox News Saturday Night Media Buzz Fox News Sunday Sunday Morning Futures With Maria Bartiromo My View with Lara Trump Special America's Election Headquarters Fox News Reporting Former The ½ Hour News Hour America Live with Megyn Kelly The Beltway Boys Bill Hemmer Reports Drudge America's News Headquarters Fox News Specialists Fox News Watch Fox Online Geraldo at Large The Glenn Beck Program Hannity's America Hannity & Colmes Happening Now Heartland Huckabee Justice with Judge Jeanine Just In with Laura Ingraham The Kelly File The Live Desk with Martha and Trace Lawrence Jones Cross Country The Next Revolution The O'Reilly Factor On the Record Pat Sajak Weekend The Real Story Red Eye Shepard Smith Reporting Showdown with Larry Elder Stossel Tucker Carlson Tonight War Stories with Oliver North Weekend Live v t e Fox Corporation Sister company: News Corp Corporate directors Rupert Murdoch (Co-Chairman) Lachlan Murdoch (Co-Chairman and CEO) John Nallen (COO) Paul Cheesbrough (CTO) Steve Tomsic (CFO) v t e Fox Broadcasting Company Programming Fox Sports Animation Domination Weekend Marketplace Xploration Station List of affiliates Table List by U.S. state Defunct or cancelled 4Kids TV Animation Domination High-Def Fox Kids Fox Lab Foxnet Sunday Funday See also Fox Television Stations Fox Broadcasting Co. v. Dish Network, LLC v t e Fox programming (current and upcoming) Primetime America's Most Wanted (1988–2011; since 2021) The Simpsons (since 1989) Family Guy (1999–2002; since 2005) Hell's Kitchen (since 2005) So You Think You Can Dance (since 2005) Don't Forget the Lyrics!

(2007–2009; since 2022) Kitchen Nightmares (2007–2014; since 2023) MasterChef (since 2010) Bob's Burgers (since 2011) MasterChef Junior (since 2013) Beat Shazam (since 2017) The Masked Singer (since 2019) Lego Masters (since 2020) The Great North (since 2021) Name That Tune (since 2021) Crime Scene Kitchen (since 2021) Next Level Chef (since 2022) Lego Masters: Celebrity Holiday Bricktacular (since 2022) Special Forces: World's Toughest Test (since 2023) Accused (since 2023) Animal Control (since 2023) Farmer Wants a Wife (since 2023) Gordon Ramsay's Food Stars (since 2023) Krapopolis (since 2023) The Floor (since 2024) We Are Family (since 2024) Grimsburg (since 2024) TMZ Investigates (since 2024) The 1% Club (since 2024) The Quiz with Balls (since 2024) Universal Basic Guys (since 2024) Murder in a Small Town (since 2024) Going Dutch (since 2025) Doc (since 2025) Extracted (since 2025) Gordon Ramsay's Secret Service (since 2025) The Snake (since 2025) The Fixer (since 2025) News Fox News Sunday (since 1996) Sports NFL on Fox (since 1994) Fox NFL Sunday (since 1994) Fox Saturday Baseball (since 1996) MLB on Fox (since 1996) Fox College Football (since 1999) NASCAR on Fox (since 2001) Soccer on Fox Sports (since 2010) Baseball Night in America (since 2012) Fox College Hoops (since 2013) Boxing on Fox (since 2015) MLS on Fox (since 2015) PBA on Fox (since 2018) Big Noon Kickoff (since 2019) Thoroughbred Racing on Fox Sports (since 2019) UFL on Fox (since 2024) IndyCar Series on Fox (since 2025) Upcoming Celebrity Weakest Link (2025) American Dad!

(2005–2014; 2026) Best Medicine (2026) Fear Factor: The Next Chapter (2026) See also Animation Domination ( High-Def ) Animation on Fox Former programming Fox Sunday Night / Sunday Funday Weekend Marketplace v t e Fox Television Stations Units Fox Television Stations Productions Networks Movies!

JV MyNetworkTV Fox Soul Stations Fox KCPQ KDFW KMSP-TV KRIV KSAZ-TV KTBC KTTV KTVU WAGA-TV WFLD WITI WJBK WNYW WOFL WOGX WTTG WTVT WTXF-TV MyNetworkTV KCOP-TV KDFI KICU-TV KTXH KUTP KZJO WDCA WFTC KFTC WPWR-TV WRBW WWOR-TV Defunct/related BHC Communications Metromedia New World Communications United Television See also Fox Broadcasting Company FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc.

(2009) FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc.

(2012) Fox News Media Linear TV channels Fox News Channel History programs controversies Fox Business Network programs Fox Weather Radio services Fox News Radio Fox News Talk Online Fox Nation v t e Fox News programming Weekday America's Newsroom America Reports The Five Fox & Friends Fox & Friends First Fox News @ Night Gutfeld!

Hannity The Ingraham Angle Jesse Watters Primetime Outnumbered Special Report The Story with Martha MacCallum The Will Cain Show Weekend Fox News Live Fox Report The Big Weekend Show One Nation with Brian Kilmeade Life, Liberty & Levin Cavuto Live Fox & Friends Weekend Journal Editorial Report Sunday Night in America with Trey Gowdy Fox News Saturday Night Media Buzz Fox News Sunday Sunday Morning Futures With Maria Bartiromo My View with Lara Trump Special America's Election Headquarters Fox News Reporting Former The ½ Hour News Hour America Live with Megyn Kelly The Beltway Boys Bill Hemmer Reports Drudge America's News Headquarters Fox News Specialists Fox News Watch Fox Online Geraldo at Large The Glenn Beck Program Hannity's America Hannity & Colmes Happening Now Heartland Huckabee Justice with Judge Jeanine Just In with Laura Ingraham The Kelly File The Live Desk with Martha and Trace Lawrence Jones Cross Country The Next Revolution The O'Reilly Factor On the Record Pat Sajak Weekend The Real Story Red Eye Shepard Smith Reporting Showdown with Larry Elder Stossel Tucker Carlson Tonight War Stories with Oliver North Weekend Live v t e Fox Business Network programming Current Varney & Co.

Former Imus in the Morning Lou Dobbs Tonight Freedom Watch with Judge Napolitano Stossel Strange Inheritance Fox Sports Linear TV channels FS1 FS2 Fox Deportes Big Ten Network JV Fox Soccer Plus Fox Sports Racing Radio network Fox Sports Radio Digital Media FoxSports.com OutKick Sports league UFL JV Defunct or sold Fox Soccer Speed Other assets Credible Fox Entertainment Bento Box Entertainment MarVista Entertainment TMZ Tubi Fox One See also News Corporation 21st Century Fox Acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney v t e SiriusXM Talk Radio channels Entertainment Comedy Central Radio Comedy Club Faction Talk Jeff & Larry's Comedy Roundup Laugh USA Netflix Is A Joke Radio Radio Andy Radio Classics Raw Dog Comedy Road Dog Trucking Stars Today Triumph Family and health Doctor Radio Kids Place Live News BBC World Service Bloomberg Radio Business Radio CNBC CNN C-Span Radio Fox Business Fox News Channel Fox News Radio HLN MSNBC NPR Now Patriot POTUS Politics Progress PRX Rural Radio Urban View Religion The Billy Graham Channel The Catholic Channel EWTN FamilyTalk Joel Osteen Radio Sports Barstool Radio Dan Patrick Radio College Sports Radio ESPN Radio ESPN Xtra Fantasy Sports Radio Fox Sports Radio IndyCar Radio Infinity Sports Network Mad Dog Sports Radio MLB Network Radio NASCAR Radio NBA Radio NFL Radio NHL Network Radio PGA Tour Radio VSiN Canadian Canada Talks CBC Radio One Ici Radio-Canada Première XM Scoreboard Other BYU Radio HBCU RadioNet Howard 100 Howard 101 H.U.R. Voices Internet radio ATN-Asian Radio Carlin's Corner CNN en Español Court TV Jason Ellis Show Nonstop Ramsey Media Discontinued XM Satellite Radio channel history ABC News & Talk America's Talk Calendrier Sportif Canada 360 Cosmo Radio Extreme Talk ESPN Deportes Radio FamilyNet Radio Fox News Talk The Foxxhole Martha Stewart Living Radio OutQ Playboy Radio Quoi de Neuf Radio Disney Radio Parallèle Sirius XM Indie Sirius XM Weather & Emergency Specials The Weather Network WRN Broadcast Category Commons v t e Television news in Australia Broadcast news divisions ABC News Seven News Nine News 10 News SBS World News Regional broadcast news divisions Southern Cross News Tasmania Spencer Gulf and Broken Hill Other regions WIN News National cable / satellite channels ABC News Al Jazeera English BBC World News CNN International CCTV News Fox News Channel Fox Sports News NHK World Russia Today SBS WorldWatch Sky News Live Specialty channels Bloomberg TV CNBC Asia Sky News Extra Sky News Weather Channel Defunct Asia Business News CNNfn SBS World News Channel Sky News Business Channel Sky News Election Channel The News Channel Weatherzone Your Money v t e Subscription television channels in Australia Binge Fetch TV Flash Foxtel Kayo Sports Lifestyle Entertainment and drama Arena BBC Brit BBC Drama BBC UKTV BoxSets British Classics Comedy Crime DocPlay Fox8 Foxtel One MTV MyZen TV Oxygen Real Life Universal TV Lifestyle FashionTV Food Network HGTV Lifestyle Lifestyle Food Lifestyle Home TLC Travel Channel Religious Daystar Good SonLife TBN Inspire Home Shopping Expo Channel TVSN Movies Foxtel Movies Sport BeIN Sports ESPN ESPN2 Fox Cricket Fox Footy Fox League Fox Sports Fox Sports News Main Event Main Event UFC NBL TV Racing.com Sky Racing News Al Jazeera English Ausbiz BBC News (international TV channel) Bloomberg Television Bloomberg Originals CGTN CGTN Documentary CNA CNBC Australia CNN International ET Now Euronews France 24 Fox News GB News i24 News MSNBC NBC News Now Newsmax TV NHK World SEA Today Sky News Sky News Extra Sky News UK Sky News Weather Channel Ticker News Times Now TRT World USA Today News Documentary Animal Planet BBC Earth Curiosity Stream Discovery Discovery Turbo Investigation Discovery Love Nature Real Crime Real History Kids and family BabyTV DreamWorks Nick Nick Jr.

ZooMoo Music Australian Played Club Club MTV CMC Kids Max MTV 80s MTV 90s MTV 00s MTV Hits NickMusic Retro Stingray CMusic Trending Specialty Al Jazeera ANT1 Pacific ART Aurora Community Channel The Filipino Channel Horse & Country LBC Rai Italia Defunct A&E Asia Business News Australian Christian Channel BBC First BBC HD BBC Kids BBC Knowledge Binge Bio Boomerang C7 Sport Cartoon Network CBeebies Channel [V] Club MTV Club Superstation CMT CNNfn Comedy Central The Comedy Channel Discovery HD World Discovery Home & Health Discovery Kids Discovery Real Time Discovery Science Disney Channel Disney Junior Disney XD E!

eGG Network Eurosport 1 Eurosport News Famous Fox Footy Channel Fox Funny Foxtel 3D Foxtel Arts Foxtel Smooth Fuel TV FX Hillsong Channel HLN Horizon Learning Channel HOW TO Channel KidsCo Lifestyle You LMN LocalVision MAD World Movie Network Channels MTV (Australian version) MTV Classic MTV Hits (Australian version) MTV Live HD MTV Music National Geographic National Geographic Channel HD Nat Geo Wild Nat Geo People Neighbourhood Cable NDTV 24x7 Odyssey Channel Oh!

Optus Sport OUTtv Ovation Real Madrid TV RT Sci-Fi SF Channel Showtime Movie Channels Sky News Business Channel Sky News Election Channel SoHo Speed Spike Sportsplay Studio Style Network Syfy The Soundtrack Channel 13th Street TechTV The News Channel Travel TV1 TVH!TS TVN Turner Classic Movies UBI World TV [V] Weatherzone Wine TV World Movies Yesshop Your Money Former Providers: Austar Galaxy Neighbourhood Cable Optus Television SelecTV TransACT v t e Channels on Sky in New Zealand General entertainment TVNZ 1 TVNZ 2 Three Sky Open Sky 5 Vibe BBC UKTV BBC First Jones!

HBO Universal TV Comedy Central Bravo Eden TLC Living ID Whakaata Māori Sky Arts HGTV TVNZ Duke Rush Movies Sky Movies Premiere Sky Movies Comedy Sky Movies Action Sky Movies Greats Sky Movies Classics Sky Movies Family Rialto Sport Sky Sport Select Sky Sport 1 Sky Sport 2 Sky Sport 3 Sky Sport 4 Sky Sport 5 Sky Sport 6 Sky Sport 7 Sky Sport Premier League Sky Sport 9 Sky Sport Pop-Up ESPN ESPN2 Trackside 1 Trackside 2 Sky Arena Informational Discovery Channel Real Crime Real History BBC Earth Animal Planet Discovery Turbo Public service Country TV Face TV News coverage Sky News Parliament TV CNN Fox News BBC News Al Jazeera CNBC Children and family Nickelodeon Cartoon Network CBeebies Nick Jr.

Music video MTV Hits MTV 80s Religious Shine TV Daystar Sonlife Broadcasting Network Hope Channel Asian Star Plus Hindi Colors Star Gold The Filipino Channel CGTN Documentary CGTN Audio only RNZ National RNZ Concert Tahu FM Timeshift TVNZ 1+1 TVNZ 2+1 ThreePlus1 TVNZ Duke+1 Eden+1 Bravo Plus 1 Former Granada UKTV ALT TV MTV New Zealand Nickelodeon New Zealand TVNZ 6 Documentary Channel FashionTV TVNZ 7 U C4 C4 2 Juice TV Cue TV TVNZ Heartland TVNZ Kidzone24 Four Four Plus 1 Yesshop The Zone Garage BBC Knowledge Turner Classic Movies Disney XD Playboy TV Desire TV Brazzers TV Sky Sport Mosaic The Rugby Channel Sky Movies Disney Disney Channel Disney Junior ThreeLife ThreeLife + 1 MTV Music MTV Classic TVSN Food Network SoHo2 Sky Movies Vintage Sky Movies Pop-Up Chinese Radio FM 99.4 AM936 Chinese Radio FM 104.2 Vice The Edge TV Breeze TV RT E!

National Geographic Jones! Too Sky Movies Collection Sky Box Sets The Shopping Channel NickMusic Sky Box Office Sky Open +1 MTV Te Reo Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Norway Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐92v5d
Cached time: 20250818023331
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.775 seconds
Real time usage: 5.167 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 29993/1000000
Revision size: 330014/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1555962/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 147678/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1855929/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 3.069/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12488677/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4295.817      1 -total
 71.31% 3063.350      2 Template:Reflist
 33.26% 1428.985    243 Template:Cite_news
 19.19%  824.400    140 Template:Cite_web
  5.54%  237.824     37 Template:Cite_book
  4.33%  186.025     28 Template:Cite_journal
  3.83%  164.664      1 Template:Infobox_television_channel
  3.43%  147.461      2 Template:Infobox
  3.34%  143.327      1 Template:Navboxes
  3.17%  136.227     19 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11121:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818023331 and revision id 1306468331. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fox_News&oldid=1306468331 " Categories : Fox News 24-hour television news channels in the United States 1996 establishments in New York (state) Conservatism in the United States Conservative television in the United States Climate change denial English-language television stations in the United States Foreign television channels broadcasting in the United Kingdom Fox Corporation subsidiaries Sirius Satellite Radio channels SiriusXM Radio channels Television channels and stations established in 1996 Television networks in the United States XM Satellite Radio channels Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: generic name CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from April 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2024 Articles using infobox television channel All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2021 Commons category link is defined as the pagename This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fox News 61 languages Add topic

