Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development of transitional approach 2 Comparison with other demands 3 Citations 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Transitional demand 2 languages Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term in Marxist theory; describes the political aims of a socialist organization "Transitional program" redirects here. For the Fourth International platform, see The Transitional Program .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Transitional demand" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Marxist theory , a transitional demand either is a partial realisation of a maximum demand after revolution or an agitational demand made by a socialist organisation with the aim of linking the current situation to progress towards their goal of a socialist society.

Development of transitional approach [ edit ] Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Historically the parties adhering to the Second or Socialist International had adopted programmes that included both minimal demands, which it was believed could be satisfied by reform of the bourgeois state, and maximum demands which it was argued would see the end of capitalism and the beginning of a transition to communism. The left of the Socialist International came more and more to reject this separation of minimal and maximal demands and argued that socialism was imminent and that therefore the pursuit of minimal demands, reforms, was closing.

The use of transitional demands as part of a transitional programme was developed by the early Communist International and to some considerable degree was codified by the Second, Third and Fourth Congresses of the Comintern as "transitional slogans." However the Fifth and Sixth Congresses saw the Comintern returning to the division of its political demands between reformist, or minimal, and revolutionary, or maximum, demands. The key difference being that at the Fifth Congress both were seen as important but at the Sixth there was a marked tendency to reject any minimal demands as bring operative in the short term.

Crucially, the Sixth Congress also saw the adoption of a programme by the Comintern which was more in line with maximum demands than with transitional slogans. A major debate took place at the Congress with regard to this with major contributions from Bukharin and Thalheimer the dissident German Communist who championed the concept.

Perhaps the most famous example of a transitional programme is The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International , adopted by the Fourth International and written by Leon Trotsky . Earlier examples include Lenin's The Impending Catastrophe and How to Avoid It .

[ 1 ] Comparison with other demands [ edit ] Transitional demands differ from calls for reform (a minimum programme ) in that they call for things that governments and corporations are unwilling or unable to offer, and therefore, any progress towards obtaining a transitional demand is likely to weaken capitalism and strengthen the hand of the working class .

Transitional demands differ from calls for revolution (a maximum programme ) in that they call for primarily economic demands that could be achieved under capitalism.  So "Rule by workers' councils " would not be a transitional demand, as it would imply the overthrow of capitalism. Examples of transitional demands would be " Employment for all " or " Housing for all," demands that sound reasonable to the average citizen, but are practically impossible for capitalism to deliver on. Trotsky held that, while socialists should not hide their programme, it was essential to plan a possible route to it.

The BBC television documentary Lefties , which aired in several parts in April 2006, featured interviews with people who were radicals in the 1970s and 1980s, in which the concept of transitional demands is described.

[ 2 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ See "The Impending Catastrophe and How to Avoid It ^ "Lefties" .

BBC Programmes . Retrieved 13 August 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] Strategy and Tactics of the Communist International: What are Transitional Slogans?

Programme of the Communist International Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transitional_demand&oldid=1285789430 " Categories : Comintern Marxist theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transitional demand 2 languages Add topic

