Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publication contents 2 Publication history 3 Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Astronomical Almanac 6 languages Català Deutsch Español 한국어 Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Annual publication containing astronomical information, especially about the Solar System This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Astronomical Almanac" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Astronomical Almanac [ 1 ] is an almanac published by the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office ; it also includes data supplied by many scientists from around the world. On page vii, the listed major contributors to its various Sections are: H.M Nautical Almanac Office , United Kingdom Hydrographic Office; the Nautical Almanac Office, United States Naval Observatory ; the Jet Propulsion Laboratory , California Institute of Technology ; the IAU Standards Of Fundamental Astronomy (SOFA) initiative; the Institut de Mécanique Céleste et des Calcul des Éphémerides, Paris Observatory ; and the Minor Planet Center , Cambridge, Massachusetts.

It is considered a worldwide resource for fundamental astronomical data, often being the first publication to incorporate new International Astronomical Union resolutions. The almanac largely contains Solar System ephemerides based on the JPL Solar System integration "DE440" (created June 2020), and catalogs of selected stellar and extragalactic objects.  The material appears in sections, each section addressing a specific astronomical category. The book also includes references to the material, explanations, and examples. It used to be available up to one year in advance of its date, however the current 2024 edition became available only one month in advance; in December 2023.

The Astronomical Almanac Online was a companion to the printed volume. It was designed to broaden the scope of the publication, not duplicate the data. In addition to ancillary information, the Astronomical Almanac Online extended the printed version by providing data best presented in machine-readable form.
The 2024 printed edition of the Almanac states on page iv: "The web companion to The Astronomical Almanac has been withdrawn as of January 2023." Publication contents [ edit ] Section A PHENOMENA: includes information on the seasons, phases of the Moon, configurations of the planets, eclipses, transits of Mercury or Venus, sunrise/set, moonrise/set times, and times for twilight. Preprints of many of these data appear in Astronomical Phenomena , [ 2 ] another joint publication by USNO and HMNAO.

Section B TIME-SCALES AND COORDINATE SYSTEMS: contains calendar information, relationships between time scales, universal and sidereal times, Earth rotation angle, definitions of the various celestial coordinate systems, frame bias, precession, nutation, obliquity, intermediate system, the position and velocity of the Earth, and coordinates of Polaris. Preprints of many of these data also appear in Astronomical Phenomena .

[ 2 ] Section C SUN; covers detailed positional information on the Sun, including the ecliptic and equatorial coordinates, physical ephemerides, geocentric rectangular coordinates, times of transit, and the equation of time .

Section D MOON: contains detailed positional information on the Moon including phases, mean elements of the orbit and rotation, lengths of mean months, ecliptic and equatorial coordinates, librations, and physical ephemerides.

Section E PLANETS: consist of detailed positional information on each of the major planets including osculating orbital elements, heliocentric ecliptic and geocentric equatorial coordinates, and physical ephemerides.

Section F NATURAL SATELLITES; covers positional information on the satellites of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn (including the rings), Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto.

Section G DWARF PLANETS AND SMALL SOLAR SYSTEM BODIES: includes positional and physical data on selected dwarf planets, positional information on bright minor planets and periodic comets.

Section H STARS AND STELLAR SYSTEMS: Beginning with the almanac for the year 2025, the data has been reduced from earlier years to navigational stars, Spectrophotometric standard stars, and ICRF3 radio source positions. Readers are referred to https://aa.usno.navy.mil/publications/asa for other data.

[ 3 ] Section J LUNARCENTRIC CELESTIAL OBJECTS: Beginning in the almanac for the year 2025, tables of celestial objects as observed from the lunar south pole replace the list of observatories that was in earlier editions.

[ 3 ] Section K TABLES AND DATA: includes Julian dates, selected astronomical constants, relations between time scales, coordinates of the celestial pole, reduction of terrestrial coordinates, interpolations methods, vectors and matrices.

Section L NOTES AND REFERENCES: gives notes on the data and references for source material found in the almanac.

Section M GLOSSARY: contains terms and definitions for many of the words and phrases, with emphasis on positional astronomy.

Publication history [ edit ] The Astronomical Almanac is the direct descendant of the British and American navigational almanacs . The British Nautical Almanac and Astronomical Ephemeris had been published since 1766, and was renamed The Astronomical Ephemeris in 1960.

The American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac had been published since 1852. In 1981 the British and American publications were combined under the title The Astronomical Almanac ." [ 4 ] Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac [ edit ] The Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac , currently in its third edition (2013), provides detailed discussion of usage and data reduction methods used by the Astronomical Almanac .

[ 5 ] It covers its history, significance, sources, methods of computation, and use of the data. Because the Astronomical Almanac prints primarily positional data, this book goes into great detail on techniques to get astronomical positions. Earlier editions of the supplement were published in 1961 [ 6 ] and in 1992.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac (specific title) Astronomical Ephemeris (generic article) Nautical almanac (generic article) The Nautical Almanac (familiar name for a specific series of (official British) publications which appeared under a variety of different full titles for the period 1767 to 1959, as well as being a specific official title (jointly UK/US-published) for 1960 onwards) Jet Propulsion Laboratory Development Ephemeris (used by the Astronomical Almanac ) References [ edit ] ^ The Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2024, © Crown Copyright 2023, ISSN 0737-6421 ISBN 978-0-7077-46357 .

^ a b Astronomical Phenomena for the Year 2016 (United States Naval Observatory/Nautical Almanac Office and Her Majesty's Nautical Almanac Office, 2014) ^ a b The Astronomical Almanac for the year 2025 . Washington DC: Government Publication Office. 2024. p. iv.

ISBN 978-0-7077-46494 .

^ " History of the Astronomical Almanac Archived 2009-03-05 at the Wayback Machine ." United States Naval Observatory.

^ S.E. Urban and P. Kenneth Seidelmann (eds), Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac: Third Edition (Mill Valley [CA]: University Science Books, 2013), ISBN 978-1-891389-85-6 – list of errata Archived 2021-04-17 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Ephemeris and the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1961).

^ P. Kenneth Seidelmann (ed.), Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac : A Revision to the Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Ephemeris and the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac (Mill Valley [CA]: University Science Books, 1992) – list of errata Archived 2021-03-09 at the Wayback Machine .

External links [ edit ] The Astronomical Almanac (official publication at U.S. Naval Observatory website) The Astronomical Almanac Online (official publication online at Her Majesty's Nautical Almanac Office website) Archived 2022-11-11 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astronomical_Almanac&oldid=1306542667 " Categories : United States Naval Observatory Astronomical almanacs Astronomical catalogues Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astronomical Almanac 6 languages Add topic

