Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subareas 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Andean world 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cultural areas of the Andes.

Acllahuasi in Pachacamac . It was built during the Inca Empire to house the acllas and mamacunas .

The Andean world (Spanish: mundo andino ), Andean cultural area (Spanish: área cultural andina ) or Andean America (Spanish: andinoamérica [ 1 ] ) is a cultural area in existence since pre-Columbian times located in the central region of the Andes mountain range , where the most complex societies of South America developed, the Andean civilizations . Its approximate "area of influence" extends from the center-south of Chile and Mendoza in Argentina , to the south, up to the south of Colombia , as well as the societies inheriting them. To the north, it overlaps with what is traditionally known as the Intermediate Area .

The concept of the Andean area was discussed in the mid-20th century. Bennet and Bird established an area of co-tradition in the Andean region primarily focused on the Central Andes and the existence of an "Intermediate" area located north of the Cajamarca basin in Peru. This approach, valid for Peruvian archaeology, does not encompass all the complex societies that emerged in the Andes before the Spanish conquest .

In this regard, the macro-Andean approach postulated by Luis Lumbreras in 1981 emerged, which established what is now known as the Andean cultural area. This cultural area is the consequence of an interdependence relationship caused by an agricultural-based lifestyle; therefore, it is not applicable to pre-agricultural stages nor will it be for social levels based, for example, on industry .

[ 2 ] A factor that unites all the peoples of this area, according to Lumbreras, is that their relationship with the environment is resolved through a constant cycle of sea - mountain range - tropical forest, which shapes an integrative economic rationality transverse to the geographic axis of the Andes .

[ 3 ] However, there are differences and varying degrees of complexity in the social and political development of the cultures within the Andean area, expressed in sub-areas.

Subareas [ edit ] Volcanic zones of the Andes where pre-Hispanic cultures developed. In the north, the ethnic lordships of Ecuador , in the center the Aymara kingdoms and the Incas , and in the south the pre-Hispanic cultures of Chile . This also includes the eastern Andes where the Muiscas developed and the western Andes where the Quimbayas were located.

The boundaries of these cultural subareas do not coincide with the borders of modern Andean republics.

Northern extreme Includes the Andean basins of the Magdalena and Cauca (Colombia), the Altiplano Cundiboyacense , the Colombian coast, and part of western Venezuela. Regional Colombian cultures developed here, including the Quimbaya, Tairona, San Agustín, Tierra Adentro, and Chibcha . This subarea is where ceramics may have been invented in South America. The ecosystem of páramo predominates.

Northern Andean area [ 1 ] Primarily composed of Ecuadorian territory, the southwestern corner of Colombia, and the northernmost part of Peru. Known cultures include the ancient Valdivia culture , with one of the oldest ceramics in the Americas (3600 BCE), and the Mayo-Chinchipe culture . The Manteña-huancavilca civilization and the Milagro culture in the coastal regions, and the late kingdoms of Caranqui-Cayambe and Cañar are also part of this subarea. The development of the Vicus culture , however, is deeply connected to the next subarea.

Central Andean area Located in Peru (although its influence is strongly felt in the northern and central-southern Andes). The high Andean regions are dominated by the puna ecosystem, and the coast is arid. It is considered along with the central-southern area as the most culturally developed region. It includes a vast history where cultures such as Caral-Supe , Chavín , Moche , Nazca , Recuay , Wari , Chimú , Chachapoya , and Inca , among many others, stand out.

Central-southern Andean area (Titicaca Circum area) Includes the southernmost part of Peru, Bolivia, northern Chile, and part of northeastern Argentina. Its high Andean zone is dominated by the Collao Plateau. The coastal region is the driest in South America. It is home to the Chinchorro culture , Pucará, the Atacama cultures, Tiwanaku , and the Aymara kingdoms .

Southern Andean area Occupies central Chile and much of the Argentine Northwest .

Southern extreme Occupies what has traditionally been identified as the Araucanía .

Gallery [ edit ] Laguna Colorada Rock formations in the Valley of the Moon Tinajani Canyon Puna Altiplano See also [ edit ] Inca Empire Latin American social archaeology Primer Congreso del Hombre Andino Viceroyalty of Peru References [ edit ] ^ a b Moreno Yañez, Segundo. El altiplano ecuatorial andino. Estudios sobre su especificidad cultural. Actas del II Simposio Internacional de Estudios Altiplánicos. Arica, Chile, 1993 ( https://web.archive.org/web/20080209225430/http://mazinger.sisib.uchile.cl/repositorio/lb/ciencias_veterinarias_y_pecuarias/simposio1993/ ).

^ Lumbreras 1981 , pp. 41–43.

^ Lumbreras 1981 , p. 16.

Bibliography [ edit ] Lumbreras, Luis (1981).

Arqueología de la América Latina . Lima: Milla Batres.

Alcina, José.

La tradición cultural andina , en: Los incas y el Antiguo Perú . Madrid: Sociedad Estatal Quinto Centenario, 1991..

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andean_world&oldid=1296176706 " Categories : Andes Cultural anthropology Cultural geography Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2025 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 09:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andean world 1 language Add topic

