Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Placement and movement Toggle Placement and movement subsection 1.1 Castling 2 Status in games Toggle Status in games subsection 2.1 Check and checkmate 2.2 Stalemate 3 Role in gameplay 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Name translations 5 Unicode 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents King (chess) 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chess piece White king Black king The king (♔, ♚) is the most important piece in the game of chess . It may move to any adjoining square; it may also perform, in tandem with the rook , a special move called castling . If a player's king is threatened with capture, it is said to be in check , and the player must remove or evade the threat of capture immediately, such as by moving it away from the attacked square. If this cannot be done, the king is said to be in checkmate , resulting in a loss for that player. A player cannot make any move that places their own king in check. Despite this, the king can become a strong offensive piece in the endgame or, rarely, the middlegame .

In algebraic notation , the king is abbreviated by the letter K among English speakers. The white king starts the game on e1; the black king starts on e8. Unlike all other pieces, each player can have only one king, and the kings are never removed from the board during the game.

This article uses algebraic notation to describe chess moves.

Placement and movement [ edit ] a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h Initial placement of the kings a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h Possible movements of an unhindered king a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h The king's movement may be hindered by other pieces. Black's king cannot move to squares under attack by the white bishop, knight, queen, or pawn; White's king cannot move to squares under attack by the black queen.

The white king starts on e1, on the first file to the right of the queen from White's perspective. The black king starts on e8, directly across from the white king. Each king starts on a square opposite its own color.

A king can move one square horizontally, vertically, and diagonally unless the square is already occupied by a friendly piece or the move would place the king in check. If the square is occupied by an undefended enemy piece, the king may capture it, removing it from play. Opposing kings may never occupy adjacent squares (see opposition ) to give check, as that would put the moving king in check as well. The king can give discovered check , however, by unblocking a bishop , rook , or queen.

Castling [ edit ] Main article: Castling a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h White has castled kingside (0-0); Black has castled queenside (0-0-0).

The king can make a special move, in conjunction with a rook of the same color, called castling . When castling, the king moves two squares horizontally toward one of its rooks, and that rook is placed on the square over which the king crossed.

Castling is permissible under the following conditions: Neither the king nor the castling rook have previously moved.

No squares between the two pieces are occupied.

The king is not in check.

None of the squares the king would move across or to are under enemy attack.

Castling with the h-file rook is known as castling kingside or short castling (denoted 0-0 in algebraic notation ), while castling with the a-file rook is known as castling queenside or long castling (denoted 0-0-0).

Status in games [ edit ] Check and checkmate [ edit ] Main articles: Check (chess) and Checkmate a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h Black's king cannot move to squares under attack by the white bishop, knight, queen, or pawn. Since White is checking Black, and Black can neither move, capture the checking piece, nor block the check, Black is checkmated.

A king that is under attack is said to be in check , and the player in check must immediately remedy the situation. There are three possible ways to remove the king from check: Capturing the checking piece . This is done with either the king or another piece, but the king cannot be placed in check from a different piece in the process.

Moving the king . The king is moved to an adjacent square where it is not in check. The king is not allowed to castle when it is in check.

Blocking the check . Also called interposing , this is possible only if the checking piece is a queen , rook , or bishop and there is at least one empty square in the line between the checking piece and the checked king. Blocking a check is done by moving a piece to one such empty square. (The blocking piece is then pinned to the king by the attacking piece.) If none of the three options are available, the player's king has been checkmated , and the player loses the game.

If the king is under attack by two different pieces simultaneously, it is not possible to capture or block both of them simultaneously so the king must move.

In casual games, when placing the opponent's king in check, it is common to announce this by saying "check", but this is not required by the rules of chess. In tournament games, it is unusual to announce check; competent players are expected to know when they are in check.

Stalemate [ edit ] Main article: Stalemate a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h White to move: White cannot move legally because of the black queen and king. Since the king may not move into check, White is stalemated.

A stalemate occurs when a player, on their turn, has no legal moves, and the player's king is not in check.

If this happens, the king is said to have been stalemated, and the game ends in a draw . A player who has very little or no chance of winning will often, in order to avoid a loss, try to entice the opponent to inadvertently place the player's king in stalemate (see swindle ).

Role in gameplay [ edit ] In the opening and middlegame , the king will rarely play an active role in the development of an offensive or defensive position, with the notable exception of a king walk . Instead, it will normally castle and seek safety on the edge of the board behind friendly pawns . In the endgame , however, the king emerges to play an active role as an offensive piece, and can assist in the promotion of the player's remaining pawns.

It is not meaningful to assign a value to the king relative to the other pieces, as it cannot be captured or exchanged and must be protected at all costs. In this sense, its value could be considered infinite. As an assessment of the king's capability as an offensive piece in the endgame, it is often considered to be slightly stronger than a bishop or knight.

Emanuel Lasker gave it the value of a knight plus a pawn (i.e. four points on the scale of chess piece relative value ), [ 1 ] though some other theorists evaluate it closer to three points. It is better at defending friendly pawns than the knight is, and it is better at attacking enemy pawns than the bishop is.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Indian chess king represented here by the Maharaja seated upon a tall elephant in a Howdah The king's predecessor is the piece of the same name in shatranj . Like the modern king, it is the most important piece in the game and can move to any neighboring square. However, in shatranj, baring the king is a win unless the opponent can do the same immediately afterward; stalemating the king is a win; and castling does not exist.

Name translations [ edit ] Overview of chess piece names Language King Translation Afrikaans K Koning king Albanian M Mbreti king Arabic م مَلِك (malik) king Azerbaijani Ş Şah shah Armenian Ա Արքա (Ark῾a) king Basque E Erregea king Belarusian ( Taraškievica ) К кароль king Bengali R রাজা (rājā) King Bulgarian Ц цар tsar Catalan R rei Chinese K 王 (wáng) king Czech K král king Danish K konge king Dutch K koning king English K king Esperanto R reĝo king Estonian [ 3 ] K kuningas king Finnish K kuningas king French R roi king Galician R rei king Georgian მფ მეფე (mep'e) king German [ 4 ] K König king Greek Ρ βασιλιάς (vasiliás) king Hindi R राजा  (rājā) king Hebrew מ מלך (Melech) king Hausa S sarki king Hungarian K király king Icelandic K kóngur king Ido R rejo king Indonesian R raja king Interslavic K kralj king Irish R rí king Italian R re king Japanese K キング (kingu) Javanese R raja king Kannada ರಾ ರಾಜ  (raaja) king Kazakh Кр патша (patşa) king Korean K 킹 (king) Latin R rex king Latvian K karalis king Lithuanian K karalius king Luxembourgish K Kinnek king Macedonian K крал king Malayalam K രാജാവ്  (raajavu) king Marathi R राजा  (rājā) king Mongolian Н ноён noyan Norwegian Bokmål K konge king Norwegian Nynorsk K konge king Odia K ରଜା  (rôja) king Oromo M Mootii Persian ش شاه king Polish K król king Portuguese R rei king Romanian R rege king Russian Кр король (korol') king Scottish Gaelic R righ king Serbo-Croatian K kralj ( К краљ) king Northern Sotho K Kgoši Sicilian R re king Slovak K kráľ king Slovene K kralj king Spanish R rey king Swedish K kung king Tamil K அரசன்  (arasaṉ) king Telugu రాజు  (rāju) king Thai ข ขุน  (khun) king Turkish Ş/K şah / kral shah / king Ukrainian Kр король (korol) king Urdu بادشاہ (bādshāh) Vietnamese V vua king Welsh T teyrn / brenin lord / king Unicode [ edit ] Main article: Chess symbols in Unicode Unicode defines three codepoints for a king: ♔ U+2654 White Chess King ♚ U+265A Black Chess King 🨀 U+1FA00 Neutral Chess King See also [ edit ] Bare king Chess piece Finial – top of king, often a monarch's King and pawn versus king endgame King's graph Mann – the non-royal equivalent piece Opposition – technique of king facing king Staunton chess set Notes [ edit ] ^ ( Lasker 1934 :73) ^ ( Ward 1996 :13) ^ The Estonian chess terms were coined by Ado Grenzstein .

^ "Handbook" .

www.fide.com . Retrieved 22 March 2019 .

The pieces bear the names: Koenig, Dame, Turm, Laeufer, Springer, Bauer References [ edit ] Barden, Leonard (1980), Play better chess with Leonard Barden , Octopus Books Limited, pp. 9, 11, 12, ISBN 0-7064-0967-1 Brace, Edward R. (1977), An Illustrated Dictionary of Chess , Hamlyn Publishing Group, p. 151, ISBN 1-55521-394-4 Hooper, David ; Whyld, Kenneth (1996) [First pub. 1992], "king", The Oxford Companion to Chess (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press , pp.

200– 01, ISBN 0-19-280049-3 Lasker, Emanuel (1934), Lasker's Chess Primer , Billings (1988 reprint), ISBN 0-7134-6241-8 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Ward, Chris (1996), Endgame Play , Batsford, ISBN 0-7134-7920-5 FIDE Handbook: Laws of Chess External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chess kings .

Fianchetto variation of the King’s Indian Defence Archived 2014-08-05 at archive.today Piececlopedia: King by Fergus Duniho and Hans Bodlaender , The Chess Variant Pages v t e Chess pieces Orthodox pieces Bishop King Knight Pawn Queen Rook Fairy pieces ( List ) Alfil Amazon Berolina pawn Camel Dabbaba Empress Ferz Giraffe Grasshopper Mann Nightrider Princess Wazir Zebra Related Chess set ( Staunton ) Hippogonal Piece point values v t e Chess Outline Chess theory Chess titles Grandmaster Computer chess glossary matches engines software Correspondence chess FIDE Glossary Online chess Premove Internet chess server list Rating system world rankings norms Variants List World records Equipment Chess set chessboard Dubrovnik chess set Staunton chess set Chess pieces King Queen Rook Bishop Knight Pawn Fairy Chess clock Chess table Score sheets History Timeline Versus de scachis Göttingen manuscript Charlemagne chessmen Lewis chessmen Romantic chess Hypermodernism Soviet chess school Top player comparison Geography of chess Africa South Africa China Europe Armenia Spain India Notable games List of chess players amateurs female grandmasters Women in chess Transgender people in chess Chess museums Bobby Fischer Center Gökyay Association Chess Museum World Chess Hall of Fame Rules Castling Cheating in chess Doping in chess Check Checkmate Draw by agreement Fifty-move rule Perpetual check Stalemate Threefold repetition En passant Pawn promotion Time control Fast chess Touch-move rule White and Black Terms Blunder Chess notation algebraic descriptive PGN annotation symbols symbols in Unicode Fianchetto Gambit Key square King walk Open file Half-open file Outpost Pawns backward connected doubled isolated passed Swindle Tempo Transposition Trap Tactics Artificial castling Battery Alekhine's gun Block Checkmate patterns Combination Decoy Deflection Desperado Discovered attack Double check Fork Interference Overloading Pawn storm Pin Sacrifice Queen sacrifice Skewer Undermining Windmill X-ray Zwischenzug Strategy Compensation Exchange the exchange Initiative first-move advantage Middlegame Pawn structure Hedgehog Isolated Queen's Pawn Maróczy Bind Minority attack Piece values Prophylaxis School of chess Openings Flank opening Benko Opening Bird's Opening Dunst Opening English Opening Grob's Attack Larsen's Opening Zukertort Opening King's Indian Attack Réti Opening King's Pawn Game Alekhine's Defense Caro–Kann Defense French Defense Modern Defense Nimzowitsch Defense Open Game Four Knights Game Giuoco Piano Italian Game King's Gambit Petrov's Defense Philidor Defense Ponziani Opening Ruy Lopez Semi-Italian Opening Scotch Game Two Knights Defense Vienna Game Owen's Defense Pirc Defense Austrian Attack Scandinavian Defense Sicilian Defence Alapin Dragon / Accelerated Dragon Najdorf Scheveningen Queen's Pawn Game Budapest Gambit Colle System Dutch Defense English Defense Indian Defense Benoni Defense Modern Benoni Bogo-Indian Defense Catalan Opening Grünfeld Defense King's Indian Defense Nimzo-Indian Defense Old Indian Defense Queen's Indian Defense London System Richter–Veresov Attack Queen's Gambit Accepted Declined Slav Defense Semi-Slav Defense Chigorin Defense Torre Attack Trompowsky Attack Other List of openings theory table List of chess gambits Irregular Bongcloud Attack Fool's mate Scholar's mate Endgames Bishop and knight checkmate King and pawn vs. king Opposite-colored bishops Pawnless endgame Queen and pawn vs. queen Queen vs. pawn Queen vs. rook Rook and bishop vs. rook Rook and pawn vs. rook Lucena position Philidor position Strategy fortress opposition Tarrasch rule triangulation Zugzwang Study Tablebase Two knights endgame Wrong bishop Wrong rook pawn Tournaments List of strong chess tournaments Chess Olympiad Women Olympics Olympic Esports Series World Chess Championship List Candidates Tournament Chess World Cup FIDE Grand Prix Other world championships Women Team Rapid Blitz Junior Youth Senior Amateur Chess composition Solving Computer chess championships CCC CSVN North American TCEC WCCC WCSCC Art and media Caïssa Chess aesthetics Chess in the arts early literature film novels paintings poetry short stories Chess books opening books endgame literature Oxford Companion Chess libraries Chess newspaper columns Chess periodicals Related Arbiter Chess boxing Chess club Chess composer Chess engine AlphaZero Deep Blue Leela Chess Zero Mittens Stockfish Chess problem glossary joke chess Chess prodigy Elo rating system Mechanical Turk Simultaneous exhibition Tie-breaking in Swiss-system tournaments Solving chess Chess portal Category Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bd84v
Cached time: 20250817201135
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.654 seconds
Real time usage: 0.848 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5041/1000000
Revision size: 11659/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 135961/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5022/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48615/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.368/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15664910/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  652.968      1 -total
 22.78%  148.770      1 Template:Chess_names
 17.36%  113.359      4 Template:Lang
 17.11%  111.693      1 Template:Reflist
 14.48%   94.525      3 Template:Navbox
 11.21%   73.179      1 Template:Cite_web
 11.05%   72.142      1 Template:Chess_piece
  9.69%   63.290      1 Template:Short_description
  5.86%   38.290      2 Template:Side_box
  5.80%   37.850      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47485:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817201135 and revision id 1304349862. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=King_(chess)&oldid=1304349862 " Category : Chess pieces Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images Articles containing Afrikaans-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Urdu-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template archiveis links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 14:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents King (chess) 82 languages Add topic

