Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Military service 2.2 Senate campaign 3 Personal life 4 United States Senate Toggle United States Senate subsection 4.1 Malmedy massacre trial 4.2 "Enemies within" 4.3 Tydings Committee 4.4 Fame and notoriety 4.5 McCarthy and the Truman administration 4.6 Support from Catholics and the Kennedy family 4.7 McCarthy and Eisenhower 4.8 Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations 4.9 Investigating the Army 4.10 Army–McCarthy hearings 4.11 Edward R. Murrow, See It Now 4.12 "Joe Must Go" recall attempt 4.13 Public opinion 4.14 Censure and the Watkins Committee 5 Final years 6 Death 7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 7.1 House Un-American Activities Committee 7.2 In popular culture 7.2.1 Post-censure reaction 7.3 Reconsideration 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Primary sources 9.3 Secondary sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Joseph McCarthy 62 languages العربية Asturianu تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American politician (1908–1957) For other people named Joseph McCarthy, see Joseph McCarthy (disambiguation) .

Joseph McCarthy McCarthy in 1954 United States Senator from Wisconsin In office January 3, 1947 – May 2, 1957 Preceded by Robert M. La Follette Jr.

Succeeded by William Proxmire Chair of the Senate Government Operations Committee In office January 3, 1953 – January 3, 1955 Preceded by John L. McClellan Succeeded by John L. McClellan Judge of the Wisconsin Circuit Court for the 10th Circuit In office January 1, 1940 – January 3, 1947 Preceded by Edgar Werner Succeeded by Michael Eberlein Personal details Born Joseph Raymond McCarthy ( 1908-11-14 ) November 14, 1908 Grand Chute, Wisconsin , U.S.

Died May 2, 1957 (1957-05-02) (aged 48) Bethesda, Maryland , U.S.

Resting place Saint Mary's Cemetery Political party Republican (from 1944) Other political affiliations Democratic (1936–1944) Spouse Jean Kerr ​ ( m.

1953) ​ Children 1 Education Marquette University ( LLB ) Signature Military service Allegiance United States Branch/service United States Marine Corps Years of service 1942–1945 (Marine Corps) 1946–1957 ( Reserve ) Rank Lieutenant Colonel Battles/wars World War II Awards Distinguished Flying Cross Air Medal (5) Joseph Raymond McCarthy (November 14, 1908 – May 2, 1957) was an American politician who served as a Republican U.S. senator from Wisconsin from 1947 until his death in 1957. Beginning in 1950, McCarthy became the most visible public face of a period in the United States in which Cold War tensions fueled fears of widespread communist subversion .

[ 1 ] He alleged that numerous communists and Soviet spies and sympathizers had infiltrated the United States federal government, universities, film industry, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and elsewhere. Ultimately he was censured by the Senate in 1954 for refusing to cooperate with and abusing members of the committee established to investigate whether or not he should be censured. The term " McCarthyism ", coined in 1950 in reference to McCarthy's practices, was soon applied to similar anti-communist activities. Today the term is used more broadly to mean demagogic , reckless, and unsubstantiated accusations, as well as public attacks on the character or patriotism of political opponents.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Born in Grand Chute, Wisconsin , McCarthy commissioned into the Marine Corps in 1942, where he served as an intelligence briefing officer for a dive bomber squadron. Following the end of World War II , he attained the rank of major . He volunteered to fly twelve combat missions as a gunner-observer. These missions were generally safe, and after one where he was allowed to shoot as much ammunition as he wanted, mainly at coconut trees, he acquired the nickname "Tail-Gunner Joe". Some of his claims of heroism were later shown to be exaggerated or falsified, leading many of his critics to use "Tail-Gunner Joe" as a term of mockery.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] A Democrat until 1944, McCarthy successfully ran for the U.S. Senate in 1946 as a Republican, narrowly defeating incumbent Robert M. La Follette Jr.

in the Wisconsin Republican primary , then Democratic challenger Howard McMurray by a 61% – 37% margin. After three largely undistinguished years in the Senate, McCarthy rose suddenly to national fame in February 1950 when he asserted in a speech that he had a list of "members of the Communist Party and members of a spy ring" who were employed in the State Department .

[ 9 ] In succeeding years after his 1950 speech, McCarthy made additional accusations of Communist infiltration into the State Department, the administration of President Harry S. Truman , the Voice of America , and the U.S. Army . He also used various charges of communism, communist sympathies, disloyalty, or sex crimes to attack a number of politicians and other individuals inside and outside of government.

[ 10 ] This included a concurrent " Lavender Scare " against suspected homosexuals , whose illicit sexual activity was presumed to make them vulnerable to blackmail by communists and others.

[ 11 ] With the highly publicized Army–McCarthy hearings of 1954, and following the suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester C. Hunt that same year, [ 12 ] McCarthy's support and popularity faded. On December 2, 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy by a vote of 67–22, making him one of the few senators ever to be disciplined in this fashion. He continued to rail against anarchism, communism, socialism and liberalism until his death at the age of 48 at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Bethesda, Maryland , on May 2, 1957, though doctors had not previously reported him to be seriously ill.

[ 13 ] His death certificate listed the cause of death as " Hepatitis , acute, cause unknown", [ 14 ] which some biographers say was caused or exacerbated by alcoholism .

[ 15 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Joseph Raymond McCarthy was born on November 14, 1908, on a farm in Grand Chute, Wisconsin , the fifth of nine children.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] His mother, Bridget McCarthy (nee Tierney), was from County Tipperary , Ireland. His father, Timothy McCarthy, was born in the United States, the son of an Irish father and a German mother. McCarthy dropped out of junior high school at age 14 to help his parents manage their farm. He entered Little Wolf High School, in Manawa, Wisconsin , when he was 20 and graduated in one year.

[ 18 ] He attended Marquette University from 1930 to 1935. McCarthy worked odd jobs while at college, including as a dishwasher, parking-lot attendant, and boxing coach.

[ 19 ] He first studied electrical engineering for two years, then law, and received a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1935 from Marquette University Law School in Milwaukee .

[ 20 ] Career [ edit ] McCarthy was admitted to the bar in 1935. While working at a law firm in Shawano, Wisconsin , he launched an unsuccessful campaign for district attorney as a Democrat in 1936. During his years as an attorney, McCarthy made money on the side by gambling.

[ 21 ] In 1939, McCarthy had better success when he ran for the nonpartisan elected post of 10th District circuit judge.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] McCarthy became the youngest circuit judge in the state's history by defeating incumbent Edgar V. Werner, who had been a judge for 24 years.

[ 24 ] In the campaign, McCarthy lied about Werner's age of 66, claiming that he was 73, and so allegedly too old and infirm to handle the duties of his office.

[ 25 ] Writing of Werner in Reds: McCarthyism In Twentieth-Century America, Ted Morgan wrote: "Pompous and condescending, he (Werner) was disliked by lawyers. His judgements had often been reversed by the Wisconsin Supreme Court , and he was so inefficient that he had piled up a huge backlog of cases." [ 26 ] McCarthy's judicial career attracted some controversy because of the speed with which he dispatched many of his cases as he worked to clear the heavily backlogged docket he had inherited from Werner.

[ 27 ] Wisconsin had strict divorce laws, but when McCarthy heard divorce cases, he expedited them whenever possible, and he made the needs of children involved in contested divorces a priority.

[ 28 ] When it came to other cases argued before him, McCarthy compensated for his lack of experience as a jurist by demanding and relying heavily upon precise briefs from the contesting attorneys. The Wisconsin Supreme Court reversed a low percentage of the cases he heard, [ 29 ] but he was also censured in 1941 for having lost evidence in a price fixing case.

[ 30 ] Military service [ edit ] Joseph McCarthy in his U.S.

Marine Corps uniform In 1942, shortly after the U.S. entered World War II , McCarthy joined the United States Marine Corps , despite the fact that his judicial office exempted him from military service.

[ 31 ] His college education qualified him for a direct commission , and he entered the Marines as a first lieutenant .

[ 32 ] According to Morgan, writing in Reds, McCarthy's friend and campaign manager, attorney and judge Urban P. Van Susteren, had applied for active duty in the U.S. Army Air Forces in early 1942, and advised McCarthy: "Be a hero—join the Marines." [ 33 ] [ 34 ] When McCarthy seemed hesitant, Van Susteren asked, "You got shit in your blood?" [ 35 ] McCarthy receiving his DFC and Air Medal from Colonel John R. Lanigan , commanding officer of Fifth Marine Reserve District, December 1952 He served as an intelligence briefing officer for a dive bomber squadron VMSB-235 in the Solomon Islands and Bougainville for 30 months (August 1942 – February 1945), and held the rank of captain at the time he resigned his commission in April 1945.

[ 36 ] He volunteered to fly twelve combat missions as a gunner-observer. These missions were generally safe, and after one where he was allowed to shoot as much ammunition as he wanted, mainly at coconut trees, he acquired the nickname "Tail-Gunner Joe".

[ 37 ] McCarthy remained in the Marine Corps Reserve after the war, attaining the rank of lieutenant colonel .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] He later falsely claimed participation in 32 aerial missions so as to qualify for a Distinguished Flying Cross and multiple awards of the Air Medal , which the Marine Corps decided to approve in 1952 under his political influence.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] McCarthy also publicly claimed a letter of commendation from his commanding officer and Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , Chief of Naval Operations.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] However, his commander revealed that McCarthy had written this letter himself, probably while preparing award citations and commendation letters for his men, and that he had signed his commander's name, after which Nimitz signed it routinely.

[ 44 ] [ 43 ] A "war wound"—a badly broken leg—that McCarthy attributed to varying adventures involving airplane crashes or anti-aircraft fire, had in fact happened aboard ship during a raucous celebration for sailors crossing the equator for the first time .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Because of McCarthy's various lies about his military heroism, his "Tail-Gunner Joe" nickname was used in mockery by his critics.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] McCarthy campaigned for the Republican Senate nomination in Wisconsin while still on active duty in 1944 but was defeated by Alexander Wiley , the incumbent. After he left the Marines in April 1945, five months before the end of the Pacific war in September 1945, McCarthy was reelected unopposed to his circuit court position. He then began a much more systematic campaign for the 1946 Republican Senate primary nomination, with support from Thomas Coleman, the Republican Party's political boss in Wisconsin. In this race, he was challenging three-term senator Robert M. La Follette Jr.

, founder of the Wisconsin Progressive Party and son of the celebrated Wisconsin governor and senator Robert M. La Follette Sr.

Senate campaign [ edit ] In his campaign, McCarthy attacked La Follette for not enlisting during the war, although La Follette had been 46 when Pearl Harbor was bombed. He also claimed La Follette had made huge profits from his investments while he, McCarthy, had been away fighting for his country. In fact, McCarthy had invested in the stock market himself during the war, netting a profit of $42,000 in 1943 (equal to $763,188 today). Where McCarthy got the money to invest in the first place remains a mystery. La Follette's investments consisted of partial interest in a radio station, which earned him a profit of $47,000 over two years.

[ 48 ] According to Jack Anderson and Ronald W. May, [ 49 ] McCarthy's campaign funds, much of them from out of state, were ten times more than La Follette's and McCarthy's vote benefited from a Communist Party vendetta against La Follette. The suggestion that La Follette had been guilty of war profiteering was deeply damaging, and McCarthy won the primary nomination 207,935 votes to 202,557. It was during this campaign that McCarthy started publicizing his war-time nickname "Tail-Gunner Joe," using the slogan, "Congress needs a tail-gunner." Journalist Arnold Beichman later stated that McCarthy "was elected to his first term in the Senate with support from the Communist-controlled United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers , CIO ", which preferred McCarthy to the anti-communist Robert M. La Follette.

[ 50 ] In the general election against Democratic opponent Howard J. McMurray , McCarthy won 61.2% to McMurray's 37.3%, and thus joined Alexander Wiley, whom he had challenged unsuccessfully two years earlier, in the Senate.

1946 Wisconsin U.S. Senate election Party Candidate Votes % Republican Joseph McCarthy 620,430 61.2 Democratic Howard McMurray 378,772 37.3 Total votes 999,202 98.5 Republican hold Personal life [ edit ] In 1950, McCarthy assaulted journalist Drew Pearson in the cloakroom at the Sulgrave Club , reportedly kneeing him in the groin. McCarthy, who admitted the assault, claimed he merely "slapped" Pearson.

[ 51 ] In 1952, using rumors collected by Pearson as well as other sources, Nevada publisher Hank Greenspun wrote that McCarthy was a frequent patron at the White Horse Inn, a Milwaukee gay bar, and cited his involvement with young men. Greenspun named some of McCarthy's alleged lovers, including Charles E. Davis, an ex-Communist and "confessed homosexual" who claimed that he had been hired by McCarthy to spy on U.S. diplomats in Switzerland .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] McCarthy's FBI file also contains numerous allegations, including a 1952 letter from an Army lieutenant who said, "When I was in Washington some time ago, [McCarthy] picked me up at the bar in the Wardman [Hotel] and took me home, and while I was half-drunk he committed sodomy on me." J. Edgar Hoover conducted a perfunctory investigation of the Senator's alleged sexual assault ; Hoover's take was that "homosexuals are very bitter against Senator McCarthy for his attack upon those who are supposed to be in the Government." [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Although some notable McCarthy biographers have rejected these rumors, [ 56 ] others have suggested that he may have been blackmailed. Allegations against McCarthy not only involved accusations of homosexuality, but also inappropriate behavior towards young women, particularly after drinking. In his autobiography, Walter Trohan (who was one of McCarthy's close supporters at the time) stated that "he just couldn't keep his hands off young girls", and that the communists could have "plant[ed] a minor on him and raised the cry of statutory rape".

[ 57 ] Curt Gentry , in his biography of Hoover, cited rumors among FBI employees that the director had a secret file containing affidavits of such conduct, including towards children younger than ten.

[ 58 ] During the early 1950s, McCarthy launched a series of attacks on the CIA , claiming it had been infiltrated by communist agents.

Allen Dulles , who suspected McCarthy was using information supplied by Hoover, refused to cooperate. According to the historian David Talbot , Dulles also compiled a "scandalous" intimate dossier on the Senator's personal life and used the homosexual stories to take him down.

[ 59 ] In any event, McCarthy did not sue Greenspun for libel . (He was told that if the case went ahead he would be compelled to take the witness stand and to rebut the charges made in the affidavit of the young man, which was the basis for Greenspun's story.) In 1953, he married Jean Fraser Kerr, a researcher in his office. In January 1957, McCarthy and his wife adopted an infant with the help of Roy Cohn 's close friend Cardinal Francis Spellman . They named the baby girl Tierney Elizabeth McCarthy.

[ 60 ] United States Senate [ edit ] Senator McCarthy's first three years in the Senate were unremarkable.

[ 61 ] McCarthy was a popular speaker, invited by many different organizations, covering a wide range of topics. His aides and many in the Washington social circle described him as charming and friendly, and he was a popular guest at cocktail parties. He was far less well liked among fellow senators, however, who found him quick-tempered and prone to impatience and even rage. Outside of a small circle of colleagues, he was soon an isolated figure in the Senate, [ 62 ] who was often widely criticized.

[ 63 ] McCarthy was active in labor-management issues, with a reputation as a moderate Republican. He fought against continuation of wartime price controls, especially on sugar. His advocacy in this area was associated by critics with a $20,000 personal loan McCarthy received from a Pepsi bottling executive, earning the Senator the derisive nickname "The Pepsi-Cola Kid".

[ 64 ] McCarthy supported the Taft–Hartley Act over Truman's veto, angering labor unions in Wisconsin but solidifying his business base.

[ 65 ] Malmedy massacre trial [ edit ] Main article: Malmedy massacre trial In an incident for which he would be widely criticized, McCarthy lobbied for the commutation of death sentences given to a group of Waffen-SS soldiers convicted of war crimes for carrying out the 1944 Malmedy massacre of American prisoners of war. McCarthy was critical of the convictions because the German soldiers' confessions were allegedly obtained through torture during the interrogations. He argued that the U.S. Army was engaged in a coverup of judicial misconduct, but never presented any evidence to support the accusation.

[ 66 ] Shortly after this, a 1950 poll of the Senate press corps voted McCarthy "the worst U.S. senator" currently in office.

[ 67 ] McCarthy biographer Larry Tye has written that antisemitism factored into McCarthy's outspoken views on Malmedy, and noted that McCarthy frequently used anti-Jewish slurs.

[ 68 ] In this and McCarthy's other characteristics, such as the enthusiastic support he received from antisemitic politicians like Ku Klux Klansman Wesley Swift and his tendency, according to friends, to refer to his copy of Mein Kampf , stating, "That's the way to do it," McCarthy's critics characterize him as driven by antisemitism. However, Tye argues that McCarthy's criticisms of the Malmedy trial were driven not only by antisemitism, but by opportunism to gain favor with the political right by scapegoating marginalized groups.

[ 68 ] It was later found that McCarthy had received "evidence" of the false torture claims from Rudolf Aschenauer, a prominent Neo-Nazi agitator who often served as a defense attorney for Nazi war criminals, such as Einsatzgruppen commander Otto Ohlendorf .

[ 69 ] "Enemies within" [ edit ] McCarthy experienced a meteoric rise in national profile beginning on February 9, 1950, when he gave a Lincoln Day speech to the Republican Women's Club of Wheeling, West Virginia . His words in the speech are a matter of some debate, as no audio recording survives. However, it is generally agreed that he produced a piece of paper that he claimed contained a list of known Communists working for the State Department . McCarthy is usually quoted as having said: "The State Department is infested with communists. I have here in my hand a list of 205—a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department." [ 70 ] [ 71 ] There is some dispute with whether or not McCarthy actually gave the number of people on the list as being "205" or "57". In a later telegram to President Truman, and when entering the speech into the Congressional Record , he used the number 57.

[ 72 ] The origin of the number 205 can be traced: in later debates on the Senate floor, McCarthy referred to a 1946 letter that then–Secretary of State James Byrnes sent to Congressman Adolph J. Sabath . In that letter, Byrnes said State Department security investigations had resulted in "recommendation against permanent employment" for 284 persons, and that 79 of these had been removed from their jobs; this left 205 still on the State Department's payroll. In fact, by the time of McCarthy's speech only about 65 of the employees mentioned in the Byrnes letter were still with the State Department, and all of these had undergone further security checks.

[ 73 ] At the time of McCarthy's speech, communism was a significant concern in the United States. This concern was exacerbated by the actions of the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe, the victory of the communists in the Chinese Civil War , the Soviets' development of a nuclear weapon the year before, and by the contemporary controversy surrounding Alger Hiss and the confession of Soviet spy Klaus Fuchs . With this background and due to the sensational nature of McCarthy's charge against the State Department, the Wheeling speech soon attracted a flood of press interest in McCarthy's claim.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Tydings Committee [ edit ] Main article: Tydings Committee McCarthy himself was taken aback by the massive media response to the Wheeling speech, and he was accused of continually revising both his charges and figures. In Salt Lake City , Utah, a few days later, he cited a figure of 57, and in the Senate on February 20, 1950, he claimed 81.

[ 76 ] During a five-hour speech, [ 77 ] McCarthy presented a case-by-case analysis of his 81 "loyalty risks" employed at the State Department. It is widely accepted that most of McCarthy's cases were selected from the so-called "Lee list", a report that had been compiled three years earlier for the House Appropriations Committee . Led by a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent named Robert E. Lee, the House investigators had reviewed security clearance documents on State Department employees, and had determined that there were "incidents of inefficiencies" [ 78 ] in the security reviews of 108 employees. McCarthy hid the source of his list, stating that he had penetrated the "iron curtain" of State Department secrecy with the aid of "some good, loyal Americans in the State Department".

[ 79 ] In reciting the information from the Lee list cases, McCarthy consistently exaggerated, representing the hearsay of witnesses as facts and converting phrases such as "inclined towards Communism" to "a Communist".

[ 80 ] Senator Millard Tydings In response to McCarthy's charges, the Senate voted unanimously to investigate, and the Tydings Committee hearings were called.

[ 81 ] This was a subcommittee of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations set up in February 1950 to conduct "a full and complete study and investigation as to whether persons who are disloyal to the United States are, or have been, employed by the Department of State".

[ 82 ] Many Democrats were incensed at McCarthy's attack on the State Department of a Democratic administration, and had hoped to use the hearings to discredit him. The Democratic chairman of the subcommittee, Senator Millard Tydings , was reported to have said, "Let me have him [McCarthy] for three days in public hearings, and he'll never show his face in the Senate again." [ 83 ] During the hearings, McCarthy made charges against nine specific people: Dorothy Kenyon , Esther Brunauer , Haldore Hanson, Gustavo Durán , Owen Lattimore , Harlow Shapley , Frederick Schuman , John S. Service , and Philip Jessup . They all had previously been the subject of charges of varying worth and validity. McCarthy came to focus particularly on Lattimore, who at one point he described as a "top Russian spy".

[ citation needed ] From its beginning, the Tydings Committee was marked by intense partisan infighting. Its final report, written by the Democratic majority, concluded that the individuals on McCarthy's list were neither Communists nor pro-communist, and said the State Department had an effective security program. The Tydings Report labeled McCarthy's charges a "fraud and a hoax," and described them as using incensing rhetoric—saying that the result of McCarthy's actions was to "confuse and divide the American people ... to a degree far beyond the hopes of the Communists themselves". Republicans were outraged by the Democratic response. They responded to the report's rhetoric in kind, with William E. Jenner stating that Tydings was guilty of "the most brazen whitewash of treasonable conspiracy in our history".

[ 84 ] The full Senate voted three times on whether to accept the report, and each time the voting was precisely divided along party lines.

[ 85 ] Fame and notoriety [ edit ] Herbert Block, who signed his work " Herblock ", coined the term " McCarthyism " in this cartoon in the March 29, 1950, Washington Post .

From 1950 onward, McCarthy continued to exploit the fear of Communism and to press his accusations that the government was failing to deal with Communism within its ranks. McCarthy also began investigations into homosexuals working in the foreign policy bureaucracy, who were considered prime candidates for blackmail by the Soviets.

[ 86 ] These accusations received wide publicity, increased his approval rating, and gained him a powerful national following.

In Congress, there was little doubt that homosexuals did not belong in sensitive government positions.

[ 86 ] Since the late 1940s, the government had been dismissing about five homosexuals a month from civilian posts; by 1954, the number had grown twelve-fold.

[ 87 ] As historian David M. Barrett would write, "Mixed in with the hysterics were some logic, though: homosexuals faced condemnation and discrimination, and most of them—wishing to conceal their orientation—were vulnerable to blackmail ." [ 88 ] Director of Central Intelligence Roscoe Hillenkoetter was called to Congress to testify on homosexuals being employed at the CIA . He said, "The use of homosexuals as a control mechanism over individuals recruited for espionage is a generally accepted technique which has been used at least on a limited basis for many years." As soon as the DCI said these words, his aide signaled to take the remainder of the DCI's testimony off the record. Political historian David Barrett uncovered Hillenkoetter's notes, which reveal the remainder of the statement: "While this agency will never employ homosexuals on its rolls, it might conceivably be necessary, and in the past has actually been valuable, to use known homosexuals as agents in the field. I am certain that if Joseph Stalin or a member of the Politburo or a high satellite official were known to be a homosexual, no member of this committee or of the Congress would balk against our use of any technique to penetrate their operations ... after all, intelligence and espionage is, at best, an extremely dirty business." [ 89 ] The senators reluctantly agreed the CIA had to be flexible.

[ 90 ] McCarthy's methods also brought on the disapproval and opposition of many. Barely a month after McCarthy's Wheeling speech, the term "McCarthyism" was coined by Washington Post cartoonist Herbert Block .

[ citation needed ] Block and others used the word as a synonym for demagoguery , baseless defamation, and mudslinging. Later, it would be embraced by McCarthy and some of his supporters. "McCarthyism is Americanism with its sleeves rolled," McCarthy said in a 1952 speech, and later that year, he published a book titled McCarthyism: The Fight For America .

[ citation needed ] McCarthy sought to discredit his critics and political opponents by accusing them of being Communists or communist sympathizers. In the 1950 Maryland Senate election, McCarthy campaigned for John Marshall Butler in his race against four-term incumbent Millard Tydings, with whom McCarthy had been in conflict during the Tydings Committee hearings. In speeches supporting Butler, McCarthy accused Tydings of "protecting Communists" and "shielding traitors". McCarthy's staff was heavily involved in the campaign and collaborated in the production of a campaign tabloid that contained a composite photograph doctored to make it appear that Tydings was in intimate conversation with Communist leader Earl Russell Browder .

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] A Senate subcommittee later investigated this election and referred to it as "a despicable, back-street type of campaign", as well as recommending that the use of defamatory literature in a campaign be made grounds for expulsion from the Senate.

[ 94 ] The pamphlet was clearly labeled a composite. McCarthy said it was "wrong" to distribute it; though staffer Jean Kerr thought it was fine. After he lost the election by almost 40,000 votes, Tydings claimed foul play.

In addition to the Tydings–Butler race, McCarthy campaigned for several other Republicans in the 1950 elections , including Everett Dirksen against Democratic incumbent and Senate Majority Leader Scott W. Lucas . Dirksen, and indeed all the candidates McCarthy supported, won their elections, and those he opposed lost. The elections, including many that McCarthy was not involved in, were an overall Republican sweep. Although his impact on the elections was unclear, McCarthy was credited as a key Republican campaigner. He was now regarded as one of the most powerful men in the Senate and was treated with new-found deference by his colleagues.

[ 95 ] In the 1952 Senate elections McCarthy was returned to his Senate seat with 54.2% of the vote, compared to Democrat Thomas Fairchild's 45.6%. As of 2020, McCarthy is the last Republican to win Wisconsin's Class 1 Senate seat.

1952 Wisconsin U.S. Senate election Party Candidate Votes % Republican Joseph McCarthy 870,444 54.2 Democratic Thomas E. Fairchild 731,402 45.6 Total votes 1,601,846 99.8 Republican hold McCarthy and the Truman administration [ edit ] McCarthy and President Truman clashed often during the years both held office. McCarthy characterized Truman and the Democratic Party as soft on, or even in league with, Communists, and spoke of the Democrats' "twenty years of treason". Truman, in turn, once referred to McCarthy as "the best asset the Kremlin has", calling McCarthy's actions an attempt to "sabotage the foreign policy of the United States" in a cold war and comparing it to shooting American soldiers in the back in a hot war.

[ 96 ] It was the Truman Administration's State Department that McCarthy accused of harboring 205 (or 57 or 81) "known Communists". Truman's Secretary of Defense , George Marshall , was the target of some of McCarthy's most vitriolic rhetoric. Marshall had been Army Chief of Staff during World War II and was also Truman's former Secretary of State . Marshall was a highly respected general and statesman, remembered today as the architect of victory and peace, the latter based on the Marshall Plan for post-war reconstruction of Europe, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1953. McCarthy made a lengthy speech on Marshall, later published in 1951 as a book titled America's Retreat From Victory: The Story of George Catlett Marshall . Marshall had been involved in American foreign policy with China, and McCarthy charged that Marshall was directly responsible for the loss of China to Communism. In the speech McCarthy also implied that Marshall was guilty of treason; [ 97 ] declared that "if Marshall were merely stupid, the laws of probability would dictate that part of his decisions would serve this country's interest"; [ 97 ] and most famously, accused him of being part of "a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man".

[ 97 ] In December 1950, McCarthy teamed with right-wing radio star Fulton Lewis Jr.

to smear Truman's nominee for Assistant Secretary of Defense, Anna M. Rosenberg . Their smear campaign attracted allies in anti-Semites and extremists like Gerald L. K. Smith , who falsely claimed Rosenberg, who was Jewish, was a communist.

[ 98 ] Unlike other women targets of McCarthyism, Rosenberg emerged with her career and integrity intact. When the smear campaign fizzled out, journalist Edward R. Murrow said "the character assassin has missed." [ 98 ] During the Korean War , when Truman dismissed General Douglas MacArthur , McCarthy charged that Truman and his advisors must have planned the dismissal during late-night sessions when "they've had time to get the President cheerful" on bourbon and Bénédictine . McCarthy declared, "The son of a bitch should be impeached." [ 99 ] Support from Catholics and the Kennedy family [ edit ] One of the strongest bases of anti-Communist sentiment in the United States was the Catholic community, which constituted over 20% of the national vote. McCarthy identified himself as Catholic, and although the great majority of Catholics were Democrats, as his fame as a leading anti-Communist grew, he became popular in Catholic communities across the country, with strong support from many leading Catholics, diocesan newspapers, and Catholic journals. At the same time, some Catholics opposed McCarthy, notably the anti-Communist author Father John Francis Cronin and the influential journal Commonweal .

[ 100 ] McCarthy established a bond with the powerful Kennedy family , which had high visibility among Catholics. McCarthy became a close friend of Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

, himself a fervent anti-Communist, and he was also a frequent guest at the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts . He dated two of Kennedy's daughters, Patricia and Eunice .

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] It has been stated that McCarthy was godfather to Robert F. Kennedy 's first child, Kathleen Kennedy . This claim was acknowledged by Robert's wife and Kathleen's mother Ethel , [ 103 ] though Kathleen later claimed that she looked at her baptismal certificate and that her actual godfather was Manhattanville College of the Sacred Heart professor Daniel Walsh.

[ 103 ] Robert Kennedy was unusual among his Harvard friends for defending McCarthy when they discussed politics after graduation.

[ 104 ] He was chosen by McCarthy to be a counsel for his investigatory committee, but resigned after six months due to disagreements with McCarthy and Committee Counsel Roy Cohn . Joseph Kennedy had a national network of contacts and became a vocal supporter, building McCarthy's popularity among Catholics and making sizable contributions to McCarthy's campaigns.

[ 105 ] The Kennedy patriarch hoped that one of his sons would be president. Mindful of the anti-Catholic prejudice which Al Smith faced during his 1928 campaign for that office, Joseph Kennedy supported McCarthy as a national Catholic politician who might pave the way for a younger Kennedy's presidential candidacy.

Unlike many Democrats, John F. Kennedy , who served in the Senate with McCarthy from 1953 until the latter's death in 1957, never attacked McCarthy. Due to his friendship with the Kennedys [ 106 ] and, reportedly, a $50,000 donation from Joseph Kennedy, McCarthy did not campaign for JFK's 1952 opponent , Republican incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

. Lodge lost despite Eisenhower winning the state in the presidential election.

[ 107 ] When a speaker at a February 1952 final club dinner stated that he was glad that McCarthy had not attended Harvard , an angry Kennedy jumped up, denounced the speaker, and left the event.

[ 104 ] When Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

asked John Kennedy why he avoided criticizing McCarthy, Kennedy responded by saying, "Hell, half my voters in Massachusetts look on McCarthy as a hero".

[ 107 ] McCarthy and Eisenhower [ edit ] Dwight D. Eisenhower , 34th President of the United States.

During the 1952 presidential election , the Eisenhower campaign toured Wisconsin with McCarthy. In a speech delivered in Green Bay , Eisenhower declared that while he agreed with McCarthy's goals, he disagreed with his methods. In draft versions of his speech, Eisenhower had also included a strong defense of his mentor, George Marshall, which was a direct rebuke of McCarthy's frequent attacks. However, under the advice of conservative colleagues who were afraid that Eisenhower could lose Wisconsin if he alienated McCarthy supporters, he deleted this defense from later versions of his speech.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] The deletion was discovered by William H. Laurence, a reporter for The New York Times , and featured on its front page the next day. Eisenhower was widely criticized for giving up his personal convictions, and the incident became the low point of his campaign.

[ 108 ] With his victory in the 1952 presidential race, Eisenhower became the first Republican president in 20 years. The Republican Party also held a majority in the House of Representatives and the Senate. After being elected president, Eisenhower made it clear to those close to him that he did not approve of McCarthy and he worked actively to diminish his power and influence. Still, he never directly confronted McCarthy or criticized him by name in any speech, thus perhaps prolonging McCarthy's power by giving the impression that even the President was afraid to criticize him directly. Oshinsky disputes this, stating that "Eisenhower was known as a harmonizer, a man who could get diverse factions to work toward a common goal. ... Leadership, he explained, meant patience and conciliation, not 'hitting people over the head.'" [ 110 ] McCarthy won reelection in 1952 with 54% of the popular vote, defeating former Wisconsin State Attorney General Thomas E. Fairchild but, as stated above, badly trailing a Republican ticket which otherwise swept the state of Wisconsin; all the other Republican winners, including Eisenhower himself, received at least 60% of the Wisconsin vote.

[ 111 ] Those who expected that party loyalty would cause McCarthy to tone down his accusations of Communists being harbored within the government were soon disappointed. Eisenhower had never been an admirer of McCarthy, and their relationship became more hostile once Eisenhower was in office. In a November 1953 speech that was carried on national television, McCarthy began by praising the Eisenhower Administration for removing "1,456 Truman holdovers who were ... gotten rid of because of Communist connections and activities or perversion." He then went on to complain that John Paton Davies Jr.

was still "on the payroll after eleven months of the Eisenhower administration," even though Davies had actually been dismissed three weeks earlier, and repeated an unsubstantiated accusation that Davies had tried to "put Communists and espionage agents in key spots in the Central Intelligence Agency ." In the same speech, he criticized Eisenhower for not doing enough to secure the release of missing American pilots shot down over China during the Korean War.

[ 112 ] By the end of 1953, McCarthy had altered the "twenty years of treason" catchphrase he had coined for the preceding Democratic administrations and began referring to "twenty- one years of treason" to include Eisenhower's first year in office.

[ 113 ] As McCarthy became increasingly combative towards the Eisenhower Administration, Eisenhower faced repeated calls that he confront McCarthy directly. Eisenhower refused, saying privately "nothing would please him [McCarthy] more than to get the publicity that would be generated by a public repudiation by the President." [ 114 ] On several occasions Eisenhower is reported to have said of McCarthy that he did not want to "get down in the gutter with that guy." [ 115 ] Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations [ edit ] With the beginning of his second term as senator in January 1953, McCarthy was made chairman of the Senate Committee on Government Operations. According to some reports, Republican leaders were growing wary of McCarthy's methods and gave him this relatively mundane panel rather than the Internal Security Subcommittee —the committee normally involved with investigating Communists—thus putting McCarthy "where he can't do any harm", in the words of Senate Majority Leader Robert A. Taft .

[ 116 ] However, the Committee on Government Operations included the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations , and the mandate of this subcommittee was sufficiently flexible to allow McCarthy to use it for his own investigations of Communists in the government. McCarthy appointed Roy Cohn as chief counsel and 27-year-old Robert F. Kennedy as an assistant counsel to the subcommittee. Later, McCarthy also hired Gerard David Schine , heir to a hotel-chain fortune, on the recommendation of George Sokolsky.

[ 117 ] This subcommittee would be the scene of some of McCarthy's most publicized exploits. When the records of the closed executive sessions of the subcommittee under McCarthy's chairmanship were made public in 2003–04, [ 118 ] Senators Susan Collins and Carl Levin wrote the following in their preface to the documents: Senator McCarthy's zeal to uncover subversion and espionage led to disturbing excesses. His browbeating tactics destroyed careers of people who were not involved in the infiltration of our government. His freewheeling style caused both the Senate and the Subcommittee to revise the rules governing future investigations, and prompted the courts to act to protect the Constitutional rights of witnesses at Congressional hearings. ... These hearings are a part of our national past that we can neither afford to forget nor permit to re-occur.

[ 119 ] The subcommittee first investigated allegations of Communist influence in the Voice of America , at that time administered by the State Department's United States Information Agency . Many VOA personnel were questioned in front of television cameras and a packed press gallery, with McCarthy lacing his questions with hostile innuendo and false accusations.

[ 120 ] A few VOA employees alleged Communist influence on the content of broadcasts, but none of the charges were substantiated. Morale at VOA was badly damaged, and one of its engineers committed suicide during McCarthy's investigation. Ed Kretzman, a policy advisor for the service, would later comment that it was VOA's "darkest hour when Senator McCarthy and his chief hatchet man, Roy Cohn, almost succeeded in muffling it." [ 120 ] The subcommittee then turned to the overseas library program of the International Information Agency. Cohn toured Europe examining the card catalogs of the State Department libraries looking for works by authors he deemed inappropriate. McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro-communist authors before his subcommittee and the press. The State Department bowed to McCarthy and ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves "material by any controversial persons, Communists, fellow travelers, etc." Some libraries went as far as burning the newly-forbidden books.

[ 121 ] Shortly after this, in one of his public criticisms of McCarthy, President Eisenhower urged Americans: "Don't join the book burners. ... Don't be afraid to go in your library and read every book." [ 122 ] Soon after receiving the chair to the Subcommittee on Investigations, McCarthy appointed J. B. Matthews as staff director of the subcommittee. One of the nation's foremost anti-communists, Matthews had formerly been staff director for the House Un-American Activities Committee . The appointment became controversial when it was learned that Matthews had recently written an article titled "Reds and Our Churches", [ 123 ] [ 124 ] which opened with the sentence, "The largest single group supporting the Communist apparatus in the United States is composed of Protestant Clergymen." A group of senators denounced this "shocking and unwarranted attack against the American clergy" and demanded that McCarthy dismiss Matthews. McCarthy initially refused to do this. As the controversy mounted, however, and the majority of his own subcommittee joined the call for Matthews's ouster, McCarthy finally yielded and accepted his resignation. For some McCarthy opponents, this was a signal defeat of the senator, showing he was not as invincible as he had formerly seemed.

[ 125 ] Investigating the Army [ edit ] In autumn 1953, McCarthy's committee began its ill-fated inquiry into the United States Army . This began with McCarthy opening an investigation into the Army Signal Corps laboratory at Fort Monmouth . McCarthy, newly married to Jean Kerr, cut short his honeymoon to open the investigation. He garnered some headlines with stories of a dangerous spy ring among the army researchers, but after weeks of hearings, nothing came of his investigations.

[ 126 ] Unable to expose any signs of subversion, McCarthy focused instead on the case of Irving Peress , a New York dentist who had been drafted into the army in 1952 and promoted to major in November 1953. Shortly thereafter it came to the attention of the military bureaucracy that Peress, who was a member of the left-wing American Labor Party , had declined to answer questions about his political affiliations on a loyalty-review form. Peress's superiors were therefore ordered to discharge him from the army within 90 days. McCarthy subpoenaed Peress to appear before his subcommittee on January 30, 1954. Peress refused to answer McCarthy's questions, citing his rights under the Fifth Amendment . McCarthy responded by sending a message to Secretary of the Army Robert T. Stevens , demanding that Peress be court-martialed. On that same day, Peress asked for his pending discharge from the army to be effected immediately, and the next day Brigadier General Ralph W. Zwicker , his commanding officer at Camp Kilmer in New Jersey , gave him an honorable separation from the army. At McCarthy's encouragement, "Who promoted Peress?" became a rallying cry among many anti-communists and McCarthy supporters. In fact, and as McCarthy knew, Peress had been promoted automatically through the provisions of the Doctor Draft Law, for which McCarthy had voted.

[ 127 ] Army–McCarthy hearings [ edit ] Main article: Army–McCarthy hearings Early in 1954, the U.S. Army accused McCarthy and his chief counsel, Roy Cohn , of improperly pressuring the army to give favorable treatment to G. David Schine , a former aide to McCarthy and a friend of Cohn's, who was then serving in the army as a private.

[ 128 ] McCarthy claimed that the accusation was made in bad faith, in retaliation for his questioning of Zwicker the previous year. The Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, usually chaired by McCarthy himself, was given the task of adjudicating these conflicting charges. Republican senator Karl Mundt was appointed to chair the committee, and the Army–McCarthy hearings convened on April 22, 1954.

[ 129 ] McCarthy chats with Roy Cohn (right) at the Army-McCarthy hearings .

The army consulted with an attorney familiar with McCarthy to determine the best approach to attacking him. Based on his recommendation, it decided not to pursue McCarthy on the question of communists in government: "The attorney feels it is almost impossible to counter McCarthy effectively on the issue of kicking Communists out of Government, because he generally has some basis, no matter how slight, for his claim of Communist connection." [ 45 ] The hearings lasted for 36 days and were broadcast on live television by ABC and DuMont , with an estimated 20 million viewers. After hearing 32 witnesses and two million words of testimony, the committee concluded that McCarthy himself had not exercised any improper influence on Schine's behalf, but that Cohn had engaged in "unduly persistent or aggressive efforts". The committee also concluded that Army Secretary Robert Stevens and Army Counsel John Adams "made efforts to terminate or influence the investigation and hearings at Fort Monmouth", and that Adams "made vigorous and diligent efforts" to block subpoenas for members of the Army Loyalty and Screening Board "by means of personal appeal to certain members of the [McCarthy] committee".

[ 130 ] Of far greater importance to McCarthy than the committee's inconclusive final report was the adverse effect that the extensive exposure had on his popularity. Many in the audience saw him as bullying, reckless, and dishonest, and the daily newspaper summaries of the hearings were also frequently unfavorable.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Late in the hearings, Senator Stuart Symington made an angry and prophetic remark to McCarthy. Upon being told by McCarthy that "You're not fooling anyone", Symington replied: "Senator, the American people have had a look at you now for six weeks; you're not fooling anyone, either." [ 133 ] In Gallup polls of January 1954, 50% of those polled had a favorable opinion of McCarthy. In June, that number had fallen to 34%. In the same polls, those with a unfavorable opinion of McCarthy increased from 29% to 45%.

[ 134 ] An increasing number of Republicans and conservatives were coming to see McCarthy as a liability to the party and to anti-communism. Representative George H. Bender noted, "There is a growing impatience with the Republican Party. McCarthyism has become a synonym for witch-hunting, Star Chamber methods, and the denial of ... civil liberties." [ 135 ] Frederick Woltman , a reporter with a long-standing reputation as a staunch anti-communist, wrote a five-part series of articles criticizing McCarthy in the New York World-Telegram .

He stated that McCarthy "has become a major liability to the cause of anti-communism", and accused him of "wild twisting of facts and near-facts [that] repels authorities in the field".

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Joseph N. Welch (left) being questioned by Senator McCarthy, June 9, 1954.

The most famous incident in the hearings was an exchange between McCarthy and the army's chief legal representative, Joseph Nye Welch . On June 9, 1954, [ 138 ] the 30th day of the hearings, Welch challenged Roy Cohn to provide U.S. Attorney General Herbert Brownell Jr.

with McCarthy's list of 130 Communists or subversives in defense plants "before the sun goes down". McCarthy stepped in and said that if Welch was so concerned about persons aiding the Communist Party, he should check on a man in his Boston law office named Fred Fisher , who had once belonged to the National Lawyers Guild , a progressive lawyers' association.

[ 139 ] In an impassioned defense of Fisher, Welch responded, "Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness ..." When McCarthy resumed his attack, Welch interrupted him: "Let us not assassinate this lad further, Senator. You've done enough. Have you no sense of decency, Sir, at long last? Have you left no sense of decency?" When McCarthy once again persisted, Welch cut him off and demanded the chairman "call the next witness". At that point, the gallery erupted in applause and a recess was called.

[ 140 ] Edward R. Murrow, See It Now [ edit ] Edward R. Murrow , pioneer in broadcast journalism.

Even before McCarthy's clash with Welch in the hearings, one of the most prominent attacks on McCarthy's methods was an episode of the television documentary series See It Now , hosted by journalist Edward R. Murrow , which was broadcast on March 9, 1954. Titled "A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy", the episode consisted largely of clips of McCarthy speaking. In these clips, McCarthy accuses the Democratic party of "twenty years of treason", describes the American Civil Liberties Union as "listed as 'a front for, and doing the work of', the Communist Party", [ 141 ] and berates and harangues various witnesses, including General Zwicker .

[ 142 ] In his conclusion, Murrow said of McCarthy: No one familiar with the history of this country can deny that congressional committees are useful. It is necessary to investigate before legislating, but the line between investigating and persecuting is a very fine one, and the junior Senator from Wisconsin has stepped over it repeatedly. His primary achievement has been in confusing the public mind, as between the internal and the external threats of Communism. We must not confuse dissent with disloyalty. We must remember always that accusation is not proof and that conviction depends upon evidence and due process of law. We will not walk in fear, one of another. We will not be driven by fear into an age of unreason, if we dig deep in our history and our doctrine, and remember that we are not descended from fearful men—not from men who feared to write, to speak, to associate and to defend causes that were, for the moment, unpopular.

This is no time for men who oppose Senator McCarthy's methods to keep silent, or for those who approve. We can deny our heritage and our history, but we cannot escape responsibility for the result. There is no way for a citizen of a republic to abdicate his responsibilities. As a nation we have come into our full inheritance at a tender age. We proclaim ourselves, as indeed we are, the defenders of freedom, wherever it continues to exist in the world, but we cannot defend freedom abroad by deserting it at home.

The actions of the junior Senator from Wisconsin have caused alarm and dismay amongst our allies abroad, and given considerable comfort to our enemies. And whose fault is that? Not really his. He didn't create this situation of fear; he merely exploited it—and rather successfully.

Cassius was right: "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves." [ 143 ] The following week, See It Now ran another episode critical of McCarthy, this one focusing on the case of Annie Lee Moss , an African-American army clerk who was the target of one of McCarthy's investigations. The Murrow shows, together with the televised Army–McCarthy hearings of the same year, were the major causes of a nationwide popular opinion backlash against McCarthy, [ 144 ] in part because for the first time his statements were being publicly challenged by noteworthy figures. To counter the negative publicity, McCarthy appeared on See It Now on April 6, 1954, and made a number of charges against the popular Murrow, including the accusation that he colluded with VOKS , the "Russian espionage and propaganda organization".

[ 145 ] This response did not go over well with viewers, and the result was a further decline in McCarthy's popularity.

[ citation needed ] "Joe Must Go" recall attempt [ edit ] On March 18, 1954, Sauk-Prairie Star editor Leroy Gore of Sauk City , Wisconsin urged the recall of McCarthy in a front-page editorial that ran alongside a sample petition that readers could fill out and mail to the newspaper. A Republican and former McCarthy supporter, Gore cited the senator with subverting President Eisenhower's authority, disrespecting Wisconsin's own Gen.

Ralph Wise Zwicker and ignoring the plight of Wisconsin dairy farmers faced with price-slashing surpluses.

[ 146 ] Despite critics' claims that a recall attempt was foolhardy, the "Joe Must Go" movement caught fire and was backed by a diverse coalition including other Republican leaders, Democrats, businessmen, farmers and students.

Wisconsin's constitution stipulates the number of signatures needed to force a recall election must exceed one-quarter the number of voters in the most recent gubernatorial election, requiring the anti-McCarthy movement to gather some 404,000 signatures in sixty days. With little support from organized labor or the state Democratic Party , the roughly organized recall effort attracted national attention, particularly during the concurrent Army-McCarthy hearings.

[ citation needed ] Following the deadline of June 5, the final number of signatures was never determined because the petitions were sent out of state to avoid a subpoena from Sauk County district attorney Harlan Kelley, an ardent McCarthy supporter who was investigating the leaders of the recall campaign on the grounds that they had violated Wisconsin's Corrupt Practices Act. Chicago newspapermen later tallied 335,000 names while another 50,000 were said to be hidden in Minneapolis, with other lists buried on Sauk County farms.

[ 146 ] Public opinion [ edit ] McCarthy's Support in Gallup Polls [ 147 ] Date Favorable No Opinion Unfavorable Net Favorable 1952 August 15 63 22 −7 1953 April 19 59 22 −3 1953 June 35 35 30 +5 1953 August 34 24 42 −8 1954 January 50 21 29 +21 1954 March 46 18 36 +10 1954 April 38 16 46 −8 1954 May 35 16 49 −14 1954 June 34 21 45 −11 1954 August 36 13 51 −15 1954 November 35 19 46 −11 Censure and the Watkins Committee [ edit ] Senator Ralph Flanders , who introduced the resolution calling for McCarthy to be censured .

Several members of the U.S. Senate had opposed McCarthy well before 1953. Senator Margaret Chase Smith , a Maine Republican, was the first. She delivered her " Declaration of Conscience " speech on June 1, 1950, calling for an end to the use of smear tactics, without mentioning McCarthy or anyone else by name. Only six other Republican senators— Wayne Morse , Irving Ives , Charles W. Tobey , Edward John Thye , George Aiken , and Robert C. Hendrickson —agreed to join her in condemning McCarthy's tactics. McCarthy referred to Smith and her fellow senators as "Snow White and the six dwarfs".

[ 148 ] On March 9, 1954, Vermont Republican senator Ralph E. Flanders gave a humor-laced speech on the Senate floor, questioning McCarthy's tactics in fighting communism, likening McCarthyism to "house-cleaning" with "much clatter and hullabaloo". He recommended that McCarthy turn his attention to the worldwide encroachment of Communism outside North America.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] In a June 1 speech, Flanders compared McCarthy to Adolf Hitler , accusing him of spreading "division and confusion" and saying, "Were the Junior Senator from Wisconsin in the pay of the Communists he could not have done a better job for them." [ 151 ] On June 11, Flanders introduced a resolution to have McCarthy removed as chair of his committees. Although there were many in the Senate who believed that some sort of disciplinary action against McCarthy was warranted, there was no clear majority supporting this resolution. Some of the resistance was due to concern about usurping the Senate's rules regarding committee chairs and seniority. Flanders next introduced a resolution to censure McCarthy. The resolution was initially written without any reference to particular actions or misdeeds on McCarthy's part. As Flanders put it, "It was not his breaches of etiquette, or of rules or sometimes even of laws which is so disturbing," but rather his overall pattern of behavior. Ultimately a "bill of particulars" listing 46 charges was added to the censure resolution. A special committee, chaired by Senator Arthur Vivian Watkins , was appointed to study and evaluate the resolution. This committee opened hearings on August 31.

[ 152 ] Senator Arthur V. Watkins After two months of hearings and deliberations, the Watkins Committee recommended that McCarthy be censured on two of the 46 counts: his contempt of the Subcommittee on Rules and Administration, which had called him to testify in 1951 and 1952, and his abuse of General Zwicker in 1954. The Zwicker count was dropped by the full Senate on the grounds that McCarthy's conduct was arguably "induced" by Zwicker's own behavior. In place of this count, a new one was drafted regarding McCarthy's statements about the Watkins Committee itself.

[ 153 ] The two counts on which the Senate ultimately voted were: That McCarthy had "failed to co-operate with the Sub-committee on Rules and Administration", and "repeatedly abused the members who were trying to carry out assigned duties ..." That McCarthy had charged "three members of the [Watkins] Select Committee with 'deliberate deception' and 'fraud' ... that the special Senate session ... was a 'lynch party ' ", and had characterized the committee "as the 'unwitting handmaiden', 'involuntary agent' and 'attorneys in fact' of the Communist Party", and had "acted contrary to senatorial ethics and tended to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute, to obstruct the constitutional processes of the Senate, and to impair its dignity".

[ 154 ] On December 2, 1954, the Senate voted to "condemn" McCarthy on both counts by a vote of 67 to 22.

[ 155 ] The Democrats present unanimously favored condemnation and the Republicans were split evenly. The only senator not on record was John F. Kennedy , who was hospitalized for back surgery; Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted.

[ 156 ] Immediately after the vote, Senator H. Styles Bridges , a McCarthy supporter, argued that the resolution was "not a censure resolution" because the word "condemn" rather than "censure" was used in the final draft. The word "censure" was then removed from the title of the resolution, though it is generally regarded and referred to as a censure of McCarthy, both by historians [ 157 ] and in Senate documents.

[ 158 ] McCarthy himself said, "I wouldn't exactly call it a vote of confidence." He added, "I don't feel I've been lynched." [ 159 ] However, Indiana Senator William E. Jenner , one of McCarthy's friends and fellow Republicans, likened McCarthy's conduct to that of "the kid who came to the party and peed in the lemonade." [ 160 ] Final years [ edit ] Harry J. Anslinger criticized but supplied McCarthy's morphine addiction.

After his condemnation and censure, McCarthy continued to perform his senatorial duties for another two and a half years. His career as a major public figure, however, had been ruined. His colleagues in the Senate avoided him; his speeches on the Senate floor were delivered to a near-empty chamber or received with intentional and conspicuous displays of inattention.

[ 161 ] The press that had once recorded his every public statement now ignored him, and outside speaking engagements dwindled almost to nothing. Eisenhower, finally freed of McCarthy's political intimidation, quipped to his Cabinet that McCarthyism was now "McCarthywasm".

[ 162 ] Still, McCarthy continued to rail against communism and socialism. He warned against attendance at summit conferences with "the Reds", saying that "you cannot offer friendship to tyrants and murderers ... without advancing the cause of tyranny and murder." [ 163 ] He declared that "co-existence with Communists is neither possible nor honorable nor desirable. Our long-term objective must be the eradication of Communism from the face of the earth." In one of his final acts in the Senate, McCarthy opposed President Eisenhower's nomination to the Supreme Court of William J. Brennan , after reading a speech Brennan had given shortly beforehand in which he characterized McCarthy's anti-Communist investigations as "witch hunts". McCarthy's opposition failed to gain any traction, however, and he was the only senator to vote against Brennan's confirmation.

[ 164 ] McCarthy's biographers agree that he was a changed man, for the worse, after the censure; declining both physically and emotionally, he became a "pale ghost of his former self", in the words of Fred J. Cook.

[ 165 ] It was reported that McCarthy suffered from cirrhosis of the liver and was frequently hospitalized for alcohol abuse. Numerous eyewitnesses, including Senate aide George Reedy and journalist Tom Wicker , reported finding him drunk in the Senate.

Journalist Richard Rovere (1959) wrote: He had always been a heavy drinker, and there were times in those seasons of discontent when he drank more than ever. But he was not always drunk. He went on the wagon (for him this meant beer instead of whiskey) for days and weeks at a time. The difficulty toward the end was that he couldn't hold the stuff. He went to pieces on his second or third drink, and he did not snap back quickly.

[ 166 ] McCarthy had also become addicted to morphine .

Harry J. Anslinger , head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics , became aware of McCarthy's addiction in the 1950s, and demanded he stop using the drug. McCarthy refused.

[ 167 ] In Anslinger's memoir, The Murderers , McCarthy is anonymously quoted as saying: I wouldn't try to do anything about it, Commissioner ... It will be the worse for you ... and if it winds up in a public scandal and that should hurt this country, I wouldn't care […] The choice is yours.

[ 167 ] Anslinger decided to give McCarthy access to morphine in secret from a pharmacy in Washington, D.C. The morphine was paid for by the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, right up to McCarthy's death. Anslinger never publicly named McCarthy, and he threatened with prison a journalist who had uncovered the story.

[ 167 ] However, McCarthy's identity was known to Anslinger's agents, and journalist Maxine Cheshire confirmed his identity with Will Oursler , co-author of The Murderers, in 1978.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Death [ edit ] Tombstone of Joseph McCarthy with the Fox River in the background.

McCarthy died in the Bethesda Naval Hospital on May 2, 1957, at the age of 48. His death certificate listed the cause of death as " Hepatitis , acute, cause unknown"; previously doctors had not reported him to be in critical condition. It was hinted in the press that he died of alcoholism (cirrhosis of the liver), an estimation that is now accepted by modern biographers.

[ 15 ] Thomas C. Reeves argues that he effectively died by suicide.

[ 169 ] He was given a state funeral that was attended by 70 senators, and a Solemn Pontifical Requiem Mass was celebrated before more than 100 priests and 2,000 others at Washington's St. Matthew's Cathedral . Thousands of people viewed his body in Washington. He was buried in St. Mary's Parish Cemetery, Appleton, Wisconsin , where more than 17,000 people filed through St. Mary's Church in order to pay him their last respects.

[ 170 ] Three senators— George W. Malone , William E. Jenner , and Herman Welker —had flown from Washington to Appleton on the plane that carried McCarthy's casket.

Robert F. Kennedy attended the funeral in Wisconsin. McCarthy was survived by his wife, Jean, and their daughter, Tierney.

In the summer of 1957, a special election was held to fill McCarthy's seat. In the primaries , voters in both parties turned away from McCarthy's legacy. The Republican primary was won by Governor Walter J. Kohler Jr.

, who called for a clean break from McCarthy's approach; he defeated former Representative Glenn Robert Davis , who charged that President Eisenhower was soft on Communism.

[ 171 ] Kohler was defeated in the special general election by Democrat William Proxmire .

[ 172 ] After assuming his seat, Proxmire did not pay the customary tribute to his predecessor and stated instead that McCarthy was a "disgrace to Wisconsin, to the Senate, and to America." [ 173 ] As of 2025, McCarthy is the last Republican to have held, or won election to, Wisconsin's Class 1 Senate seat.

[ 174 ] Legacy [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e William Bennett , former Reagan Administration Secretary of Education , summed up his perspective in his 2007 book America: The Last Best Hope : The cause of anti-communism, which united millions of Americans and which gained the support of Democrats, Republicans and independents, was undermined by Sen. Joe McCarthy ... McCarthy addressed a real problem: disloyal elements within the U.S. government. But his approach to this real problem was to cause untold grief to the country he claimed to love ... ¨Best¨ of all, McCarthy besmirched the honorable cause of anti-communism. He discredited legitimate efforts to counter Soviet subversion of American institutions.

[ 175 ] House Un-American Activities Committee [ edit ] McCarthy's hearings are often incorrectly conflated with the hearings of the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). HUAC is best known for its investigations of Alger Hiss and the Hollywood film industry , which led to the blacklisting of hundreds of actors, writers, and directors. HUAC was a House committee, and as such it had no formal connection to McCarthy, who served in the Senate, although the existence of the House Un-American Activities Committee thrived in part as a result of McCarthy's activities. HUAC was active for 37 years (1938–1975).

[ 176 ] In popular culture [ edit ] From the start of his notoriety, McCarthy served as a favorite subject for political cartoonists. He was traditionally depicted in a negative light, normally pertaining to McCarthyism and his accusations.

Herblock 's cartoon that coined the term McCarthyism appeared less than two months after the senator's now famous February 1950 speech in Wheeling, West Virginia .

In 1951, Ray Bradbury published "The Fireman", an allegory on suppression of ideas. This served as the basis for Fahrenheit 451 published in 1953.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Bradbury said that he wrote Fahrenheit 451 because of his concerns at the time (during the McCarthy era ) about the threat of book burning in the United States.

[ 179 ] Bob Hope was one of the first comedians to make jokes about McCarthy. During his 1952 Christmas show, Hope made a joke about Santa Claus writing to let Joe McCarthy know he was going to wear his red suit despite the Red Scare. Hope continued to offer McCarthy jokes as they were well received by most people, although he did receive some hate mail.

In 1953, the popular daily comic strip Pogo introduced the character Simple J. Malarkey , a pugnacious and conniving wildcat with an unmistakable physical resemblance to McCarthy. After a worried Rhode Island newspaper editor protested to the syndicate that provided the strip, creator Walt Kelly began depicting the Malarkey character with a bag over his head, concealing his features. The explanation was that Malarkey was hiding from a Rhode Island Red hen, a clear reference to the controversy over the Malarkey character.

[ 180 ] In 1953, playwright Arthur Miller published The Crucible , suggesting the Salem witch trials were analogous to McCarthyism.

[ 181 ] As his fame grew, McCarthy increasingly became the target of ridicule and parody. He was impersonated by nightclub and radio impressionists and was satirized in Mad magazine, on The Red Skelton Show , and elsewhere. Several comedy songs lampooning the senator were released in 1954, including "Point of Order" by Stan Freberg and Daws Butler , "Senator McCarthy Blues" by Hal Block , and unionist folk singer Joe Glazer 's "Joe McCarthy's Band", sung to the tune of " McNamara's Band ". Also in 1954, the radio comedy team Bob and Ray parodied McCarthy with the character "Commissioner Carstairs" in their soap opera spoof "Mary Backstayge, Noble Wife". That same year, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation radio network broadcast a satire, The Investigator , whose title character was a clear imitation of McCarthy. A recording of the show became popular in the United States, and was reportedly played by President Eisenhower at cabinet meetings.

[ 182 ] The 1953 short story Mr. Costello, Hero by Theodore Sturgeon was described by journalist Paul Williams as "the all-time great story about Senator Joseph McCarthy, who he was and how he did what he did." [ 183 ] Post-censure reaction [ edit ] Mr. Costello, Hero was adapted by X Minus One into a radio teleplay and broadcast on July 3, 1956.

[ 184 ] While the radio adaptation retains much of the story, it completely remakes the narrator and in fact gives him a line spoken in the original by Mr. Costello himself, thus changing the tone of the story considerably. In a 1977 interview, Sturgeon commented that it was his concerns about the ongoing McCarthy hearings that prompted him to write the story.

[ 185 ] A more serious fictional portrayal of McCarthy played a central role in the 1959 novel The Manchurian Candidate by Richard Condon .

[ 186 ] The character of Senator John Iselin, a demagogic anti-communist, is closely modeled on McCarthy, even to the varying numbers of Communists he asserts are employed by the federal government.

[ 187 ] He remains a major character in the 1962 film version .

[ 188 ] The 1959 novel Advise and Consent by Allen Drury features an overzealous demagogue, Senator Fred Van Ackerman, based on McCarthy. Although the fictional senator is an ultraliberal who proposes surrender to the Soviet Union, his portrayal strongly resembles the popular perception of McCarthy's character and methods.

McCarthy was portrayed by Peter Boyle in the 1977 Emmy-winning television movie Tail Gunner Joe , a dramatization of McCarthy's life.

[ 189 ] He was portrayed by Joe Don Baker in the 1992 HBO film Citizen Cohn .

[ 190 ] Archival footage of McCarthy himself was used in the 2005 film Good Night, and Good Luck about Edward R. Murrow and the See It Now episode that challenged McCarthy.

[ 191 ] In the German-French docu-drama The Real American – Joe McCarthy (2012), directed by Lutz Hachmeister , McCarthy is portrayed by the British actor and comedian John Sessions .

[ 192 ] In Lee Daniels ' 2020 film, The United States vs. Billie Holiday , McCarthy is portrayed by actor Randy Davison .

Reconsideration [ edit ] McCarthy remains a controversial figure.

Arthur Herman , popular historian and senior fellow of the Hudson Institute , says that new evidence—in the form of Venona -decrypted Soviet messages, Soviet espionage data now opened to the West, and newly released transcripts of closed hearings before McCarthy's subcommittee—has partially vindicated McCarthy by showing that some of his identifications of Communists were correct and the scale of Soviet espionage activities in the United States during the 1940s and 1950s was larger than many scholars had suspected.

[ 193 ] In his 2007 book Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight Against America's Enemies , journalist M. Stanton Evans similarly argued that evidence from the Venona documents shows significant penetration by Soviet agents.

[ 194 ] Historian John Earl Haynes , who studied the Venona decryptions extensively, challenged Herman's efforts to rehabilitate McCarthy, arguing that McCarthy's attempts to "make anti-communism a partisan weapon" actually "threatened [the post-War] anti-Communist consensus", thereby ultimately harming anti-Communist efforts more than helping them.

[ 195 ] Haynes concluded that, of the 159 people who were identified on lists used or referenced by McCarthy, evidence only substantially proved that nine of them had aided Soviet espionage efforts—while several hundred Soviet spies who were actually known based on Venona and other evidence were mostly never named by McCarthy. Haynes' own view was that a number of those accused on McCarthy's lists above, perhaps a majority, likely posed some form of possible security risk, but a significant minority of others likely did not, and several were indisputably no risk at all.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] See also [ edit ] List of members of the United States Congress who died in office (1950–1999) List of United States senators expelled or censured McCarthyism McCarthyism and antisemitism References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ For a history of this period, see, for example: Caute, David (1978).

The Great Fear: The Anti-Communist Purge Under Truman and Eisenhower . New York: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 0-671-22682-7 .

; Fried, Richard M. (1990).

Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective | . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-504361-8 .

Schrecker, Ellen (1998).

Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America . Boston: Little, Brown.

ISBN 0-316-77470-7 .

^ Youngblood, Denise J.; Shaw, Tony (2014).

Cinematic Cold War: The American Struggle for Hearts and Minds . United States of America: University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0700620203 .

^ Feuerherd, Peter (December 2, 2017).

"How Hollywood Thrived Through the Red Scare" .

JSTOR Daily .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ Publishers, HarperCollins.

"The American Heritage Dictionary entry: McCarthyism" .

www.ahdictionary.com .

Archived from the original on December 23, 2023 . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ Onion, Rebecca, We're Never Going to Get Our “Have You No Sense of Decency, Sir?” Moment Archived August 1, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , Slate, July 26, 2018 ^ a b Garraty, John (1989). 1,001 Things Everyone Should Know About American History. New York: Doubleday. p. 24 ^ a b O'Brien, Steven (1991). Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, p. 265 ^ a b "Connecticut Cartoonists #5: The Philosopher of Okefenokee Swamp" . The Comics Journal. June 22, 2016.

Archived from the original on June 23, 2016 . Retrieved June 23, 2016 .

^ "Communists in Government Service, McCarthy Says" . United States Senate History Website.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2023 .

^ McDaniel, Rodger E.

(2013).

Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins: The Suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester Hunt . Cody, WY: WordsWorth Press.

ISBN 978-0983027591 .

^ Simpson, Alan K.; McDaniel, Rodger (2013). "Prologue".

Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins: The Suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester Hunt . WordsWorth Press. p. x.

ISBN 978-0983027591 .

^ McDaniel, Rodger.

Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins ^ Ted Lewis (May 3, 1957).

"Joseph McCarthy, the controversial senator, dies at 48 in 1957" .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2017 . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

Reprinted May 1, 2016 ^ "McCarthy's death certificate" .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2022 . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

^ a b See, for example: Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . New York: Free Press. pp.

503– 504.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

; Reeves, Thomas C.

(1982).

The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy: A Biography . New York: Stein and Day. pp.

669–671 .

ISBN 1-56833-101-0 .

; Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . New York: Free Press. pp.

302–303 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ Rovere, Richard H. (1959).

Senator Joe McCarthy . New York: Harcourt, Brace. p. 79.

LCCN 59009464 .

^ "Joseph McCarthy: Biography" . Appleton Public Library. 2003.

Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved November 30, 2017 .

^ "McCarthy as Student" . Archived from the original on February 28, 2013 . Retrieved September 7, 2015 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . New York: Free Press. p. 12.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ In A Conspiracy So Immense, Oshinsky states that McCarthy chose Marquette University rather than the University of Wisconsin–Madison partially because Marquette was under Catholic control and partially because he enrolled during the Great Depression, when few working-class or farm-bred students had the money to go out of state for college. See Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . New York: Free Press. p. 11.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Oshinsky explains this (p. 17) as resulting partially from the financial pressures of the Great Depression. He also notes (p. 28) that even during his judgeship, McCarthy was known to have gambled heavily after hours.

Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . New York: Free Press. pp. 17, 28.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Judge on Trial, McCarthy – A Documented Record, The Progressive, April 1954 [ usurped ] ^ The Wisconsin Legislative Reference Library (1940).

"The Wisconsin Blue Book" .

Wisconsin Blue Books . Madison, WI: State of Wisconsin.

Archived from the original on February 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 25, 2013 .

^ Commire, Anne (1994).

Historic World Leaders: North & South America (M–Z) . Gale Research Incorporated. p. 492.

ISBN 978-0810384132 .

^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . The Free Press A Division of Simon and Schuster. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0684836256 .

^ Morgan, Ted (2003).

Reds: McCarthyism In Twentieth-Century America . New York: Random House. p.

328 .

ISBN 0-679-44399-1 .

In turn citing Michael O'Brien, McCarthy And McCarthyism in Wisconsin.

Columbia, Mo. 1980.

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 24.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Morgan, Ted (2003).

Reds: McCarthyism In Twentieth-Century America . New York: Random House. p.

330 .

ISBN 0-679-44399-1 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Ryan, James G.; Schlup, Leonard (2006).

Historical Dictionary of the 1940s . M.E. Sharpe, Inc. p. 245.

ISBN 978-0765621078 .

^ Belknap, Michal R. (2004).

The Vinson Court: Justices, Rulings, and Legacy . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 214.

ISBN 978-1-85109-542-1 .

^ O'Connell, Aaron B. (2012).

Underdogs: The Making of the Modern Marine Corps . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-674-05827-9 .

^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . New York: The Free Press. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0684836256 .

^ Morgan, Ted (2004).

Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America . Random House. p. 420.

ISBN 978-0812973020 .

^ Morgan, Ted (2003).

Reds: McCarthyism In Twentieth-Century America . New York: Random House. p.

338 .

ISBN 0-679-44399-1 .

Morgan again cites Michael O'Brien, writing in McCarthy And McCarthyism in Wisconsin .

^ Giblin, James Cross (2009).

The Rise and Fall of Senator Joe McCarthy . Boston: Clarion Books. pp.

37– 38.

ISBN 978-0-618-61058-7 .

^ Oshinsky describes the nickname "Tail-Gunner Joe" as the result of McCarthy's wish to break the record for most live ammunition discharged in a single mission.

Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 32.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Morgan, Ted (2003).

Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America . New York: Random House. p. 341.

ISBN 978-0-8129-7302-0 .

^ Mundt, Chairman Karl (June 17, 1954).

"Testimony of Hon. Joseph R. McCarthy, a United States Senator from the State of Wisconsin" .

Special Senate Investigation on Charges Involving: Secretary of the Army Robert T. Stevens, John G. Adams, H. Struve Hensel and Senator Joe McCarthy, Roy M. Cohn and Francis P. Carr . Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 2888 – via Google Books .

^ The Rise and Fall of Senator Joe McCarthy , p. 34.

^ Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America ^ Carrier, Jerry (2014).

Tapestry: The History and Consequences of America's Complex Culture . New York: Algora Publishing. p. 232.

ISBN 978-1-62894-048-0 .

^ a b The Rise and Fall of Senator Joe McCarthy , p. 37.

^ Tapestry: The History and Consequences of America's Complex Culture ^ a b Herman, Arthur (1999).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. p.

264 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ Morgan, Ted (November–December 2003).

"Judge Joe: How The Youngest Judge In Wisconsin's History Became The Country's Most Notorious Senator" . Legal Affairs.

Archived from the original on April 29, 2021 . Retrieved August 2, 2006 .

^ Underdogs: The Making of the Modern Marine Corps .

^ Rovere 1959 , pp. 97, 102.

^ McCarthy, The Man, the Senator, the Ism (Boston, Beacon Press, 1952) pp. 101–105.

^ Beichman, Arnold (February–March 2006).

"The Politics of Personal Self-Destruction" .

Policy Review . Archived from the original on March 12, 2008 . Retrieved February 25, 2008 .

^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. p.

233 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ "Memorandum of understanding about McCarthy and a besieged army".

Life . Time Inc. March 8, 1954. p. 28.

^ Hersh, Burton (2007).

Bobby and J. Edgar: The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J. Edgar Hoover that Transformed America . Carroll & Graf.

ISBN 978-0786731855 .

^ "Joseph McCarthy FBI File, part 3 of 56 (part 2 of 28)" .

FBI Records: The Vault .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2022 . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ C.A. Tripp also mentions this incident in his book The Homosexual Matrix . Tripp describes McCarthy as "predominantly homosexual." ^ The allegation is specifically rejected in Rovere's Senator Joe McCarthy , p. 68.

^ Trohan, Walter (1975).

Political Animals: Memoirs of a Sentimental Cynic (1st ed.). Double Day. p. 250.

^ Gentry, Curt (2001).

J Edgar Hoover: The Man and the Secrets . WW Norton & Co.

^ Talbot, David (2015).

The Devil's Chessboard: Allen Dulles, the CIA, and the Rise of America's Secret Government . Harper.

^ Oshinsky, David (2019).

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Free Press.

^ "This Day in History: Joseph McCarthy Dies" .

History.com . New York: A&E Television Networks, LLC. 2018.

Archived from the original on August 22, 2018 . Retrieved August 22, 2018 .

^ Herman, Arthur (1999).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. pp.

44, 51, 55 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ Davis, Kenneth C.

(2003).

Don't Know Much About History: Everything You Need to Know About American History but Never Learned (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins. p. 408.

ISBN 978-0-06-008381-6 .

^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. p.

53 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ Reeves, Thomas C. (1982).

The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy: A Biography . Madison Books. pp.

116– 119.

ISBN 1-56833-101-0 .

^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. pp.

54–55 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ Herman, Arthur (1999).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. p.

51 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ a b Tye, Larry; Cushman, Chloe.

"When Senator Joe McCarthy Defended Nazis" .

Smithsonian . Retrieved February 3, 2025 .

^ Richard Halworth Rovere: Senator Joe McCarthy . University of California Press, Berkeley 1996, ISBN 0-520-20472-7 , S. 112. (Reprint der Originalausgabe erschienen bei Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, New York 1959.) ^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Phillips, Steve (2001). "5". In Martin Collier, Erica Lewis (ed.).

The Cold War . Heinemann Advanced History. Oxford: Heinemann Educational Publishers. p. 65.

ISBN 0-435-32736-4 . Retrieved December 1, 2008 .

^ "Congressional Record, 81st Congress, 2nd Session" . West Virginia Division of Culture and History. February 20, 1950. Archived from the original on September 25, 2009 . Retrieved August 11, 2006 .

^ Cook, Fred J. (1971).

The Nightmare Decade: The Life and Times of Senator Joe McCarthy . Random House. pp.

155– 156.

ISBN 0-394-46270-X .

^ "McCarthy says communists are in State Department" .

History . November 13, 2009.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2020 .

^ Andrew Glass (February 9, 2008).

"McCarthy targets 'communists' in government Feb. 9, 1950" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2008 . Retrieved January 17, 2020 .

^ Swanson, Richard (1977).

McCarthyism in Utah (Master's thesis). Brigham Young University.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2019 . Retrieved January 17, 2020 .

^ Also reported as up to 8 hours in length.

^ Reeves, Thomas C. (1982).

The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy: A Biography . Madison Books. p. 227.

ISBN 1-56833-101-0 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

55 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

56 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ David M. Barrett, CIA and Congress: The Untold Story from Truman to Kennedy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), p. 65.

^ Congressional Record , 81st Congress, 2nd session, pp. 2062–2068; quoted in: Reeves, Thomas C. (1982).

The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy: A Biography . Madison Books. p. 243.

ISBN 1-56833-101-0 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 119.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

101 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Fried, Richard M. (1990).

Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective . Oxford University Press. p. 128.

ISBN 0-19-504361-8 .

^ a b David M. Barrett, CIA and Congress: The Untold Story from Truman to Kennedy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), p. 67.

^ William N. Eskridge, "Privacy Jurisprudence and the Apartheid of the Closet, 1946–1961," Florida State University Law Review 23, no. 4 (Summer 1997); quoted in David M. Barrett, CIA and Congress: The Untold Story from Truman to Kennedy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), p. 70.

^ David M. Barrett, CIA and Congress: The Untold Story from Truman to Kennedy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), p. 70.

^ Hillenkoetter Testimony, 7-14-50, CIS Unpublished U.S. Senate Committee Hearings on Microfiche (Washington D.C.: Congressional Information Service); quoted in David M. Barrett, CIA and Congress: The Untold Story from Truman to Kennedy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), p. 79.

^ David M. Barrett, CIA and Congress: The Untold Story from Truman to Kennedy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2005), p. 80.

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 175.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ The Official United States Congressional Daily Digest Records . Government Publishing Office, Thomas Library, Official Repository Library, Local, Bakersfield California, CSUB. 2009 [1946]. pp. 8', 79th Congress, 3rd Session, Date August 2, 1946, Congressional Records – House, p. 10749.

^ The United States Constitution . Government Publishing Office, Thomas Library, Official Repository Library, Local, Bakersfield California, CSUB. 2009 [1782]. p. 10.

^ Cook, Fred J. (1971).

The Nightmare Decade: The Life and Times of Senator Joe McCarthy . Random House. pp.

150– 151.

ISBN 0-394-46270-X .

^ Cook, Fred J. (1971).

The Nightmare Decade: The Life and Times of Senator Joe McCarthy . Random House. p. 316.

ISBN 0-394-46270-X .

^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. p.

131 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ a b c McCarthy, Joseph (1975) [1953].

Major Speeches and Debates of Senator Joe McCarthy Delivered in the United States Senate, 1950–1951 . Gordon Press. pp. 264, 307, 215.

ISBN 0-87968-308-2 .

^ a b Gorham, Christopher C. (2023).

The Confidante: The Untold Story of the Woman Who Helped Win WWII and Shape Modern America . New York: Citadel Press.

ISBN 978-0-8065-4200-3 .

OCLC 1369148974 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 194.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Crosby, Donald F. (1978).

God, Church, and Flag: Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and the Catholic Church, 1950–1957 . University of North Carolina Press. pp.

200, 67 .

ISBN 0-8078-1312-5 .

^ Morrow, Lance (1978).

The Best Year of Their Lives: Kennedy, Johnson, And Nixon in 1948 . Perseus Books Group. p. 4.

ISBN 0-465-04724-6 .

^ Bogle, Lori (2001).

Cold War Espionage and Spying .

Routledge . p. 129.

ISBN 0-8153-3241-6 .

^ a b Tye, Larry (2016).

Bobby Kennedy: The Making of a Liberal Icon . New York: Random House. p. 68.

ISBN 978-0812993349 – via Electronic version.

^ a b Leamer, Laurence (2001).

The Kennedy Men: 1901–1963 . HarperCollins. p.

302-303 .

ISBN 0-688-16315-7 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 240.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

Reeves, Thomas C. (1982).

The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy: A Biography . Madison Books. p. 443.

ISBN 1-56833-101-0 .

^ The Kennedys Archived February 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine .

American Experience . Boston, Massachusetts: WGBH-TV . 2009.

^ a b Johnson, Haynes (2005).

The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism . Harcourt. p.

250 .

ISBN 0-15-101062-5 .

^ a b Wicker, Tom (2002).

Dwight D. Eisenhower: The American Presidents Series . Times Books. p.

15 .

ISBN 0-8050-6907-0 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. pp.

188+ .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 259.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 244.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ All quotes in this paragraph: Fried, Albert (1997).

McCarthyism, The Great American Red Scare: A Documentary History . Oxford University Press. pp.

182–184 .

ISBN 0-19-509701-7 .

^ Fried, Albert (1996).

McCarthyism, The Great American Red Scare: A Documentary History . Oxford University Press. p.

179 .

ISBN 0-19-509701-7 .

^ Powers, Richard Gid (1998).

Not Without Honor: The History of American Anticommunism . Yale University Press. p. 263.

ISBN 0-300-07470-0 .

^ Parmet, Herbert S. (1998).

Eisenhower and the American Crusades . Transaction Publishers. pp.

248, 337, 577 .

ISBN 0-7658-0437-9 .

^ Fried, Richard M. (1990).

Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective . Oxford University Press. p. 134.

ISBN 0-19-504361-8 .

^ "The Press: The Man in the Middle" .

Time . May 24, 1954.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2022 . Retrieved February 2, 2022 .

^ See "Transcripts, Executive Sessions ..." under Primary sources, below.

^ Collins, Susan ; Levin, Carl (2003).

"Preface" (PDF) .

Executive Sessions of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations . U.S. Government Printing Office.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 28, 2006 . Retrieved December 19, 2006 .

^ a b Heil, Alan L. (2003).

Voice of America: A History . Columbia University Press. p. 53.

ISBN 0-231-12674-3 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

216 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ "Ike, Milton, and the McCarthy Battle" . Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission. Archived from the original on June 15, 2006 . Retrieved August 9, 2006 .

^ " 'Reds and Our Churches' Matthews" – via Google Search.

^ " 'Reds in Our Churches' Matthews" – via Google Search.

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

233 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Stone (2004).

Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism . W.W. Norton & Co.

ISBN 0-393-05880-8 .

^ Barnes, Bart (November 18, 2014).

"Irving Peress, dentist who was subject of Sen. Joseph McCarthy's hearings, dies at 97" .

Washington Post . Washington, DC.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2017 . Retrieved September 2, 2017 .

^ Schwarz, Frederick D. " 1954 50 Years Ago: The Demagogue's Downfall Archived December 1, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ".

American Heritage , November/December 2004. Retrieved November 30, 2017.

^ "U.S. Senate: The Censure Case of Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin (1954)" .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2010 . Retrieved July 27, 2020 .

^ Karl E. Mundt [Senator] et al., Report no. 2507, pursuant to Senate Resolution 189 (Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, August 30, 1954), 80. Online at books.google.com/books?id=Nh64jR1OzjUC&pg=RA245-PA80 ^ Morgan, Ted (2004).

Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America . Random House. p. 489.

ISBN 0-8129-7302-X .

^ Streitmatter, Rodger (1998).

Mightier Than the Sword: How the News Media Have Shaped American History . Westview Press. p.

167 .

ISBN 0-8133-3211-7 .

^ Powers, Richard Gid (1998).

Not Without Honor: The History of American Anticommunism . Yale University Press. p. 271.

ISBN 0-300-07470-0 .

^ Fried, Richard M. (1990).

Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective . Oxford University Press. p. 138.

ISBN 0-19-504361-8 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

264 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Cook, Fred J. (1971).

The Nightmare Decade: The Life and Times of Senator Joe McCarthy . Random House. p. 536.

ISBN 0-394-46270-X .

^ "About McCarthy" .

Time . July 19, 1954. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013 . Retrieved December 18, 2006 .

^ "June 9, 1954: "Have You No Sense of Decency?" " . United States Senate. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021 . Retrieved May 19, 2021 .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 459.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ Oshinsky, David M. (2005) [1983].

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Oxford University Press. p. 464.

ISBN 0-19-515424-X .

^ "Transcript – See it Now: A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy" . CBS-TV. March 9, 1954.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2015 . Retrieved February 15, 2015 .

^ Burns, Eric (2010).

Invasion of the Mind Snatchers: Television's Conquest of America in the Fifties . Philadelphia: Temple University Press. p. 175.

ISBN 978-1-4399-0288-2 .

^ "Transcript – See it Now: A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy" . CBS-TV. March 9, 1954.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2015 . Retrieved March 9, 2008 .

^ Joseph Wershba (March 4, 1979).

"Murrow vs. McCarthy" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2019 . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

CBS said it was the greatest spontaneous response in the history of broadcasting: 12,348 telephone calls and telegrams in the first few hours ... 11,567 of these supported Murrow.

^ "Transcript – Senator Joseph R. McCarthy: Reply to Edward R. Murrow, See It Now" . CBS-TV. April 6, 1954.

Archived from the original on March 7, 2009 . Retrieved February 15, 2009 .

^ a b David P. Thelen and Esther S. Thelen. " Joe Must Go: The Movement to Recall Senator Joseph R. McCarthy Archived March 1, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ".

Wisconsin Magazine of History , vol. 45, no. 3 (Spring 1966):185–209.

^ Polsby, Nelson W.

(October 1962). "Towards an Explanation of McCarthyism".

Political Studies .

8 (3): 252.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9248.1960.tb01144.x .

ISSN 0032-3217 .

S2CID 147198989 .

^ Wallace, Patricia Ward (1995).

Politics of Conscience: A Biography of Margaret Chase Smith . Praeger Trade. p.

109 .

ISBN 0-275-95130-8 .

^ Flanders, Ralph (1961).

Senator from Vermont . Boston: Little, Brown.

^ "Text of Flanders's speech" . March 9, 1959.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2007.

^ Woods, Randall Bennett (1995).

Fulbright: A Biography . Cambridge University Press. p. 187.

ISBN 0-521-48262-3 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. pp.

277 et seq.

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Rovere 1959 , pp. 229–230.

^ "Senate Resolution 301: Censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy" . HistoricalDocuments.com. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved March 9, 2008 .

^ United States Senate, Historical Office.

"The Censure Case of Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin (1954)" .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2010 . Retrieved January 4, 2010 .

^ Oshinsky [1983] (2005), pp. 33, 490; Michael O'Brien, John F. Kennedy: A Biography (2005), pp. 250–254, 274–279, 396–400; Reeves (1982), pp. 442–443; Thomas Maier , The Kennedys: America's Emerald Kings (2003), pp. 270–280; Crosby, God, Church, and Flag, 138–160.

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . University of Massachusetts Press. p.

310 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ "Senate Report 104-137 – Resolution For Disciplinary Action" . Library of Congress. 1995. Archived from the original on December 13, 2012 . Retrieved October 19, 2006 .

^ Rovere 1959 , p. 231.

^ Thomas, Evan (1991).

The Man to See . New York: Simon & Schuster. pp.

76– 77.

ISBN 978-0-671-68934-6 .

^ Griffith, Robert (1970).

The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate . Amherst, Massachusetts: University of Massachusetts Press . p.

318 .

ISBN 0-87023-555-9 .

^ Fried, Richard M. (1990).

Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 141.

ISBN 0-19-504361-8 .

^ Graebner, Norman A. (1956).

The New Isolationism: A Study in Politics and Foreign Policy since 1950 . New York: Ronald Press. p. 227.

^ Eisler, Kim Isaac (1993).

A Justice for All: William J. Brennan Jr., and the Decisions That Transformed America . New York: Simon & Schuster. p.

119 .

ISBN 978-0-671-76787-7 .

^ Cook, Fred J. (1971).

The Nightmare Decade: The Life and Times of Senator Joe McCarthy . New York: Random House . p. 537.

ISBN 0-394-46270-X .

^ Rovere 1959 , pp. 244–245.

^ a b c d Hari, Johann (January 15, 2015).

Chasing the Scream: The First and Last Days of the War on Drugs . London: Bloomsbury . pp.

289– 290.

ISBN 978-1-4088-5782-3 .

OCLC 881418255 .

^ Cheshire, Maxine (December 1978).

"Drugs and Washington, D.C." Ladies' Home Journal . Vol. 95.

OCLC 33261187 .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2017 . Retrieved December 17, 2017 .

^ The Real American: Joe McCarthy (2012) (documentary) ^ "Joseph McCarthy Photographs: The Funeral" . Archived from the original on February 5, 2012 . Retrieved July 18, 2014 .

^ Nichols, John (July 31, 2007).

"In 1957, a McCarthy-free morning in America" .

The Capital Times . Archived from the original on April 5, 2009.

^ "Wisconsin: Running Scared" .

Time . August 26, 1957. Archived from the original on September 2, 2010 . Retrieved May 30, 2017 .

^ "Joseph_McCarthy – Himatsubushi Wikipedia" . Archived from the original on October 6, 2013 . Retrieved January 26, 2012 .

^ "U.S. Senate: States in the Senate | Wisconsin Senators" .

www.senate.gov . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Thomma, Steven (April 1, 2010).

"Not satisfied with U.S. history, some conservatives rewrite it" .

McClatchy Newspapers . Archived from the original on April 2, 2010 . Retrieved April 1, 2010 .

^ "House Un-American Activities Committee" . infoplease.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved January 17, 2017 .

^ A Bruin Birthday Tribute To Ray Bradbury Tweet (August 22, 2010).

"First Spark: Ray Bradbury Turns 90; The Universe and UCLA Academy Celebrate" . Spotlight.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on October 5, 2011 . Retrieved September 30, 2011 .

^ Asimov, Isaac; Bradbury, Ray; Campbell, John W. (December 4, 1956).

"Ticket to the Moon (tribute to SciFi)" (mp3) .

Biography in Sound . Narrated by Norman Rose. NBC Radio News. 27:10–27:30.

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

I wrote this book at a time when I was worried about the way things were going in this country four years ago. Too many people were afraid of their shadows; there was a threat of book burning. Many of the books were being taken off the shelves at that time.

^ Johnston, Amy E. Boyle (May 30, 2007).

"Ray Bradbury: Fahrenheit 451 Misinterpreted" .

LA Weekly website . Archived from the original on September 2, 2013 . Retrieved August 3, 2013 .

^ "Georgia State 'Possum" .

Netstate.com . September 18, 2014.

Archived from the original on April 3, 2015 . Retrieved December 22, 2014 .

^ Miller, Arthur (1992).

The Crucible: Notes and Questions by Maureen Blakesley . Oxford: Heinemann Educational. p. xv.

ISBN 0435232819 .

^ Doherty, Thomas (2005).

Cold War, Cool Medium: Television, McCarthyism, and American Culture . Columbia University Press. p.

213 .

ISBN 978-0-231-12953-4 .

^ Williams, Paul (1976).

"Theodore Sturgeon, Storyteller" .

Archived from the original on March 13, 2016 . Retrieved February 28, 2016 .

^ "Mr Costello Hero | X Minus One" . Retrieved May 25, 2020 .

^ Paul Williams, ed. (2000).

A Saucer of Loneliness . Vol. VII: The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books. pp.

384– 385.

ISBN 1-55643-424-3 . Retrieved February 28, 2016 .

^ Welsh, James Michael; Lev, Peter (2007).

The Literature/film Reader: Issues of Adaptation . Plymouth, UK: Scarecrow Press. p. 205.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5949-4 .

^ Sachleben, Mark; Yenerall, Kevan M. (2008).

Seeing the Bigger Picture: Understanding Politics Through Film & Television . New York: Peter Lang Publishing. p. 64.

ISBN 978-0-8204-7144-0 .

^ DiMare, Philip C. (2011).

Movies in American History: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1 . Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, Inc. p. 325.

ISBN 978-1-59884-296-8 .

^ Miller, Stephen (December 14, 2006).

"Peter Boyle, 71, Character Actor Played Psychotics and Monsters" .

New York Sun . Archived from the original on January 28, 2015 . Retrieved December 22, 2014 .

^ " 'Citizen' Woods: James Woods Rips Roy Cohn, the Press and His Own Image" .

Los Angeles Times . August 16, 1992.

Archived from the original on January 8, 2019 . Retrieved February 18, 2020 .

^ LaSalle, Mick (October 7, 2005).

"Newsman Challenges a Powerful Politician" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2015 . Retrieved December 22, 2014 .

^ Dorothy Rabinowitz. "A Name That Lives in Infamy", Wall Street Journal , 23. November 2012 ^ Herman, Arthur (2000).

Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator . Free Press. pp.

5–6 .

ISBN 0-684-83625-4 .

^ Evans, M. Stanton (2009).

Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight Against America's Enemies . New York: Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 978-1-4000-8106-6 .

^ Haynes, John Earl (February 2000).

"Exchange with Arthur Herman and Venona book talk" .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ Haynes, John Earl (2006).

"Senator Joseph McCarthy's Lists and Venona" .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 31, 2006 .

^ Haynes, John Earl; Klehr, Harvey (2000).

Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press .

ISBN 0-300-08462-5 .

Primary sources [ edit ] Adams, John G. (1983).

Without Precedent: The Story of the Death of McCarthyism . W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 0-393-30230-X .

"Censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy (1954)" . The United States Department of State. Archived from the original on November 20, 2007 . Retrieved June 2, 2009 .

Fried, Albert (1996).

McCarthyism, The Great American Red Scare: A Documentary History . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509701-7 .

"Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum" .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2019 . Retrieved August 11, 2006 .

McCarthy, Joseph (1975) [1953].

Major Speeches and Debates of Senator Joe McCarthy Delivered in the United States Senate, 1950–1951 . Gordon Press.

ISBN 0-87968-308-2 . Archived from the original on June 9, 2012 . Retrieved September 2, 2017 .

McCarthy, Joseph (1951).

America's Retreat from Victory, the Story of George Catlett Marshall . Devin-Adair.

OCLC 1374310153 .

McCarthy, Joseph (1952).

McCarthyism, the fight for America: documented answers to questions asked by friend and foe . Devin-Adair.

OCLC 2805482 .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved August 30, 2009 .

Edward R. Murrow & Fred W. Friendly (Producers) (1991).

Edward R. Murrow: The McCarthy Years (DVD (from 'See it Now' TV News show)). CBS News/Docudrama.

"Senate Committee Transcripts, 107th Congress" . Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. Archived from the original on July 16, 2006 . Retrieved August 11, 2006 .

"Transcripts, Executive Sessions of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations" . U.S. Government Printing Office. 2003.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2006 . Retrieved December 19, 2006 .

Watkins, Arthur Vivian (1969).

Enough Rope: The Inside Story of the Censure of Senator Joe McCarthy . Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 0-13-283101-5 .

Secondary sources [ edit ] Anderson, Jack and May, Ronald W (1952).

McCarthy: the man, the Senator, the "ism", Beacon Press.

Bayley, Edwin R. (1981).

Joe McCarthy and the Press . University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 0-299-08624-0 .

Belfrage, Cedric (1989).

The American Inquisition, 1945–1960: A Profile of the "McCarthy Era" . Thunder's Mouth Press.

ISBN 0-938410-87-3 .

Buckley, William F.

; Bozell, L. Brent (1954).

McCarthy and His Enemies: The Record and Its Meaning . Regnery Publishing.

OCLC 902155868 .

Caballero, Raymond.

McCarthyism vs. Clinton Jencks.

Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2019.

Crosby, Donald F. "The Jesuits and Joe McCarthy".

Church History 1977 46(3): 374–388.

ISSN 0009-6407 Fulltext: in Jstor Daynes, Gary (1997).

Making Villains, Making Heroes: Joseph R. McCarthy, Martin Luther King Jr. and the Politics of American Memory . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 0-8153-2992-X .

Evans, M. Stanton (2007).

Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight Against America's Enemies . Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 978-1-4000-8106-6 .

Freeland, Richard M. (1985).

The Truman Doctrine and the Origins of McCarthyism: Foreign Policy, Domestic Politics, and Internal Security, 1946–1948 . New York University Press.

ISBN 0-8147-2576-7 .

Fried, Richard M.

A Genius for Confusion: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Politics of Deceit (Rowman & Littlefield, 2022), the most recent major scholarly biography.

Fried, Richard M. (1977).

Men Against McCarthy . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-08360-2 .

online Gauger, Michael. "Flickering Images: Live Television Coverage and Viewership of the Army-McCarthy Hearings".

Historian 2005 67(4): 678–693.

ISSN 0018-2370 Fulltext: in Swetswise, Ingenta and Ebsco. Audience ratings show that few people watched the hearings.

Latham, Earl (1969).

Communist Controversy in Washington: From the New Deal to McCarthy . Macmillan Publishing Company.

ISBN 0-689-70121-7 .

Luthin, Reinhard H.

(1954).

"Ch. 11: Joseph R. McCarthy: Wisconsin's Briefcase Demagogue" .

American Demagogues: Twentieth Century . Beacon Press. pp.

272– 301.

ASIN B0007DN37C .

LCCN 54-8228 .

OCLC 1098334 .

Morgan, Ted (November–December 2003).

"Judge Joe: How the youngest judge in Wisconsin's history became the country's most notorious senator" .

Legal Affairs . Archived from the original on April 29, 2021 . Retrieved January 13, 2006 .

Nichols, David A. (2017).

Ike and McCarthy: Dwight Eisenhower's Secret Campaign against Joseph McCarthy . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1451686609 .

O'Brien, Michael (1980).

McCarthy and McCarthyism in Wisconsin . Olympic Marketing Corp.

ISBN 0-8262-0319-1 .

Oshinsky, David M.

A conspiracy so immense : the world of Joe McCarthy (1985), a major scholarly biography.

online Ranville, Michael (1996).

To Strike at a King: The Turning Point in the McCarthy Witch-Hunt . Momentum Books Limited.

ISBN 1-879094-53-3 .

Reeves, Thomas C.

The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy: A Biography (1997), a major scholarly biography.

online Reeves, Thomas C. (Spring 1997).

"The Search for Joe McCarthy" .

Wisconsin Magazine of History .

60 (3): 185– 196.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved December 4, 2016 .

Rosteck, Thomas (1994).

See It Now Confronts McCarthyism: Television Documentary and the Politics of Representation . University of Alabama Press.

ISBN 0-8173-5191-4 .

Strout, Lawrence N. (1999).

Covering McCarthyism: How the Christian Science Monitor Handled Joseph R. McCarthy, 1950–1954 . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 0-313-31091-2 .

Tanenhaus, Sam (April 2017).

"Who Stopped McCarthy?" .

The Atlantic .

Tye, Larry (2020).

Demagogue: The Life and Long Shadow of Senator Joe McCarthy . New York: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-1328959720 .

Wicker, Tom (2006).

Shooting Star: The Brief Arc of Joe McCarthy . Harcourt.

ISBN 0-15-101082-X .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Joseph McCarthy .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Joseph McCarthy .

United States Congress.

"Joseph McCarthy (id: M000315)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Joseph McCarthy Papers Archived September 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Marquette University Library A film clip "Longines Chronoscope with Sen. Joseph McCarthy (June 25, 1952)" is available for viewing at the Internet Archive A film clip "Longines Chronoscope with Sen. Joseph McCarthy (September 29, 1952)" is available for viewing at the Internet Archive Documents on McCarthyism at the Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library Archived February 10, 2023, at the Wayback Machine The Redhunter: a novel based on the life and times of Senator Joe McCarthy by William F. Buckley, Jr.

Works by Joseph McCarthy at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Party political offices Preceded by Fred Clausen Republican nominee for U.S. Senator from Wisconsin ( Class 1 ) 1946 , 1952 Succeeded by Walter J. Kohler Jr.

U.S. Senate Preceded by Robert M. La Follette Jr.

U.S. Senator (Class 1) from Wisconsin 1947–1957 Served alongside: Alexander Wiley Succeeded by William Proxmire Preceded by John L. McClellan Chair of Senate Government Operations Committee 1953–1955 Succeeded by John L. McClellan Honorary titles Preceded by William Knowland Baby of the Senate 1947–1948 Succeeded by Russell B. Long v t e United States senators from Wisconsin Class 1 Dodge Doolittle Carpenter Cameron Sawyer Mitchell Quarles La Follette Sr.

La Follette Jr.

McCarthy Proxmire Kohl Baldwin Class 3 Walker Durkee Howe Carpenter Cameron Spooner Vilas Spooner Stephenson Husting Lenroot Blaine Duffy Wiley Nelson Kasten Feingold Johnson v t e Chairs of the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Expenditures in Executive Departments (1921–1952) McCormick Reed Sackett Goff Steiwer Lewis Van Nuys Hill Aiken McClellan Government Operations (1952–1977) McClellan McCarthy McClellan Ervin Ribicoff Governmental Affairs (1977–2005) Ribicoff Roth Glenn Roth Stevens Thompson Lieberman Thompson Lieberman Collins Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2005–) Collins Lieberman Carper Johnson Peters Paul v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Wisconsin 's delegation(s) to the 80th–85th United States Congresses (ordered by seniority) 80th Senate : ▌ A. Wiley (R) ▌ J. McCarthy (R) House : ▌ M. Hull (R) ▌ F. Keefe (R) ▌ R. Murray (R) ▌ W. Stevenson (R) ▌ L. Smith (R) ▌ A. O'Konski (R) ▌ J. Byrnes (R) ▌ J. Brophy (R) ▌ C. Kersten (R) ▌ G. Davis (R) 81st Senate : ▌ A. Wiley (R) ▌ J. McCarthy (R) House : ▌ M. Hull (R) ▌ F. Keefe (R) ▌ R. Murray (R) ▌ L. Smith (R) ▌ G. Withrow (R) ▌ A. O'Konski (R) ▌ J. Byrnes (R) ▌ G. Davis (R) ▌ A. Biemiller (D) ▌ C. Zablocki (D) 82nd Senate : ▌ A. Wiley (R) ▌ J. McCarthy (R) House : ▌ M. Hull (R) ▌ R. Murray (R) ▌ L. Smith (R) ▌ G. Withrow (R) ▌ A. O'Konski (R) ▌ J. Byrnes (R) ▌ G. Davis (R) ▌ C. Zablocki (D) ▌ C. Kersten (R) ▌ W. Van Pelt (R) 83rd Senate : ▌ A. Wiley (R) ▌ J. McCarthy (R) House : ▌ M. Hull (R) ▌ L. Smith (R) ▌ G. Withrow (R) ▌ A. O'Konski (R) ▌ J. Byrnes (R) ▌ G. Davis (R) ▌ C. Zablocki (D) ▌ C. Kersten (R) ▌ W. Van Pelt (R) ▌ M. Laird (R) ▌ L. Johnson (D) 84th Senate : ▌ A. Wiley (R) ▌ J. McCarthy (R) House : ▌ L. Smith (R) ▌ G. Withrow (R) ▌ A. O'Konski (R) ▌ J. Byrnes (R) ▌ G. Davis (R) ▌ C. Zablocki (D) ▌ W. Van Pelt (R) ▌ M. Laird (R) ▌ L. Johnson (D) ▌ H. Reuss (D) 85th Senate : ▌ A. Wiley (R) ▌ J. McCarthy (R) ▌ W. Proxmire (D) House : ▌ L. Smith (R) ▌ G. Withrow (R) ▌ A. O'Konski (R) ▌ J. Byrnes (R) ▌ C. Zablocki (D) ▌ W. Van Pelt (R) ▌ M. Laird (R) ▌ L. Johnson (D) ▌ H. Reuss (D) ▌ D. Tewes (R) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Artists MusicBrainz FID People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐crlsp
Cached time: 20250818105419
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.493 seconds
Real time usage: 2.775 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28134/1000000
Revision size: 159823/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 629134/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 55507/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 777931/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.494/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17188137/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2270.372      1 -total
 44.45% 1009.226      1 Template:Reflist
 31.40%  712.977    134 Template:Cite_book
 11.97%  271.794      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 10.06%  228.447     47 Template:Cite_web
  4.98%  112.958      8 Template:Sfn
  4.69%  106.422      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  4.36%   98.974      6 Template:USCongRep-row
  4.10%   93.196     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  3.62%   82.172     12 Template:Hanging_indent Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16321:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818105419 and revision id 1305700756. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_McCarthy&oldid=1305700756 " Categories : Joseph McCarthy McCarthyism 1908 births 1957 deaths 20th-century American far-right politicians 20th-century American lawyers 20th-century Roman Catholics 20th-century United States senators 20th-century Wisconsin politicians Alcohol-related deaths in Maryland American anti-communists American Christian Zionists American conspiracy theorists American people of German descent American people of Irish descent Antisemitism in the United States Catholic politicians from Wisconsin Censured or reprimanded United States senators Deaths from hepatitis Discrimination against LGBTQ people in the United States Marquette University Law School alumni Military personnel from Wisconsin People from Grand Chute, Wisconsin People from Shawano, Wisconsin People of the Cold War Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United States) Republican Party United States senators from Wisconsin Right-wing populists in the United States United States Marine Corps officers United States Marine Corps personnel of World War II United States Marine Corps reservists Wisconsin Democrats Wisconsin Republicans Wisconsin state court judges Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from June 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joseph McCarthy 62 languages Add topic

