Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Modern proponents 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Chartalism 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Eesti Español Français Italiano 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heterodox theory of money Not to be confused with Chartism .

Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Chartalism is a theory in macroeconomics that views money as a creation of the state, introduced to control and organize economic activity rather than arising from barter or debt.
It holds that fiat currency has value because governments impose taxes that must be paid in the currency they issue, creating demand for it.

Background [ edit ] Georg Friedrich Knapp , a German economist , invented the term "chartalism" in his State Theory of Money , which was published in German in 1905 and translated into English in 1924. The name derives from the Latin charta , in the sense of a token or ticket.

[ 1 ] Knapp argued that "money is a creature of law" rather than a commodity .

[ 2 ] Knapp contrasted his state theory of money with " metallism ", as embodied at the time in the gold standard , where the value of a unit of currency depended on the quantity of precious metal it contained or could be exchanged for. He argued the state could create pure paper money and make it exchangeable by recognising it as legal tender , with the criterion for the money of a state being "that which is accepted at the public pay offices".

[ 2 ] When Knapp was writing, the prevailing view of money was that it had evolved from systems of barter to become a medium of exchange because it represented a durable commodity which had some use value . However, modern chartalist economists Randall Wray and Mathew Forstater say that chartalist insights into tax-driven paper money can be found in the earlier writings of many classical economists, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] for instance Adam Smith , who observed in The Wealth of Nations : A prince, who should enact that a certain proportion of his taxes should be paid in a paper money of a certain kind, might thereby give a certain value to this paper money; even though the term of its final discharge and redemption should depend altogether on the will of the prince.

— Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations Forstater also finds support for the concept of tax-driven money, under certain institutional conditions, in the work of Jean-Baptiste Say , John Stuart Mill , Karl Marx and William Stanley Jevons .

[ 4 ] Alfred Mitchell-Innes , writing in 1914, argued that money existed not as a medium of exchange but as a standard of deferred payment , with government money being debt the government could reclaim by taxation.

[ 5 ] Innes argued: Whenever a tax is imposed, each taxpayer becomes responsible for the redemption of a small part of the debt which the government has contracted by its issues of money, whether coins, certificates, notes, drafts on the treasury, or by whatever name this money is called. He has to acquire his portion of the debt from some holder of a coin or certificate or other form of government money, and present it to the Treasury in liquidation of his legal debt. He has to redeem or cancel that portion of the debt...The redemption of government debt by taxation is the basic law of coinage and of any issue of government ‘money’ in whatever form.

— Alfred Mitchell-Innes, The Credit Theory of Money, The Banking Law Journal Knapp and "Chartalism" were referenced by John Maynard Keynes in the opening pages of his 1930 Treatise on Money [ 6 ] and appear to have influenced Keynesian ideas on the role of the state in the economy.

[ 3 ] By 1947, when Abba Lerner wrote his article "Money as a Creature of the State", economists had largely abandoned the idea that the value of money was closely linked to gold.

[ 7 ] Lerner argued that responsibility for avoiding inflation and depressions lay with the state because of its ability to create or tax away money.

[ 7 ] Historian Constantina Katsari sees principles from both metallism and chartalism reflected in the monetary system introduced by Augustus to the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire , from the early 1st century to the late 3rd century AD.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Modern proponents [ edit ] See also: Modern Monetary Theory Economists Warren Mosler , L. Randall Wray , Stephanie Kelton , and Bill Mitchell are largely responsible for reviving chartalism as an explanation of money creation ; Wray refers to this revived formulation as Neo-Chartalism .

[ 10 ] Mitchell, founder of the Centre of Full Employment and Equity or CofFEE at the University of Newcastle in Australia, coined the term Modern Monetary Theory to describe modern Neo-Chartalism, and that term is now widely used. Scott Fullwiler has added detailed technical analysis of the banking and monetary systems.

[ 11 ] Rodger Malcolm Mitchell's book Free Money [ 12 ] describes in layman's terms the essence of chartalism.

Some contemporary proponents, such as Wray, situate chartalism within post-Keynesian economics , while chartalism has been proposed as an alternative or complementary theory to monetary circuit theory , both being forms of endogenous money , i.e., money created within the economy, as by government deficit spending or bank lending, rather than from outside, as by gold. In the complementary view, chartalism explains the "vertical" (government-to-private and vice versa) interactions, while circuit theory is a model of the "horizontal" (private-to-private) interactions.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Hyman Minsky seemed to incorporate a Chartalist approach to money creation in his 2008 book Stabilizing an Unstable Economy , [ 15 ] while Basil Moore , in his 1988 book Horizontalists and Verticalists , [ 16 ] delineates the differences between bank money and state money.

James K. Galbraith supports chartalism and wrote the foreword for Mosler's book Seven Deadly Innocent Frauds of Economic Policy in 2010.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Fiat currency Functional finance Demand for money History of money History of macroeconomic thought Heterodox economics References [ edit ] ^ Knapp, George Friedrich (1924), The State Theory of Money , Macmillan and Company, p. 32 ^ a b Knapp, George Friedrich (1924), The State Theory of Money , Macmillan and Company ^ a b Wray, L. Randall (2000), The Neo-Chartalist Approach to Money , UMKC Center for Full Employment and Price Stability, archived from the original on 2019-10-20 , retrieved 2019-08-27 ^ a b Forstater, Mathew (2004), Tax-Driven Money: Additional Evidence from the History of Thought, Economic History, and Economic Policy (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-04-20 , retrieved 2014-07-28 ^ Mitchell-Innes, Alfred (1914).

"The Credit Theory of Money" .

The Banking Law Journal .

31 .

^ Keynes, John Maynard: A Treatise on Money , 1930, pp. 4, 6 ^ a b Lerner, Abba P. (May 1947). "Money as a Creature of the State".

The American Economic Review .

37 (2).

^ Stephanie A. Bell and Edward J. Nell, ed. (2003).

The State, the Market, and the Euro: Chartalism Versus Metallism in the theory of money . Edward Elgar.

ISBN 1843761564 .

^ Constantina Katsari (2011). "Chpt. 7".

The Roman Monetary System .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521769464 .

^ The Economist, 31 December 2011, "Marginal revolutionaries" neo-chartalism, sometimes called “Modern Monetary Theory” ^ "Author Page for Scott Fullwiler :: SSRN" .

^ Mitchell, Rodger Malcolm: Free Money - Plan for Prosperity , PGM International, Inc., paperback 2005, ISBN 978-0-9658323-1-1 ^ "Deficit Spending 101 - Part 3" Bill Mitchell, 2 March 2009 ^ "In the spirit of debate...my reply" Bill Mitchell, 28 September 2009 ^ Minsky, Hyman: Stabilizing an Unstable Economy , McGraw-Hill, 2008, ISBN 978-0-07-159299-4 ^ Moore, Basil J.: Horizontalists and Verticalists: The Macroeconomics of Credit Money , Cambridge University Press, 1988, ISBN 978-0-521-35079-2 ^ Mosler, Warren: Seven Deadly Innocent Frauds of Economic Policy , Valance Co., 2010, ISBN 978-0-692-00959-8 ; also available in .DOC v t e Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side Notable macroeconomists François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw Critique Critique of political economy See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Category v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Medium of exchange Commodity money Axe-money (W. Mesoamerica & N. Andes) Cocoa bean (Mesoamerica) Koku (rice) Manilla (W. Africa) Precious metals Quachtli (cotton cloth) Salt (Roman world) Shekel (barley) Shells Trade bead Domestic animals Water buffalo (SE Asia) Cow (Hindu) Camel (Arabia) Yak (Tibet, China) Representative money Bimetallism Gold certificates Demurrage currency Money portal Money ( Fiat / Token ) Bailment Banknote Central bank digital currency Chattel/movable property Cheque Clearing Cheque clearing Clay token Coinage Currency Deposit Deposit account Legal tender Notary Paper money Possession Promissory note Redemption Safekeeping General List of historical currencies Barter Coincidence of wants Bureau de change Central bank Clearinghouse bank Savings bank Depository institution Mint Akkadian standards of measurement ( c.

2150 BC ) Code of Hammurabi ( §100; §122–125 ; c. 1750 BC) Commodity theory of money (Metallism) Credit theory of money Chartalism Quantity theory of money Monetarism Market monetarism Standard of deferred payment Store of value Unit of account Digital currency Cryptocurrency Digital gold currency Virtual currency Local currency Complementary currency Sectoral currency Time-based currency NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐jqrfm
Cached time: 20250812114110
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.680 seconds
Real time usage: 0.822 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2006/1000000
Revision size: 9904/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 154378/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2790/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92516/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.476/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7248929/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  684.486      1 -total
 53.18%  364.042      5 Template:Navbox
 39.81%  272.473      1 Template:Macroeconomics
 36.61%  250.623      9 Template:Excerpt
 21.13%  144.600      1 Template:Reflist
 14.80%  101.284      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.11%   89.734      1 Template:Macroeconomics_sidebar
 11.97%   81.958      4 Template:Citation
  8.88%   60.793      1 Template:Short_description
  5.42%   37.132      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:41146581:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812114110 and revision id 1303791340. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chartalism&oldid=1303791340 " Categories : Monetary economics Macroeconomic theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chartalism 12 languages Add topic

