Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meteorology 2 Extent 3 Islands 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Alaska 76 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 57°N 144°W ﻿ / ﻿ 57°N 144°W ﻿ / 57; -144 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arm of the Pacific Ocean For the Firdhaus Farmizi song, see Gulf of Alaska (song) .

Gulf of Alaska A view of the Gulf of Alaska from space, showing swirling sediment in the waters Gulf of Alaska Location South shore of Alaska Coordinates 57°N 144°W ﻿ / ﻿ 57°N 144°W ﻿ / 57; -144 Type Gulf Part of North Pacific Ocean River sources Susitna River Ocean/sea sources Pacific Ocean Basin countries Canada and United States Surface area 1,533,000 km 2 (592,000 sq mi) Islands Kodiak Archipelago , Montague Island , Middleton Island , Alexander Archipelago Settlements Anchorage , Juneau The Gulf of Alaska ( Tlingit : Yéil T'ooch’ ) [ 1 ] is an arm of the Pacific Ocean defined by the curve of the southern coast of Alaska , stretching from the Alaska Peninsula and Kodiak Island in the west to the Alexander Archipelago in the east, where Glacier Bay and the Inside Passage are found.

The Gulf shoreline is a combination of forest, mountain and a number of tidewater glaciers .  Alaska's largest glaciers, the Malaspina Glacier and Bering Glacier , spill out onto the coastal line along the Gulf of Alaska. The coast is heavily indented with Cook Inlet and Prince William Sound , the two largest connected bodies of water. It includes Yakutat Bay and Cross Sound .

Lituya Bay (a fjord north of Cross Sound, and south of Mount Fairweather ) is the site of the largest recorded tsunami in history. It serves as a sheltered anchorage for fishing boats.

The Gulf of Alaska The Gulf of Alaska is considered a Class I, productive ecosystem with more than 300 grams of carbon per square meter per year [ 2 ] based on SeaWiFS data.

Deep water corals can be found in the Gulf of Alaska.

Primnoa pacifica has contributed to the location being labeled as Habitat Areas of Particular Concern.

[ 3 ] P. pacifica is a deep water coral typically found between 150 metres (490 ft) and 900 metres (3,000 ft) here.

[ 4 ] Thanks to the North Pacific Current , which is in turn fed by the warm Kuroshio Current , the Gulf of Alaska remains ice-free throughout the year. In 1977, the Gulf of Alaska started to manifest an unexpected and at that time inexplicable shift on its normal climate regime, resulting in a growth of the mean temperature of the sea surface and in an increased availability and variety of commercial fish species. A similar volatile climate change was observed during the 1970s in the North Pacific seas.

[ 5 ] Meteorology [ edit ] The Gulf is a great generator of storms . In addition to dumping vast quantities of snow and ice on southern Alaska, resulting in some of the largest concentrations south of the Arctic Circle , many of the storms move south along the coasts of British Columbia , Washington , Oregon , and as far south as Southern California (primarily during El Niño events).

[ 6 ] Much of the seasonal rainfall and snowfall in the Pacific Northwest and Southwestern United States comes from the Gulf of Alaska.

Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Gulf of Alaska as follows: [ 7 ] On the north.

The coast of Alaska .

On the south.

A line drawn from Cape Spencer , the northern limit of the Coastal Waters of Southeast Alaska and British Columbia to Kabuch Point, the southeast limit of the Bering Sea , in such a way that all the adjacent islands are included in the Gulf of Alaska.

The US Geological Survey 's Geographic Names Information System database defines the Gulf of Alaska as bounded on the north by the coast of Alaska and on the south by a line running from the south end of Kodiak Island on the west to Dixon Entrance on the east.

[ 8 ] Islands [ edit ] Admiralty Island Spain Island Aghiyuk Island Aiaktalik Island Akun Island Akutan Island Aleutika Island Amaknak Island Adronica Island Annette Island Anyaka Island Ariadne Island Augustine Island Avatanak Island Baker Island Ban Island Baranof Island Beautiful Isle Bell Island Benjamin Island Biorka Island Bligh Island Chat Island Chenega Island Chichagof Island Chisik Island Chiswell Island(s) Chowiet Island Coronation Island Cronin Island Culross Island Dall Island Deer Island Doggie Island Dolgoi Island Douglas Island Duke Island East Chugach Island Egg Island Egg Island(s) Eldred Rock Eleanor Island Elizabeth Island Erlington Island Esther Island Etolin Island Fish Island Fitzgerald Island Forrester Island Goloi Island Granite Island Gravina Island Green Island Gregson Island Gull Island Haenke Island Harbor Island Hawkins Island Heceta Island Herring Island(s) Hesketh Island Hinchinbrook Island Kalgin Island Kanak Island Karpa Island Kataguni Island Kayak Island Khantaak Island Knight Island Kodiak Island Korovin Island Kosciusko Island Kriwoi Island Kruzof Island Kuiu Island Kupreanof Island Latouche Island Lemesurier Island Lincoln Island Lone Island Long Island Lulu Island Lynn Brothers Ma Relle Island(s) Mab Island Marmot Island Mitkof Island Montague Island Nakchamik Island Naked Island Near Island Noyes Island Nuka Island Osier Island Otmeloi Island Outer Island Partofshikof Island Pearl Island Perry Island Pleasant Island Popof Island Powder Island Prince of Wales Island Rabbit Island Ragged Island Rugged Island Raspberry Island Revillagigedo Island Rootok Island San Fernando Island San Juan Island Sebree Island Sentinel Island Shelter Island Shikosi Island Shuyak Island Sinith Island(s) Sitkalidak Island Sitkinak Island Spruce Island Strawberry Island Suemez Island Sullivan Island Sutwik Island Talsani Island Tanker Island Tigalda Island Tugidak Island Twoheaded Island Uganik Island Unalaska Island Unalga Island Unavikshak Island Unga Island Warren Island Whale Island Wingham Island Wooded Island(s) Woronkofski Island Wrangell Island Yakobi Island Yukon Island Zarembo Island References [ edit ] ^ "Yakutat Area Native Place Names" (PDF) .

tlingitlanguage.com . Retrieved April 28, 2024 .

^ Hogan, C. Michael (2011).

" Gulf of Alaska . Topic ed. P.Saundry. Ed.-in-chief C.J.Cleveland. Encyclopedia of Earth" .

National Council for Science and the Environment . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Stone Robert P; Shotwell S Kalei. (2007).

"State of deep coral ecosystems in the Alaska Region: Gulf of Alaska, Bering Sea and the Aleutian Islands" (PDF) .

In: Lumsden SE et Al., Eds. The State of Deep Coral Ecosystems of the United States. NOAA Technical Memorandum CRCP-3. Silver Spring, MD : 65– 108 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Waller, RG; Stone, RP; Mondragon, J; Clark, CE (2011).

"Reproduction of Red Tree Corals in the Southeastern Alaskan Fjords: Implications for Conservation and Population Turnover" .

In: Pollock NW, ed. Diving for Science 2011. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences 30th Symposium. Dauphin Island, AL: AAUS; 2011 . Archived from the original on December 13, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Claudie Beaulieu; Harriet Cole; Stephanie Henson; Andrew Yool; Thomas R. Anderson; Lee de Mora; Erik T. Buitenhuis; Momme Butenschön; Ian J. Totterdell5; J. Icarus Allen (2016).

"Marine regime shifts in ocean biogeochemical models: a case study in the Gulf of Alaska" (PDF) .

Biogeosciences .

13 (15): 4543– 42.

Bibcode : 2016BGeo...13.4533B .

doi : 10.5194/bg-13-4533-2016 .

ISSN 1726-4170 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 7, 2020.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ National Geospatial-intelligence Agency (2006).

Prostar Sailing Directions 2006 Pacific Ocean and Southeast Ocean Planning Guides . Pub. (United States. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency). Prostar Publications. p. 241.

ISBN 978-1-57785-663-4 . Retrieved November 26, 2018 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 8, 2011 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

^ "Gulf of Alaska" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey , United States Department of the Interior .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gulf of Alaska .

World Atlas: Gulf Of Alaska – Map & Description v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Alaska&oldid=1291754112 " Categories : Bodies of water of Alaska Gulfs of the Pacific Ocean Gulfs of the United States Temperate Northern Pacific Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2018 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 05:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Alaska 76 languages Add topic

