Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Members 3 Mission 4 Collaborations 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Real Colegio Complutense 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Real Colegio Complutense at Harvard University Established 1990 Research type Post-Doctoral Advanced Research Institute Field of research All areas of Science Director Prof. Daniel Pablo de la Cruz Sánchez Mata Address 26 Trowbridge Location Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138 Affiliations Harvard University Complutense University of Madrid Universidad Politécnica de Madrid University of Valencia Universidad de Alcalá de Henares Universidad de Sevilla University of Oviedo The Real Colegio Complutense at Harvard University (RCC) in Cambridge, Massachusetts is an academic institution aimed at providing intellectual exchange between Harvard and the Spanish Academia.

[ 1 ] It is named after Spanish largest university, the Universidad Complutense de Madrid , which established it in cooperation with Harvard University.

History [ edit ] The RCC was founded as a joint cooperative institution to foster intellectual and scientific interaction between Harvard University and the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM), with the support of King Juan Carlos I , Queen Sofia of Spain and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts . It follows the tradition of the Royal Spanish College , founded in 1364 to host Spanish Visiting Scholars at the University of Bologna . 
In November 1990, the Dean of the Universidad Complutense de Madrid at the time and the then-president of Harvard, Derek Curtis Bok , signed an alliance to create the Real Colegio Complutense. The King of Spain inaugurated the building in 1993 and the agreement was extended in 2009.

RCC Building Members [ edit ] The RCC accord is the only one of its sort ever to have been approved by Harvard. The institution is directed jointly by the President of Harvard and the Rector of Complutense University. The RCC academic and advisory councils include outstanding members from both universities.

In the last decade, the RCC has incorporated new Partner Universities [ 2 ] on top of UCM: the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid , Universidad de Alcalá de Henares , University of Valencia , University of Oviedo , and Universidad de Sevilla , each of them represented by official delegates.

As of 2024, the director is Daniel Pablo de la Cruz Sánchez Mata, [ 3 ] full professor at UCM and faculty associate at the Harvard University Herbaria . In the period 2012-2021, the director was Prof. José Manuel Martínez Sierra, [ 4 ] Jean Monnet ad personam Professor for the Study of European Union Law and Government.

[ 5 ] Mission [ edit ] Every year, the RCC offers research grants [ 6 ] to a select number of Spanish scholars who conduct their research at Harvard as visiting scholars . It also offers a number of graduate fellowships to Spanish students who attend the different graduate schools at Harvard. In addition to this, faculty and researchers from the partner universities and other affiliated centers are eligible to become RCC Fellows , enjoying the same privileges as Harvard's non-tenured Faculty.

The RCC sponsors a number of research projects and programs that cross over different fields of study, including experimental and social sciences, architecture, health, engineering, education, communication and humanities. The relevance of RCC Fellows, Associates and Alumni/ae, as well as their partnerships with local scholars and the Faculty of Harvard University, allow these projects to generate international knowledge networks and to promote intellectual exchange in a multidisciplinary framework.

As part of this framework, the institution hosts academic lectures and scientific events for an open audience, including Harvard professors and students.

Some notable RCC fellows include: Adela Balderas , [ 7 ] Ignacio M. Llorente , [ 8 ] Samer Hassan , [ 9 ] and Javier Moreno Luzón .

[ 10 ] Notable members of its academic council are: Gonzalo Giribet , [ 11 ] David W. Kennedy [ 12 ] and the different rectors of UCM. Notable members of its advisory council [ 13 ] include: Mark C. Elliott , Pol Antràs , Iñaki Ábalos , Alberto Abadie , Luis Viceira .

Collaborations [ edit ] The RCC has signed several agreements with Spanish and International Institutions to organize summer seminars and workshops at the center. These institutions include the ISDI (Instituto Superior para el Desarrollo de Internet) , the Fundación Rafael del Pino , the Institute for Ethics in Communication and Organizations (IECO), the International Academic Program of the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid and the Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas .

References [ edit ] ^ "Real Colegio Complutense at Harvard" . rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 29 October 2014 .

^ "RCCHU Partner Universities" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Daniel Pablo de la Cruz Sánchez Mata" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "José Manuel Martínez Sierra - Editorial Tirant Lo Blanch" .

editorial.tirant.com . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Jean Monnet Program" .

^ "Funding Opportunities at Real Colegio Complutense at Harvard University (RCCHU)" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Adela Balderas" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Ignacio M. Llorente" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Samer Hassan" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Javier Moreno Luzón" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Gonzalo Giribet" .

oeb.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "David W. Kennedy" .

Harvard Law School . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "Advisory Council | Real Colegio Complutense" .

rcc.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Real Colegio Complutense .

RCC Website Harvard University Universidad Complutense de Madrid Universidad Politécnica de Madrid Universidad Rey Juan Carlos Archived 2015-04-06 at the Wayback Machine Universidad de Alcalá Archived 2015-02-11 at the Wayback Machine Universidad de Sevilla v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Real_Colegio_Complutense&oldid=1306165380 " Categories : Harvard University Complutense University of Madrid Hidden categories: Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 08:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Real Colegio Complutense 1 language Add topic

