Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life 2 Political career 3 Commemoration 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents B. T. Ranadive 7 languages हिन्दी മലയാളം मराठी ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian politician (1904–1990) B. T. Ranadive General Secretary, Communist Party of India In office 1948–1950 Preceded by Puran Chand Joshi Succeeded by Chandra Rajeswara Rao President, Center of Indian Trade Unions In office 1970–1990 Preceded by Position Established Succeeded by E. Balanandan Personal details Born ( 1904-12-19 ) 19 December 1904 Dadar , Bombay Presidency , British India Died 6 April 1990 (1990-04-06) (aged 85) Political party Communist Party of India (Marxist) (1964–1990), Communist Party of India (before 1964) Relatives Ahilya Rangnekar (sister) Occupation Freedom fighter, leader Known for Co-founder of Communist Party of India (Marxist) Part of a series on Communism in India People M. N. Roy M. P. T. Acharya Sahajanand Saraswati Shripad Amrit Dange Abani Mukherji Yashpal A. K. Gopalan B. T. Ranadive Nripen Chakraborty P. Krishna Pillai Puran Chand Joshi Damodar Dharmananda Kosambi Bhagat Singh Ajoy Ghosh E. M. S. Namboodiripad S.K. Limaye Promode Dasgupta V. Subbiah Puchalapalli Sundarayya Kondapalli Seetharamaiah Saroj Dutta Jyoti Basu Bhupesh Gupta Hare Krishna Konar Dasarath Deb Harkishan Singh Surjeet T. Nagi Reddy Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri Charu Majumdar Indrajit Gupta E. K. Nayanar Shibdas Ghosh V. S. Achuthanandan Geeta Mukherjee Mohit Sen A. G. Noorani Biman Bose Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee Pinarayi Vijayan Vinod Mishra Manik Sarkar D. Raja Ganapathy Kobad Ghandy Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya Sitaram Yechury Anuradha Ghandy Mohammed Salim History Colonial period and partition Communism in the independence movement Conspiracy cases Peshawar Kanpur Bolshevik Meerut Kakori conspiracy Foundation of the CPI Tanka movement Quit India Movement Telangana Rebellion 1946 Naval Uprising Tebhaga movement Punnapra-Vayalar uprising Post-independence and Cold War 2nd Congress of the CPI Goa liberation movement 1957 general election in Kerala Angamaly police firing Sino-Indian border dispute 1964 split in the CPI Historic Eight Documents Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising Timeline Left Front Tripura West Bengal Rajan case Operation Barga Left Democratic Front Indravelli massacre Contemporary history Bara massacre Laxmanpur Bathe massacre Maoism in the Nandigram violence Salwa Judum 2013 Naxal attack in Darbha valley Ideologies Marxism–Leninism Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Stalinism Marxist feminism Marxist humanism National communism Primitive communism Trotskyism Principles Agrarian socialism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Class conflict Land reform in Kerala Left-wing nationalism Left-wing populism People's war Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary socialism Welfare Current organisations AIFB TUCC BPI CPI AISF AITUC AIYF BKMU NFIW CPI(M) AIDWA AIKS CITU DYFI SFI CPI (Maoist) KAMS PLGA RYL CPI(ML)L AIKM AISA CPIML ND MCPI(U) AICTU MFB MLPI (Red Flag) NSA RCPI RMPI RSP SUCI(C) UCPI Defunct organisations AICP BLPI CIC CC Communist Marxist Party Communist Party of French India Comrades Association CPI (ML) HSRA ICS Lal Communist Party Lal Sena LKPH MCPI WPP Media Deshabhimani Ganashakti LeftWord Books Nava Telangana People's Democracy Prajasakti Qaumi Jang Theekkathir Visalaandhra Related topics Anarchism in India Communism in Kerala Communism in Nepal Communist movements in India Gandhian socialism Inquilab Zindabad Lal Salam List of communist parties in India Red corridor Socialism in India State of socialist orientation Communism portal v t e Bhalchandra Trimbak Ranadive ( / r ɑː n ə ˈ d iː v eɪ / ; 19 December 1904 – 6 April 1990), popularly known as BTR , was an Indian communist politician and trade union leader.

Personal life [ edit ] BTR memorial in Allepey He was elder brother of Ahilya Rangnekar , a CPI-M leader and 6th Lok Sabha member from Mumbai North Central (Lok Sabha constituency) . They belonged to a Marathi Chandraseniya Kayastha Prabhu (CKP) family but Ranadive, a brilliant student, would teach Dalit students in his spare time.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Political career [ edit ] Ranadive completed his studies in 1927, obtaining an M.A. degree with distinction and in 1928 he joined the clandestine Communist Party of India . In the same year he became a major leader of the All India Trade Union Congress in Bombay . He was active with the Girini Kamgar Union of the textile workers in Bombay and with the struggles of the railway workers. He became the secretary of the GIP Railwaymen's Union. In 1939, he married Vimal, a trade union activist.

In 1943 he was elected to the central committee of the party. In February 1946 Ranadive played a major role in organizing a general strike in support of the Naval ratings revolt .

At its 2nd Party Congress held in Calcutta in February, 1948 the party elected Ranadive in place of P.C. Joshi as its general secretary.

[ 5 ] Ranadive was the general secretary of CPI 1948–1950. During that period the party was engaged in revolutionary uprisings, such as the Telangana armed struggle . In 1950 Ranadive was deposed, and denounced by the party as a "left adventurist".

In 1956, at the 4th Party Congress in Palghat BTR was again included in the Central Committee. He became a leading figure of the leftist section of the CC.

At the time of the Indo-China border conflict in 1962, Ranadive was one of many prominent communist leaders jailed by the government. In 1964 he became one of the main leaders of Communist Party of India (Marxist) .

At the founding conference of the Centre of Indian Trade Unions in Calcutta May 28–31 1970, Ranadive was elected president.

Commemoration [ edit ] The central building of CITU in New Delhi is named after him— BTR Bhavan .

BTR (right) with AKG BTR Bhavan, Kerala References [ edit ] ^ "Red Salute To Comrade Ahilya" . People's Democracy(weekly)-Vol. XXXIII, No. 16, April 26, 2009.

Ahilya Rangnekar was born in Pune in 1922 in a Chandrasena Kayastha Prabhu family. Her father Trimbak Ranadive was deeply influenced by the social reformers of his times...(she was a trained classical singer, and had a lovely voice which she had often used in street performances to sell the Party paper on Bombay's streets along with her more well-known brother, the radical communist leader and trade union fighter, B T Ranadive {{ cite magazine }} : Cite magazine requires |magazine= ( help ) ^ "sactown magazine" .

She strongly believed that Ranadivés had an obligation to fight for social justice because of their caste (the Hindu designation of social rank). The family is Kshatriya—born to be warriors and rulers {{ cite magazine }} : Cite magazine requires |magazine= ( help ) ^ "Silicon Valley hotshot scripts NBA plan for India" .

Finally, when asked about his memories of his grand uncle, the late Indian communist leader BT Ranadivé, he says laughing, "I know he wanted to make people's lives better, which is what I also want to do, but in a different way." ^ Parvati Menon (2004).

Breaking Barriers: Stories of Twelve Women . LeftWord Books. p. 10.

My family was from the Chandrasena Kayastha Prabhu community, popularly called the CKP community, from which a large number of the social reformers came." Ahilya recalls an event that took place in Malad, where a big satyagraha was organized against untouchability. "My father, although a government servant, gave this campaign all his support.My brother B.T. Ranadive, who was a brilliant student, used to tutor dalit boys when he was at University,...

^ Chandra, Bipan & others (2000).

India after Independence 1947-2000 , New Delhi: Penguin, ISBN 0-14-027825-7 , p.204 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to B. T. Ranadive .

"B.T. Ranadive: Life and Teachings by M.K. Pandhe" . Archived from the original on 10 August 2004 . Retrieved 2008-10-18 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Other Yale LUX v t e Communist Party of India General secretaries Sachchidanand Vishnu Ghate Gangadhar Adhikari Puran Chand Joshi (1935–1947) B. T. Ranadive (1948–1950) Ajoy Ghosh (1951–1962) Chandra Rajeswara Rao (1962–1990) Indrajit Gupta (1990–1996) Ardhendu Bhushan Bardhan (1996–2012) S. Sudhakar Reddy (2012–2019) D. Raja (2019–) Chief Ministers E. M. S. Namboodiripad P. K. Vasudevan Nair C. Achutha Menon Related organisations All India Trade Union Congress All India Youth Federation All India Students Federation National Federation of Indian Women All India Kisan Sabha Bharatiya Khet Mazdoor Union All India State Government Employees Federation History Foundation of the Communist Party of India 1964 split in the Communist Party of India Electoral history Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=B._T._Ranadive&oldid=1300487595 " Categories : Indian independence activists Communist Party of India (Marxist) politicians from Maharashtra Trade unionists from Maharashtra Marathi politicians 1904 births 1990 deaths Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from December 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from December 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 16:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents B. T. Ranadive 7 languages Add topic

