Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Comparison with modern physics 3 Comparison to quantum physics 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Classical physics 61 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Naijá Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taclḥit Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Physics in the Classical Limit ) Category of theories Impact of relativity and quantum mechanics on classical mechanics Classical physics refers to scientific theories in the field of physics that are non-quantum or both non-quantum and non-relativistic, depending on the context. In historical discussions, classical physics refers to pre-1900 physics, while modern physics refers to post-1900 physics, which incorporates elements of quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity .

[ 1 ] However, relativity is based on classical field theory rather than quantum field theory , and is often categorized as a part of "classical physics".

[ citation needed ] Overview [ edit ] Part of a series on Classical mechanics F = d p d t {\displaystyle {\textbf {F}}={\frac {d\mathbf {p} }{dt}}} Second law of motion History Timeline Textbooks Branches Applied Celestial Continuum Dynamics Field theory Kinematics Kinetics Statics Statistical mechanics Fundamentals Acceleration Angular momentum Couple D'Alembert's principle Energy kinetic potential Force Frame of reference Inertial frame of reference Impulse Inertia / Moment of inertia Mass Mechanical power Mechanical work Moment Momentum Space Speed Time Torque Velocity Virtual work Formulations Newton's laws of motion Analytical mechanics Lagrangian mechanics Hamiltonian mechanics Routhian mechanics Hamilton–Jacobi equation Appell's equation of motion Koopman–von Neumann mechanics Core topics Damping Displacement Equations of motion Euler's laws of motion Fictitious force Friction Harmonic oscillator Inertial / Non-inertial reference frame Motion ( linear ) Newton's law of universal gravitation Newton's laws of motion Relative velocity Rigid body dynamics Euler's equations Simple harmonic motion Vibration Rotation Circular motion Rotating reference frame Centripetal force Centrifugal force reactive Coriolis force Pendulum Tangential speed Rotational frequency Angular acceleration / displacement / frequency / velocity Scientists Kepler Galileo Huygens Newton Horrocks Halley Maupertuis Daniel Bernoulli Johann Bernoulli Euler d'Alembert Clairaut Lagrange Laplace Poisson Hamilton Jacobi Cauchy Routh Liouville Appell Gibbs Koopman von Neumann Physics portal Category v t e Classical theory has at least two distinct meanings in physics. It can include all those areas of physics that do not make use of quantum mechanics , which includes classical mechanics (using any of the Newtonian , Lagrangian , or Hamiltonian formulations), as well as classical electrodynamics and relativity .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Alternatively, the term can refer to theories that are neither quantum or relativistic.

[ 4 ] Depending on point of view, among the branches of theory sometimes included in classical physics are: [ 5 ] : 2 Classical mechanics Newton's laws of motion Classical Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms Classical electrodynamics ( Maxwell's equations ) Classical thermodynamics Comparison with modern physics [ edit ] In contrast to classical physics, " modern physics " is usually used to focus on those revolutionary changes created by quantum physics and the theory of relativity .

[ 5 ] : 2 A physical system can be described by classical physics when it satisfies conditions such that the laws of classical physics are approximately valid.

In practice, physical objects ranging from those larger than atoms and molecules to macroscopic and astronomical objects, can be well-described (understood) with classical mechanics. Beginning at the atomic level and lower, the laws of classical physics break down and generally do not provide a correct description of nature. Electromagnetic fields and forces can be described well by classical electrodynamics at length scales and field strengths large enough that quantum mechanical effects are negligible. Unlike quantum physics, classical physics is generally characterized by the principle of complete determinism , although deterministic interpretations of quantum mechanics do exist.

From the point of view of classical physics as being non-relativistic physics, the predictions of general and special relativity are significantly different from those of classical theories, particularly concerning the passage of time, the geometry of space, the motion of bodies in free fall, and the propagation of light. Historically, light was reconciled with classical mechanics by assuming the existence of a stationary medium through which light propagated, the luminiferous aether , which was later shown not to exist.

Comparison to quantum physics [ edit ] Mathematically, quantum physics equations are those containing the Planck constant .

[ citation needed ] According to the correspondence principle and Ehrenfest's theorem , as a system becomes larger or more massive the classical dynamics tends to emerge, with some exceptions, such as superfluidity . This is why we can usually ignore quantum mechanics when dealing with everyday objects and the classical description will suffice.

Decoherence is the field of research concerned with the discovery of how the laws of quantum physics give rise to classical physics.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Physics portal Glossary of classical physics Semiclassical physics References [ edit ] ^ Weidner, Richard T.; Sells, Robert L. (1968). "Preface".

Elementary Modern Physics . p. iii.

^ Morin, David (2008).

Introduction to Classical Mechanics . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521876223 .

^ Barut, Asim O. (1980) [1964]. "Introduction to Classical Mechanics".

Electrodynamics and Classical Theory of Fields & Particles . New York: Dover Publications .

ISBN 9780486640389 .

^ Einstein, Albert (2004) [1920].

Relativity . Robert W. Lawson. New York: Barnes & Noble.

ISBN 9780760759219 .

^ a b Krane, Kenneth S. (2020).

Modern physics (4 ed.). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-119-49548-2 .

Authority control databases : National Germany v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries v t e History of physics ( timeline ) Classical physics Astronomy timeline Electromagnetism timeline Electrical engineering Maxwell's equations Fluid mechanics timeline Aerodynamics Field theory Gravitational theory timeline Material science timeline Metamaterials Mechanics timeline Variational principles Optics Spectroscopy Thermodynamics timeline Energy Entropy Perpetual motion Modern physics Computational physics timeline Condensed matter timeline Superconductivity Cosmology timeline Big Bang theory General relativity tests Geophysics Nuclear physics Fission Fusion Power Weapons Quantum mechanics timeline Atoms Molecules Quantum field theory Subatomic physics timeline Special relativity timeline Lorentz transformations tests Recent developments Quantum information timeline Loop quantum gravity Nanotechnology String theory On specific discoveries Cosmic microwave background Graphene Gravitational waves Subatomic particles timeline Higgs boson Neutron Speed of light By periods Copernican Revolution Golden age of cosmology Golden age of physics Medieval Islamic world Astronomy Noisy intermediate-scale quantum era By groups Harvard Computers The Martians Oxford Calculators Via Panisperna boys Women in physics Scientific disputes Bohr–Einstein Chandrasekhar–Eddington Galileo affair Leibniz–Newton Joule–von Mayer Shapley–Curtis Relativity priority Special relativity General relativity Transfermium Wars Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐wtp7m
Cached time: 20250811235410
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.374 seconds
Real time usage: 0.520 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2098/1000000
Revision size: 5589/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79205/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6058/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82419/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.199/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6997032/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  407.527      1 -total
 26.38%  107.523      1 Template:Classical_mechanics
 25.96%  105.797      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 23.06%   93.975      1 Template:Reflist
 20.42%   83.202      5 Template:Cite_book
 12.88%   52.473      1 Template:Short_description
 12.70%   51.768      3 Template:Cn
 11.77%   47.970      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.87%   44.291      3 Template:Fix
  7.46%   30.396      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:151066:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235410 and revision id 1297782519. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_physics&oldid=1297782519 " Categories : History of physics Philosophy of physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 13:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical physics 61 languages Add topic

