Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Segments and regions Toggle Segments and regions subsection 1.1 America 1.2 Europe and Africa 1.3 Australia 1.4 Indonesia 1.5 Others 2 Advantages 3 Disadvantages 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents K u band 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Sunda தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Range of radio frequencies from 11-20 GHz This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( July 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ku band" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) IEEE K u band Frequency range 12–18 GHz Wavelength range 2.5–1.67 cm Related bands J (NATO) SHF (ITU) Radio bands ITU 1 (ELF) 2 (SLF) 3 (ULF) 4 (VLF) 5 (LF) 6 (MF) 7 (HF) 8 (VHF) 9 (UHF) 10 (SHF) 11 (EHF) 12 (THF) EU / NATO / US ECM A B C D E F G H I J K L M N IEEE HF VHF UHF L S C X K u K K a V W mm Other TV and radio I II III IV V VI v t e The K u band ( / ˌ k eɪ ˈ j uː / ) is the  portion of the electromagnetic spectrum in the microwave range of frequencies from 12 to 18 gigahertz (GHz).  The symbol is short for "K-under" (originally German : Kurz-unten ), because it is the lower part of the original NATO K band , which was split into three bands (K u , K , and K a )  because of the presence of the atmospheric water vapor resonance peak at 22.24 GHz, (1.35 cm) which made the center unusable for long range transmission.  In radar applications, it ranges from 12 to 18 GHz according to the formal definition of radar frequency band nomenclature in IEEE Standard 521–2002.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] K u band is primarily used for satellite communications , most notably the downlink used by direct broadcast satellites to broadcast satellite television , and for specific applications such as NASA 's Tracking Data Relay Satellite used for International Space Station (ISS) communications and SpaceX Starlink satellites.

[ 3 ] K u band satellites are also used for backhauls and particularly for satellite from remote locations back to a television network's studio for editing and broadcasting .  The band is split by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) into multiple segments that vary by geographical region.

NBC was the first television network to uplink a majority of its affiliate feeds via K u band in 1983.

Some frequencies in this radio band are employed in radar guns used by law enforcement to detect vehicles speeding, especially in Europe.

[ 4 ] Segments and regions [ edit ] One use of the band is direct-broadcast satellite television .  A satellite dish on a residence, which receives satellite television channels over a K u band microwave beam from a broadcast communications satellite in a geostationary orbit 35,700 kilometres (22,000 miles) above the Earth.

America [ edit ] Segments in most of North and South America are represented by ITU Region 2 from 11.7 to 12.2 GHz ( Local Oscillator Frequency (LOF) 10.75 to 11.25 GHz), allocated to the FSS ( fixed satellite service ), uplink from 14.0 to 14.5 GHz. There are more than 22 FSS K u band satellites orbiting over North America, each carrying 12 to 48 transponders , 20 to 120 watts per transponder, and requiring a 0.8-m to 1.5-m antenna for clear reception.

The 12.2 to 12.7 GHz (LOF 11.25 to 11.75 GHz) segment is allocated to the BSS ( broadcasting satellite service ). BSS (DBS direct broadcast satellites ) normally carry 16 to 32 transponders of 27 MHz bandwidth running at 100 to 240 watts of power, allowing the use of receiver antennas as small as 18 inches (450 mm).

Europe and Africa [ edit ] Segments in those regions are represented by ITU Region 1, and they are the 11.45 to 11.7 and 12.5 to 12.75 GHz bands are allocated to the FSS ( fixed satellite service , uplink 14.0 to 14.5 GHz). In Europe K u band is used from 10.7 to 12.75 GHz (LOF Low 9.75 GHz, LOF High 10.6 GHz) for direct broadcast satellite services such as those carried by the Astra satellites. The 11.7 to 12.5 GHz segment is allocated to the BSS ( broadcasting satellite service ).

Australia [ edit ] Australia is part of ITU Region 3 and the Australian regulatory environment provides a class license that covers downlinking from 11.70 GHz to 12.75 GHz and uplinking from 14.0 GHz to 14.5 GHz.

[ 5 ] Indonesia [ edit ] The ITU has categorized Indonesia as Region P, countries with very high rain precipitation. This statement has made many people unsure about using K u -band (11 – 18 GHz) in Indonesia.  Using frequencies higher than 10 GHz in a heavy rain area usually gives poor results. This problem can be solved by using an appropriate link budget when designing the wireless communication link. Higher power can overcome the loss to rain fade .

Measurements of rain attenuation in Indonesia have been done for satellite communication links in Padang, Cibinong, Surabaya and Bandung. The DAH Model for rain attenuation prediction is valid for Indonesia, as is the ITU model. The DAH model has become an ITU recommendation since 2001 (Recommendation No. ITU-R P.618-7). This model can create a 99.7% available link so that K u -band can be applied in Indonesia.

Use of the K u -band for satellite communications in tropical regions like Indonesia is becoming more frequent. Several satellites above Indonesia have K u -band transponders , and even K a band transponders.

NSS 6 , launched in December 2002 and positioned at 95° East, contains only K u -band transponders with a footprint on Indonesia ( Sumatra , Java , Borneo , Celebes , Bali , Nusa Tenggara , Moluccas ). NSS 6 is intended to be replaced by SES-12 at the same location, which launched in June 2018 and carries 54 K u -band transponders. The IPSTAR 1 satellite, launched in 2004 also uses K u band footprints. Other satellites that provides K u band covers Indonesia are MEASAT-3b , JCSAT-4B , AsiaSat 5 , ST-2 , Chinasat 11, Koreasat 8/ABS-2 , SES-8 , SES-9 , Telkom-3S , and Nusantara Satu .

Others [ edit ] Other ITU allocations have been made within the K u band to the fixed service (microwave towers), radio astronomy service, space research service, mobile service, mobile satellite service, radiolocation service (radar), amateur radio service , and radionavigation.  However, not all of these services are actually operating in this band and others are only minor users.

Advantages [ edit ] Compared with C-band , K u band is not similarly restricted in power to avoid interference with terrestrial microwave systems, and the power of its uplinks and downlinks can be increased.  This higher power also translates into smaller receiving dishes and points out a generalization between a satellite's transmission and a dish's size.  As the power increases, the size of an antenna's dish will decrease.

[ 6 ] [ page needed ] This is because the purpose of the dish element of the antenna is to collect the incident waves over an area and focus them all onto the antenna's actual receiving element, mounted in front of the dish (and pointed back towards its face); if the waves are more intense, fewer of them need to be collected to achieve the same intensity at the receiving element.

A major attraction of the band over lower frequency microwave bands is that the shorter wavelengths allow sufficient angular resolution to separate the signals of different communication satellites to be achieved with smaller terrestrial parabolic antennas .   From the Rayleigh criterion , the diameter of a parabolic dish required to create a radiation pattern with a given angular beamwidth ( gain ) is proportional to the wavelength , and thus inversely proportional to the frequency.   At 12 GHz a 1-meter dish is capable of focusing on one satellite while sufficiently rejecting the signal from another satellite only 2 degrees away. This is important because satellites in FSS (Fixed Satellite Service) service (11.7-12.2 GHz in the U.S.) are only 2 degrees apart.  At 4 GHz (C-band) a 3-meter dish is required to achieve this narrow angular resolution.  Note the inverse linear correlation between dish size and frequency.  For K u satellites in DBS (Direct Broadcast Satellite) service (12.2-12.7 GHz in the U.S.) dishes much smaller than 1-meter can be used because those satellites are spaced 9 degrees apart.  As power levels on both C and K u band satellites have increased over the years, dish beam-width has become much more critical than gain.

The K u band also offers a user more flexibility. A smaller dish size and a K u band system's freedom from terrestrial operations simplifies finding a suitable dish site. For the end users K u band is generally cheaper and enables smaller antennas (both because of the higher frequency and a more focused beam).

[ 7 ] K u band is also less vulnerable to rain fade than the K a band frequency spectrum.

Disadvantages [ edit ] There are, however, some disadvantages of the K u band system. Around 10 GHz is the absorption peak due to orientation relaxation of molecules in liquid water.

[ 8 ] Above 10 GHz, Mie scattering takes over. The effect is a noticeable degradation, commonly known as rain fade , during heavy rain (100 mm/h).

[ 9 ] This problem can be mitigated by transmitting a higher powered signal from the satellite to compensate. Therefore, the K u band satellites typically require considerably more power to transmit than the C-band satellites.

Another weather-caused degradation called "snow fade" is not specific to the K u band. It is due to snow or ice accumulation on a dish significantly altering its focal point.

The satellite operator's Earth station antenna requires more accurate position control when operating at K u band due to its much narrower beam focus compared to C band for a dish of a given size. Position feedback accuracies are higher and the antenna may require a closed loop control system to maintain position under wind loading of the dish surface.

See also [ edit ] Multifunction Advanced Data Link References [ edit ] ^ IEEE Std 521 - 2002 URL only available to IEEE members ^ Note that in the band 11.2–12 GHz the working definitions of K u band and X band overlap; satellite communications engineers would generally regard frequencies above 11.2 GHz as being part of the K u band.

^ "SpaceX seeks FCC permission for operating all first-gen Starlink in lower orbit" .

SpaceNews.com . 2020-04-21 . Retrieved 2020-04-23 .

^ Radar Detectors Glossary ^ "Radiocommunications (Communication with Space Object) Class Licence 1998" .

Federal Register of Legislation . Australian Government. 2012-03-21 . Retrieved 2016-07-06 .

^ Mirabito, M; Morgenstern, B (2004).

Satellites: Operations and Applications. The New Communication Technologies (5 ed.). Burlington: Focal Press.

ISBN 978-0240805863 .

^ Satellite Communications: Advantage and Disadvantages Archived 2007-10-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ Martin Chaplin: Water and Microwaves Archived 2019-07-29 at the Wayback Machine .

^ TECH-FAQ: Ku band .

External links [ edit ] Frequency allocation information, mostly for U.S.

Spectrum allocation chart v t e Radio spectrum (ITU) ELF 3 Hz/100 Mm 30 Hz/10 Mm SLF 30 Hz/10 Mm 300 Hz/1 Mm ULF 300 Hz/1 Mm 3 kHz/100 km VLF 3 kHz/100 km 30 kHz/10 km LF 30 kHz/10 km 300 kHz/1 km MF 300 kHz/1 km 3 MHz/100 m HF 3 MHz/100 m 30 MHz/10 m VHF 30 MHz/10 m 300 MHz/1 m UHF 300 MHz/1 m 3 GHz/100 mm SHF 3 GHz/100 mm 30 GHz/10 mm EHF 30 GHz/10 mm 300 GHz/1 mm THF 300 GHz/1 mm 3 THz/0.1 mm Radio portal v t e Electromagnetic spectrum Gamma rays X-rays Ultraviolet Visible Infrared Microwave Radio ← higher frequencies , higher energy, shorter wavelengths longer wavelengths , lower frequencies, lower energy → Gamma rays Very-high-energy Ultra-high-energy X-rays Soft X-ray Hard X-ray High-energy X-rays Ultraviolet Extreme ultraviolet Vacuum ultraviolet Lyman-alpha FUV MUV NUV UVC UVB UVA Visible (optical) Violet Blue Cyan Green Yellow Orange Red Infrared NIR ( Bands : J , K , H ) SWIR MWIR ( Bands : L , M , N ) LWIR FIR Microwaves W band V band Q band K a band K band K u band X band C band S band L band Radio THF EHF SHF UHF VHF HF MF LF VLF ULF SLF ELF Wavelength types Microwave Shortwave Medium wave Longwave v t e Wireless video and data distribution methods Radio Digital radio Internet radio Radio broadcasting Satellite radio Video Amateur television Internet television Mobile television Terrestrial television Digital Satellite television Visual sensor network Data Mobile broadband Satellite Internet access Wireless broadband Wireless local loop Standards 3GPP family Long Term Evolution (LTE) 5G New Radio (5G NR) Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (MBMS) Digital Video Broadcasting Terrestrial (DVB-T) Handheld (DVB-H) Satellite (DVB-S2) IEEE 802 family Mobile WiMAX Mobile broadband wireless access IEEE 802.15.3 ( UWB ) Wi-Fi WiMAX WRAN Advanced Wireless Services (AWS) Educational Broadband Service (EBS) HomeRF Multichannel Video and Data Distribution Service (MVDDS) Multipoint Video Distribution System (MVDS) Wireless USB Technologies Local multipoint distribution service (LMDS) Multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS) Related Broadcasting K u band Microwave v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons v t e Analog and digital audio broadcasting Terrestrial Radio modulation AM FM COFDM Frequency allocations LW ( LF ) MW ( MF ) SW ( HF ) VHF ( low / mid / high ) L band ( UHF ) Digital systems CAM-D DAB/DAB+ DRM/DRM+ ISDB-Tsb FMeXtra HD Radio CDR DVB-T2 Lite Satellite Frequency allocations C band K u band L band S band Digital systems ADR DAB-S DVB-SH S-DMB SDR Commercial radio providers SiriusXM Canada Codecs AAC AMR-WB+ HDC HE-AAC MPEG-1 Audio Layer II DRA+ Subcarrier signals AMSS DirectBand PAD RDS/RBDS SCA/SCMO DARC Related topics Technical (audio) Audio data compression Audio signal processing Technical ( AM stereo formats) Belar C-QUAM Harris Kahn-Hazeltine Magnavox Technical (emission) AM broadcasting AM expanded band Cable radio Digital radio Error detection and correction FM broadcast band FM broadcasting FM extended band in Brazil Multipath propagation Shortwave relay station Cultural History of radio International broadcasting Radio portal Comparison of radio systems Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ku_band&oldid=1278548723 " Categories : Microwave bands Satellite broadcasting Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2014 Articles needing additional references from July 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2016 This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 03:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents K u band 25 languages Add topic

