Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Sports Toggle Sports subsection 2.1 Animal sports 2.2 Human sports 2.3 Motor sports 3 Configurations 4 Surfaces 5 Motorsport Toggle Motorsport subsection 5.1 Track layout 5.2 Road circuits 5.3 Converted airfields 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Race track 33 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Facility built for racing of animals, vehicles, or athletes "Racecourse" redirects here. For other uses, see Racecourse (disambiguation) .

For other uses, see Race track (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Race track" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An aerial view of the Killarney motorsport race track in Cape Town, South Africa Touring Car race at Brands Hatch circuit A race track ( racetrack , racing track or racing circuit ) is a facility built for racing of vehicles, athletes, or animals (e.g.

horse racing or greyhound racing ). A race track also may feature grandstands or concourses. Race tracks are also used in the study of animal locomotion .

A racetrack is a permanent facility or building.

Racecourse is an alternate term for a horse racing track, found in countries such as the United Kingdom, India, Australia, Hong Kong, and the United Arab Emirates. Race tracks built for bicycles are known as velodromes .

Circuit is a common alternate term for race track, given the circuit configuration of most race tracks, allowing races to occur over several laps. Some race tracks may also be known as speedways , or raceways .

A race course , as opposed to a racecourse , is a nonpermanent track for sports, particularly road running , water sports , road racing , or rallying . Many sports usually held on race tracks also can occur on temporary tracks, such as the Monaco and Singapore Grands Prix in Formula One .

A typical racecourse History [ edit ] Some evidence remains of racetracks being developed in several ancient civilizations. The most developed ancient race tracks were the hippodromes of the Ancient Greeks and the circuses ( circi ) of the Roman Empire . Both of these structures were designed for horse and chariot racing. The stadium of the Circus Maximus in Ancient Rome could hold 200,000 spectators.

Racing facilities existed during the Middle Ages , and records exist  of a public racecourse being opened at Newmarket , in London, in 1174. In 1780, the Earl of Derby created a horse-racing course on his estate at Epsom; the English Derby continues to be held there today. Racecourses in the British Isles are based on grass, known as turf tracks. In the United States, the race tracks are soil.

Motorcycles racing on a highly banked board track in 1911 With the advent of the automobile in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, race tracks were designed to suit the nature of powered machines. The earliest tracks were modified horse-racing courses. Racing automobiles in such facilities began in September 1896, at Narragansett Park in Cranston, Rhode Island . The Indianapolis Motor Speedway was opened in August 1909.

Beginning in the early 1900s, motorcycle races were run on high, banked, wooden race tracks called board tracks . During the 1920s, many of the races on the AAA Championship circuit were run on such board tracks.
Modern racetracks are designed with spectator safety being paramount, following incidents of spectator and track marshals fatalities. These often involve run-off areas, barriers, and high fencing.

Sports [ edit ] Autódromo José Carlos Pace Racetrack showing safety fencing Motorcycle ice racing View of a race track from a race car at Wakefield Park, Australia Racetracks are used for: Animal sports [ edit ] Camel racing Greyhound racing Harness racing Horse racing Human sports [ edit ] Bobsleigh Cycle sport Skeleton (sport) Track and field Motor sports [ edit ] Auto racing Drag racing Kart racing Motorcycle racing Stock car racing Track racing (motorcycles) Truck racing Drift racing Configurations [ edit ] Horseracing track, Happy Valley Racecourse in Hong Kong, showing grandstands Some racetracks offer little in the way of permanent infrastructure other than the track; others incorporate spectator facilities such as grandstands , hospitality or facilities for competitors, such as pit lanes and garages, paddocks and stables. Several racetracks are incorporated into larger venues or complexes, incorporating golf courses, museums, hotels, and conference centres. Some racetracks are small enough to be contained indoors, for sports such as motocross , track cycling , and athletics .

Many racetracks are multi-use, allowing different types of sport on the same track, or incorporating many tracks in one venue. Commonly, running tracks are incorporated within general use or soccer stadiums, either permanently visible or covered by stands or pitches.

Many horse and motorsport tracks are configurable, allowing different routes or sections. Some venues contain smaller tracks inside larger ones, with access tunnels and bridges for spectators. Some racetracks incorporate a short course and a longer course which uses part of the shorter one, usually the main straight, such as Brands Hatch . The Le Mans road race venue is centred on a smaller permanent circuit within its complex.

The ACI Vallelunga car racing track near Rome, Italy, a typical meandering layout with run-off areas Surfaces [ edit ] Stadion Haunstetten, a sand track Surfaces include: All-weather running track (Tartan) (athletics) Artificial turf (electric radio controlled off-road racing) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Asphalt/ tarmac (motorsports, athletics, cycling) Carpet (electric radio controlled racing) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Concrete (motorsports) Dirt (horses, greyhounds, automobiles, motorbikes (track racing), stock cars, radio controlled off-road racing, cycling) Grass (horses, amateur motorsports, cross country running ) Ice ( speed skating – when on dirt tracks, bobsleighs, speed skating, ice motor racing ) Sand (horses, camels, greyhounds, rally raid ) Wood (cycling) ( board track racing – now defunct) Motorsport [ edit ] "Car track" redirects here. For other uses, see Track car .

Race tracks are primarily designed for road racing competition through speed, featuring defined start-finish lines or posts, and sometimes even a series of defined timing points that divide the track into time sectors. A racetrack for cars (i.e. a car track) is a closed circuit, instead of a street circuit utilizing temporarily closed public roads .

Race tracks can host individual or team sports. Racetracks can feature rolling starts , or fixed starts, with associated equipment (starting blocks, cages, wheel traps etc.) They invariably feature a pit lane , and usually timing equipment.

Track layout [ edit ] Some car tracks are of an oval shape, and can be banked, which allows almost universal spectator views or high speed racing (cycling, stock cars). A famous one is Nardò where high-speed manufacturer testing often takes place, and the Indianapolis Motor Speedway . Some oval tracks are variations on an oval shape, for practical reasons or to introduce varying difficulties such as Talladega (a tri-oval). Most race tracks have meandering circuits with many curves, chicanes and changes in height, to allow for a challenge in skill to the competitors, notably motocross and touring car racing – these tend to predominate throughout most of the world, but especially in Europe.

Photograph from space of Nardò Ring in Italy, it is 12.6 kilometres (7.8 mi) long and is perfectly round – the image was taken from the ISS at an angle making it appear elliptical.

Road circuits [ edit ] Main article: Street circuit Flatter meandering motorsport courses are sometimes called 'road circuits', originating in the fact that the earliest road racing circuits were simply closed-off public roads. Some car racetracks are specifically configured in a long straight, namely drag racing .

True road circuits are still in use, e.g. the Australian GP has been run in Adelaide and continues to be in Melbourne on regular city streets. The most famous of these are the Monaco GP , and the Circuit de la Sarthe circuit in Le Mans , France. These are not permanent facilities built for racing (although parts of the Circuit de la Sarthe are purpose-built, and closed to the public).

Converted airfields [ edit ] After World War II , many wartime airfields, particularly in Great Britain, were left without further use.  This coincided with a post-war boom in motorsport, and many airfields were converted to race tracks, where the circuit layout usually combined parts of the runways and the surrounding perimeter taxiways.  The famous British track at Silverstone is a former Class A airfield , as are Castle Combe and Goodwood . The long runways were perfect for drag strips such as at Santa Pod Raceway .  This type of track also appears on the popular motoring show Top Gear , which is filmed at Dunsfold Aerodrome , in Surrey, United kingdom See also [ edit ] Animal locomotion Auto racing List of motor racing circuits by FIA grade List of horse racing venues References [ edit ] ^ "2015 IFMAR Yatabe Worlds: Astrogate" .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 .

^ "Subject: Electric Section Postal Vote Result & Electric date change" (PDF) .

International Federation Of Model Auto Racing . 14 December 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-18.

^ "IFMAR Electric Track Racing and Technical Rules" (PDF) .

IFMAR . 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-08-22.

The track surface for 1/12th Class is recommended to be indoors on standardised needle carpet.

^ "ROAR Rulebook" (PDF) .

ROAR Racing . 2013. p. 14.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-08-17.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Racing venues .

trackpedia.com Archived 2008-07-01 at the Wayback Machine Worldwide Motor Racing track wiki racingcircuits.net Archived 2016-06-24 at the Wayback Machine Worldwide Motor Racing track database When the going gets rough – tyres and track surfaces AudioTrackGuides.co.uk Audio walkthroughs of motor racing circuits, for use with games.

Trackreviewers.com Archived 2016-07-03 at the Wayback Machine Motorsport Track Reviews and Information v t e Infrastructure Bridge Canal Causeway Dam Drainage Footbridge Interchange Levee Overpass Pipeline Road Skyway Storm drain Tunnel See also: Architecture Arena Civil engineering Construction Playground Public Stadium Theater Urban park Authority control databases National Germany Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6lppv
Cached time: 20250812015336
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.331 seconds
Real time usage: 0.448 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 889/1000000
Revision size: 12934/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 30817/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 964/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 32862/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.219/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7391277/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  378.368      1 -total
 24.35%   92.145      1 Template:Reflist
 21.15%   80.037      4 Template:Cite_web
 15.37%   58.146      1 Template:Infrastructure
 15.01%   56.799      1 Template:Navbox
 14.01%   53.007      1 Template:Short_description
 11.57%   43.792      1 Template:Commons_category
 11.54%   43.681      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.08%   41.931      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.74%   40.653      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:301925:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015336 and revision id 1301531844. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Race_track&oldid=1301531844 " Categories : Horse racing terminology Racing venues Sports venues by type Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2023 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 09:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Race track 33 languages Add topic

