Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Polymers and their properties Toggle Polymers and their properties subsection 2.1 Viscosity 3 Classification 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Polymer chemistry 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemistry subdiscipline Portion of backbone of nylon 6,6 .

Polymer chemistry is a sub-discipline of chemistry that focuses on the structures, chemical synthesis , and chemical and physical properties of polymers and macromolecules . The principles and methods used within polymer chemistry are also applicable through a wide range of other chemistry sub-disciplines like organic chemistry , analytical chemistry , and physical chemistry . Many materials have polymeric structures, from fully inorganic metals and ceramics to DNA and other biological molecules . However, polymer chemistry is typically related to synthetic and organic compositions .

Synthetic polymers are ubiquitous in commercial materials and products in everyday use, such as plastics , and rubbers , and are major components of composite materials. Polymer chemistry can also be included in the broader fields of polymer science or even nanotechnology , both of which can be described as encompassing polymer physics and polymer engineering .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] History [ edit ] The work of Henri Braconnot in 1777 and the work of Christian Schönbein in 1846 led to the discovery of nitrocellulose , which, when treated with camphor , produced celluloid . Dissolved in ether or acetone , it becomes collodion , which has been used as a wound dressing since the U.S. Civil War .

Cellulose acetate was first prepared in 1865. In years 1834-1844 the properties of rubber ( polyisoprene ) were found to be greatly improved by heating with sulfur , thus founding the vulcanization process.

In 1884 Hilaire de Chardonnet started the first artificial fiber plant based on regenerated cellulose , or viscose rayon , as a substitute for silk , but it was very flammable.

[ 5 ] In 1907 Leo Baekeland invented the first polymer made independent of the products of organisms , a thermosetting phenol - formaldehyde resin called Bakelite . Around the same time, Hermann Leuchs reported the synthesis of amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides and their high molecular weight products upon reaction with nucleophiles, but stopped short of referring to these as polymers, possibly due to the strong views espoused by Emil Fischer , his direct supervisor, denying the possibility of any covalent molecule exceeding 6,000 daltons.

[ 6 ] Cellophane was invented in 1908 by Jocques Brandenberger who treated sheets of viscose rayon with acid .

[ 7 ] Leading figures in polymer chemistry Hermann Staudinger , father of polymer chemistry Wallace Carothers , inventor of nylon.

Stephanie Kwolek , inventor of Kevlar .

Structures of some electrically conductive polymers : polyacetylene ; polyphenylene vinylene ; polypyrrole (X = NH) and polythiophene (X = S); and polyaniline (X = NH/N) and polyphenylene sulfide (X = S).

Structure of polydimethylsiloxane , illustrating a polymer with an inorganic backbone.

The chemist Hermann Staudinger first proposed that polymers  consisted of long chains of atoms held together by covalent bonds , which he called macromolecules . His work expanded the chemical understanding of polymers and was followed by an expansion of the field of polymer chemistry during which such polymeric materials as neoprene, nylon and polyester were invented. Before Staudinger, polymers were thought to be clusters of small molecules ( colloids ), without definite molecular weights , held together by an unknown force . Staudinger received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1953.

Wallace Carothers invented the first synthetic rubber called neoprene in 1931, the first polyester , and went on to invent nylon , a true silk replacement, in 1935.

Paul Flory was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1974 for his work on polymer random coil configurations in solution in the 1950s.

Stephanie Kwolek developed an aramid , or aromatic nylon named Kevlar , patented in 1966.

Karl Ziegler and Giulio Natta received a Nobel Prize for their discovery of catalysts for the polymerization of alkenes .

Alan J. Heeger , Alan MacDiarmid , and Hideki Shirakawa were awarded the 2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the development of polyacetylene and related conductive polymers.

[ 8 ] Polyacetylene itself did not find practical applications, but organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) emerged as one application of conducting polymers.

[ 9 ] Teaching and research programs in polymer chemistry were introduced in the 1940s.  An Institute for Macromolecular Chemistry was founded in 1940 in Freiburg, Germany under the direction of Staudinger. In America, a Polymer Research Institute (PRI) was established in 1941 by Herman Mark at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn (now Polytechnic Institute of NYU ).

Polymers and their properties [ edit ] The viscosity of polymer solutions is a valued parameter.

Viscometers such as this are employed in such measurements.

Polymers are high molecular mass compounds formed by polymerization of monomers . They are synthesized by the polymerization process and can be modified by the additive of monomers. The additives of monomers change polymers mechanical property, processability, durability and so on. The simple reactive molecule from which the repeating structural units of a polymer are derived is called a monomer. A polymer can be described in many ways: its degree of polymerisation , molar mass distribution , tacticity , copolymer distribution, the degree of branching , by its end-groups , crosslinks , crystallinity and thermal properties such as its glass transition temperature and melting temperature.

Polymers in solution have special characteristics with respect to solubility , viscosity , and gelation .  Illustrative of the quantitative aspects of polymer chemistry, particular attention is paid to the number-average and weight-average molecular weights M n {\displaystyle M_{n}} and M w {\displaystyle M_{w}} , respectively.

M n = ∑ ∑ M i N i ∑ ∑ N i , M w = ∑ ∑ M i 2 N i ∑ ∑ M i N i , {\displaystyle M_{n}={\frac {\sum M_{i}N_{i}}{\sum N_{i}}},\quad M_{w}={\frac {\sum M_{i}^{2}N_{i}}{\sum M_{i}N_{i}}},\quad } The formation and properties of polymers have been rationalized by many theories including Scheutjens–Fleer theory , Flory–Huggins solution theory , Cossee–Arlman mechanism , Polymer field theory , Hoffman Nucleation Theory , Flory–Stockmayer theory , and many others.

Segments of polypropylene , showing the slightly different structures of isotactic (above) and syndiotactic (below) polymers.

The study of polymer thermodynamics helps improve the material properties of various polymer-based materials such as polystyrene (styrofoam) and polycarbonate . Common improvements include toughening , improving impact resistance , improving biodegradability , and altering a material's solubility .

[ 10 ] Viscosity [ edit ] As polymers get longer and their molecular weight increases, their viscosity tend to increase. Thus, the measured viscosity of polymers can provide valuable information about the average length of the polymer, the progress of reactions, and in what ways the polymer branches.

[ 11 ] Composites are formed by combining polymeric materials to form an overall structure with properties that differ from the sum of the individual components.

Classification [ edit ] Polymers can be classified in many ways.  Polymers, strictly speaking, comprise most solid matter: minerals (i.e. most of the Earth's crust) are largely polymers, metals are 3-d polymers, organisms, living and dead, are composed largely of polymers and water. Often polymers are classified according to their origin: biopolymers synthetic polymers inorganic polymers A strand of cellulose showing the hydrogen bonds (dashed) within and between the chains.

Biopolymers are the structural and functional materials that comprise most of the organic matter in organisms.  One major class of biopolymers are proteins , which are derived from amino acids .

Polysaccharides , such as cellulose , chitin , and starch , are biopolymers derived from sugars. The poly nucleic acids DNA and RNA are derived from phosphorylated sugars with pendant nucleotides that carry genetic information.

Synthetic polymers are the structural materials manifested in plastics , synthetic fibers , paints , building materials , furniture , mechanical parts, and adhesives . Synthetic polymers may be divided into thermoplastic polymers and thermoset plastics .  Thermoplastic polymers include polyethylene , teflon , polystyrene , polypropylene , polyester , polyurethane , Poly(methyl methacrylate) , polyvinyl chloride , nylons , and rayon .

Thermoset plastics include vulcanized rubber , bakelite , Kevlar , and polyepoxide .  Almost all synthetic polymers are derived from petrochemicals .

See also [ edit ] Polymer Polymer science Polymer physics Chemistry Polymer topology References [ edit ] ^ "The Macrogalleria: A Cyberwonderland of Polymer Fun" .

www.pslc.ws . Retrieved 2018-08-01 .

^ Young, R. J. (1987) Introduction to Polymers , Chapman & Hall ISBN 0-412-22170-5 ^ Odian, George G.

Principles of polymerization (Fourth ed.). Hoboken, N.J.

ISBN 9780471478751 .

OCLC 54781987 .

^ Hans-Heinrich Moretto, Manfred Schulze, Gebhard Wagner (2005) "Silicones" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry ,  Wiley-VCH, Weinheim.

doi : 10.1002/14356007.a24_057 ^ "The Early Years of Artificial Fibres" . The Plastics Historical Society . Retrieved 2011-09-05 .

^ Kricheldorf, Hans, R. (2006), "Polypeptides and 100 Years of Chemistry of α-Amino Acid N-Carboxyanhydrides", Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 45 (35): 5752– 5784, doi : 10.1002/anie.200600693 , PMID 16948174 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "History of Cellophane" . about.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012 . Retrieved 2011-09-05 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2000" . Retrieved 2009-06-02 .

^ Friend, R. H.; Gymer, R. W.; Holmes, A. B.; Burroughes, J. H.; Marks, R. N.; Taliani, C.; Bradley, D. D. C.; Santos, D. A. Dos; Brdas, J. L.; Lgdlund, M.; Salaneck, W. R. (1999). "Electroluminescence in conjugated polymers".

Nature .

397 (6715): 121– 128.

Bibcode : 1999Natur.397..121F .

doi : 10.1038/16393 .

S2CID 4328634 .

^ X Zhang, X Peng, SW Zhang. "7 - Synthetic biodegradable medical polymers: Polymer blends" Science and Principles of Biodegradable and Bioresorbable Medical Polymers, 2017. 217-254.

^ "Viscosity of Polymer Solutions" .

polymerdatabase.com . Retrieved 2019-03-05 .

v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polymer_chemistry&oldid=1302594094 " Category : Polymer chemistry Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 11:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polymer chemistry 49 languages Add topic

