Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background and description 2 In the states and territories 3 List of land councils by state Toggle List of land councils by state subsection 3.1 New South Wales 3.2 Northern Territory 3.3 Queensland 3.4 South Australia 3.5 Tasmania 3.6 Victoria 3.7 Western Australia 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Land council 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organisation representing one or more groups of the Indigenous peoples of Australia Land councils , also known as Aboriginal land councils , or land and sea councils , are Australian community organisations, generally organised by region, that are commonly formed to represent the Indigenous Australians (both Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islander people ) who occupied their particular region before the arrival of European settlers. They have historically advocated for recognition of traditional land rights , and also for the rights of Indigenous people in other areas such as equal wages and adequate housing. Land councils are self-supporting , and not funded by state or federal taxes.

The first land councils were created in the Northern Territory under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 , with the states later creating their own legislation and system of land councils.

Aboriginal land trusts (ALTs) were also set up under the Act, which hold the freehold title to the land granted under the Act. There are 151 Aboriginal land trusts, holding nearly 50 percent of the land in the NT, which is administered by one of four land councils in the Territory, depending on location. Land councils must ensure that they act on the advice and with the consent of the traditional owners ; control over Aboriginal-owned land thus lies with the traditional owners, represented by the land council.

Each state has a different system relating to Aboriginal-owned land, with the representative bodies given varying names. In New South Wales , there is also a network of local Aboriginal land councils (LALCs), which form a network of organisations close to their communities and support the larger land council, but these bodies do not administer land owned freehold by Aboriginal people.

Background and description [ edit ] The Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 , a piece of federal government legislation , was the first law by any Australian government that legally recognised the Aboriginal system of land ownership, legislating the concept of inalienable freehold title, and thus the first of all Aboriginal land rights legislation in Australia .

[ 1 ] Title to the freehold land thus granted is held by Aboriginal land trusts, also created by the Act.

[ 2 ] While it applied only to the Northern Territory , this law provided the basis on which Aboriginal peoples could claim land rights based on traditional occupation, and it set a precedent which was followed by the other states .

[ 3 ] The Land Rights Act also created Aboriginal land trusts (ALTs), which hold the freehold title to the land granted under the Act. Land councils must ensure that they act on the advice and with the consent of the traditional owners; control over Aboriginal-owned land thus lies with the traditional owners, represented by the land councils.

[ 2 ] The various state laws "effectively confer collective title to or for the benefit of traditional owners", with rights that frequently enable the pursuit of economic development opportunities for the traditional owners .

[ 2 ] Land councils are not the same as Registered Native Title Body Corporates (RNTBCs), which are funded by the federal government.

Native title in Australia includes rights and interests that relate to land and waters held by Indigenous people under traditional laws and customs, recognised by the common law in accordance with the Native Title Act 1993 (Cth). These bodies (also known as Prescribed Bodies Corporate or PBCs), hold, manage and protect native title on behalf of traditional owners, but do not own land.

[ 4 ] The states' land councils (or equivalents) also have responsibilities under the [federal] Native Title Act . Land councils are not funded by state or federal taxes, but finance themselves.

[ 3 ] In the states and territories [ edit ] See also: Aboriginal land trust The Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 created the Central Land Council and the Northern Land Council in the Northern Territory; two others ( Tiwi Land Council and Anindilyakwa Land Council ) were created later. It also created 151 Aboriginal land trusts, holding nearly 50 percent of the land in the NT, which is administered by one of four land councils, depending on location.

[ 2 ] Under the Act, traditional owners hold decision-making powers over the use of Aboriginal land. Land Councils assist traditional owners to acquire and manage their land. Royalty equivalents for mining activity on Aboriginal land in the Northern Territory are paid to the Aboriginals Benefit Account, administered by the federal government.

[ 4 ] In New South Wales , a network of local Aboriginal land councils (LALCs) and a state land council were set up by the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983 .

[ 3 ] but these bodies do not administer land owned freehold by Aboriginal people.

[ citation needed ] In Queensland , there is both Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander freehold land, governed by the Aboriginal Land Act 1991 (Qld) and the Torres Strait Islander Land Act 1991 (Qld), although this only makes up 5 percent of the land in the state. This type of land is held by either a land trust established under one of the Acts, or a corporation termed a "CATSIA body" (because they are created under the Commonwealth Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006 or "CATSI Act"), which may be a Registered Native Title Body Corporate (RNTBC). Another type of land tenure peculiar to Queensland is the land (mostly former Aboriginal reserves ) created under a Deed of Grant in Trust (DOGIT). DOGIT land is held in collective title rather than individual titles; it is held for future generations and cannot be sold. DOGITs are in the process of converting parts of the collective title to freehold title, but only for land in urban areas .

[ 2 ] In South Australia ,  the three Aboriginal landholding authorities are the (South Australian) Aboriginal Lands Trust , Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara (APY) and Maralinga Tjarutja , all statutory bodies .

[ 5 ] The ALT was created under the Aboriginal Lands Trust Act 1966 , but since 1 July 2014 has been governed by the Aboriginal Lands Trust Act 2013 . The South Australian Government provides land rights administration funding to the ALT and works with the Trust on a range of economic, community development and landcare projects across the state.

[ 6 ] APY was created by the APY Land Rights Act 1981 , as amended in 2016–2017, and has an elected Executive Board.

[ 7 ] The government is also able to transfer other crown land to the control of the Trust.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] In Tasmania , ownership of several areas was transferred to a land council, in trust for Aboriginal Tasmanians , via the Aboriginal Lands Act 1995 .

[ 3 ] In Victoria , various pieces of legislation between 1970 and 1991 transferred specific land to Aboriginal communities.

[ 3 ] Victorian laws provide for organisations called Registered Aboriginal Parties , which may provide functions in relation to Aboriginal people similar to those provided by land councils. Most of these are also Registered Native Title Body Corporate (RNTBCs).

In Western Australia , the Aborigines Act 1889 allowed Crown lands to be reserved for, but not transferred to, Aboriginal people.

[ 3 ] The Aboriginal Lands Trust (ALT) was created under the Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972 , and as of 2021 [update] has responsibility for about 24,000,000 hectares (59,000,000 acres), the equivalent of around  10% of the state's land. There are many regional and remote communities living on 44 reserves situated on this land, [ 2 ] represented by a number of land councils.

List of land councils by state [ edit ] New South Wales [ edit ] NSW Aboriginal Land Council (oversees 120 local land councils) Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council Northern Territory [ edit ] Main article: Aboriginal land councils in the Northern Territory Central Land Council covering the southern part of mainland Northern Territory Northern Land Council covering the Top End , the northern part of mainland Northern Territory the Tiwi Land Council covering Tiwi Islands north of Darwin the Anindilyakwa Land Council covering Groote Eylandt in the Gulf of Carpentaria .

Queensland [ edit ] North Queensland Land Council Central Queensland Land Council Torres Strait Regional Authority Cape York Land Council South Australia [ edit ] Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara Maralinga Tjarutja South Australian Aboriginal Lands Trust Tasmania [ edit ] Tasmanian Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Victoria [ edit ] As of July 2019 [update] , the 11 Registered Aboriginal Parties (RAPs) cover around 66% of the state. They are: [ 11 ] Barengi Gadjin Land Council Aboriginal Corporation Bunurong Land Council Aboriginal Corporation Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal Corporation Eastern Maar Aboriginal Corporation First people of the Millewa Mallee Aboriginal Corporation Gunaikurnai Land and Waters Aboriginal Corporation Gunditj Mirring Traditional Owners Aboriginal Corporation (GMTOAC) Taungurung Land and Waters Council Aboriginal Corporation Wathaurung Aboriginal Corporation (trading as Wadawurrung) Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung Cultural Heritage Aboriginal Corporation Yorta Yorta Nation Aboriginal Corporation (YYNAC) Western Australia [ edit ] See also: Aboriginal groupings of Western Australia South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Yamatji Bana Baaba Marlpa Land and Sea Council Goldfields Land and Sea Aboriginal Council Corporation Kimberley Land Council Ngaanyatjarra Council (Aboriginal Corporation) See also [ edit ] Native title in Australia Native Title Act 1993 Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations (ORIC) Registered Native Title Body Corporate (RNTBC) References [ edit ] ^ "The Aboriginal Land Rights Act" .

Central Land Council, Australia . Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

^ a b c d e f "Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander land" .

Austrade . 26 February 2016 . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

^ a b c d e f Korff, Jens (17 July 2020).

"Aboriginal land councils" .

Creative Spirits . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

^ a b "Land and Housing" .

National Indigenous Australians Agency . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

Text has been copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 4.0 International  (CC BY 4.0) licence. (See here .) ^ "Aboriginal land and business" .

Department of the Premier and Cabinet (South Australia) . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

Text may have been copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 3.0 Australia (CC BY 3.0 AU) licence.

^ "Aboriginal Lands Trust" .

Department of the Premier and Cabinet (South Australia) . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

Text may have been copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 3.0 Australia (CC BY 3.0 AU) licence.

^ "Amendment of the APY Land Rights Act 1981" .

Department of the Premier and Cabinet (South Australia) . Retrieved 9 January 2021 .

Text may have been copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 3.0 Australia (CC BY 3.0 AU) licence.

^ "About us" . Aboriginal Lands Trust. Archived from the original on 1 June 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ "Aboriginal Lands Trust" .

Agreements, Treaties and Negotiated Settlements Project . Indigenous Studies Program, The University of Melbourne . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Aboriginal Lands Trust Act 1966 . South Australian Acts (Point-in-Time). Retrieved on 29 January 2012.

^ "Victoria's current Registered Aboriginal Parties" .

Victorian Aboriginal Heritage Council . 31 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2020 .

External links [ edit ] "Victoria's current Registered Aboriginal Parties" .

Victorian Aboriginal Heritage Council . 31 July 2019.

"Native title representative bodies and service providers" .

National Indigenous Australians Agency .

"Home Page" .

National Native Title Tribunal .

"About Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice" .

Australian Human Rights Commission .

"Social Justice Reports Index" .

Australian Human Rights Commission .

- Annual reports of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner on social justice matters since 1993 "Native Title Reports" .

Australian Human Rights Commission . 29 November 2015.

- Annual reports of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner on native title matters since 1994 v t e Aboriginal Victorians Peoples Barababaraba Bidhawal Brabiralung Braiakaulung Brataualung Bungandidj Boonwurrung Dadi Dadi Dhudhuroa Djab Wurrung Djadjawurrung Djargurd Wurrong Djilamatang Gadubanud Girai wurrung Gulidjan Gunaikurnai Gunditjmara Jardwadjali Jari Jari Jupagalk Krauatungalang Koori Kulin Kurung Kwatkwat Ladji Ladji Mardidjali Minyambuta Ngooraialum Ngurelban Pallanganmiddang Pangerang Tatungalung Taungurung Wadawurrung Warkawarka Wemba-Wemba Wergaia Woiwurrung Wotjobaluk Wurundjeri Yalukit Yorta Yorta Communities Coranderrk Deen Maar Indigenous Protected Area Ebenezer Mission Framlingham Lake Boga mission Registered Aboriginal Parties / Land councils Barengi Gadjin Bunurong Wathaurung Wurundjeri Sites Bend Road Box Gulley Carisbrook stone arrangement Chiltern-Mt Pilot National Park Cloggs Cave Grampians National Park Keilor Kow Swamp Lake Bolac stone arrangement Mount William stone axe quarry New Guinea II cave Sunbury earth rings Tarragal Caves Wurdi Youang See also Victorian Aboriginal Heritage Register Victoria Archaeological Survey State organisations Heritage Victoria Minister for Treaty and First Peoples Legislation Aboriginal Heritage Act 2006 Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 Half-Caste Act Laws concerning Indigenous Australians Cases: Members of the Yorta Yorta Aboriginal Community v Victoria Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupagulk Peoples v Victoria History Batman's Treaty Battle of Yering Blood Hole massacre Campaspe Plains massacre Convincing Ground massacre Coranderrk Gippsland massacres Mudgegonga rock shelter Munangabum Murdering Gully massacre By state or territory New South Wales Northern Territory Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐d8btc
Cached time: 20250812020622
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.384 seconds
Real time usage: 0.503 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2316/1000000
Revision size: 16621/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 101201/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4770/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74403/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.194/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8601985/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  401.790      1 -total
 30.43%  122.277      1 Template:Reflist
 30.19%  121.318     16 Template:Cite_web
 20.99%   84.322      5 Template:Navbox
 19.16%   76.999      1 Template:Victorian_Aborigines
 15.38%   61.812      1 Template:Short_description
  8.50%   34.160      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.53%   30.263      1 Template:Cn
  7.28%   29.261      2 Template:Fix
  6.22%   25.011      1 Template:AAP_navs Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19081436:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020622 and revision id 1303204491. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_council&oldid=1303204491 " Category : Aboriginal land councils Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from June 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from June 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2019 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 16:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land council 1 language Add topic

