Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Creels in Scotland 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Creel (basket) 4 languages العربية বাংলা 日本語 Žemaitėška Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fishing creel ) Wicker basket used for carrying fish or blocks of peat This article is about the basket type. For other uses, see Creel .

Angler 's creel A creel is a wicker basket usually used for carrying fish or blocks of peat . It is also the fish trap used to catch lobsters and other crustaceans.

In modern times, the term has come to encompass various types of wicker baskets used by anglers or commercial fishermen to hold fish or other prey. The word is also associated with agriculture and some domestic baskets.

[ 1 ] In the North Sea herring industry of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the creel was a basket used to measure the volume of a catch.

[ 2 ] The standard measures were creel, which were made in officially approved volumes of one half and one quarter cran (another unit for measuring fresh herring).

An angler's creel is designed to function as an evaporative cooler when lined with moss and dipped into the creek to keep the catch chilled. Caught fish are inserted through a slot in the top, held in place by a small leather strap.

[ 3 ] Creels are also the high sides added to a towed trailer, making it more suitable for carrying loose materials such as turf.

Etymology [ edit ] According to the first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary [ 4 ] and the Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue , [ 5 ] the origin of the word is uncertain. However, the Middle English Dictionary asserts that it derives from Old French " grëil , gräil , grëille , gräille a grill (from L[atin] cratīcula )".

[ 6 ] Creels in Scotland [ edit ] The word creel is also used in Scotland to refer to a device used to catch lobsters and other crustaceans. Made of woven netting (similar to that used in traditional fishing net ) over a frame of plastic tubing and a slatted wooden base, this type of creel is analogous in function to a lobster pot . Several creels put out on one line can be referred to as a "leader".

Angler with creel Statue of a fishwife carrying a creel and basket Commercial creels used to catch lobsters Stack of commercial prawn creels Fishing boat "shooting" a line of creels Creel with sprat , National Fishery Museum , Belgium See also [ edit ] Fly fishing Weaving (mythology) Basket weaving Lobster pot References [ edit ] ^ Woven Communities , Basketmaking Communities in Scotland, 2017 University of St Andrews and Scottish Basketmakers' Circle. Retrieved 2017-04-13.

^ "Basket types" .

Woven Communities (Basketmaking Communities in Scotland) . Retrieved 2017-04-13 .

^ Granger, CS (2009) Fishing Kits and Equipment Pages 94–95. BiblioBazaar, LLC.

ISBN 978-1-113-43786-0 ^ " creel, n.1.

", Oxford English Dictionary Online , 1st edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1893), accessed 7 May 2023.

^ Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue , 12 vols (Chicago: University of Chicago Press; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1931–2002), s.v.

crele , n.

^ Middle English Dictionary (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1952–2001), s.v.

crẹ̄l n.

External links [ edit ] Northumbria Basketry Group The dictionary definition of creel at Wiktionary: for its etymology v t e Fishing equipment and methods Fishing tackle Fish hook Circle hook Gaff Hookset Sniggle Fishing line Braided Knots Monofilament Multifilament Power pro Swivel Fishing sinker Arlesey Bomb Bombarda Downrigger Sandsinker Fishing rod Bamboo fly rod Fishing reel Fishing rod tapers Fly rod building Fishing bait Bait fish Boilies Chum Clonk Groundbait Vermicompost Worm charming Plastic bait Deadsticking Plastic worm Fishing lures Artificial fly Heddon Little Cleo Mormyshka Original Floater Plug Sabiki Spinnerbait Spoon lure Spoonplug Surface lure Swimbait Topwater lure Zara Spook Bite indicators Fishing float Pellet waggler Shortfloating Quiver tip Fishing rig Carolina rig Chod rig Drop shot rig Hair rig Texas rig Apparel Creel Diving mask Hip boot Personal flotation device Snorkel Waders Wetsuit Other Fish stringer Tackle box Fishing techniques Gathering Abalone Ama divers Clam digging Flounder tramping Gathering seafood by hand Noodling Pearl hunting Scallop aquaculture Trout binning Trout tickling Spears Bowfishing Gigging Harpoon Hawaiian sling Polespear Spearfishing Speargun Trident Fishing lines Angling Dropline Drum lines Handline fishing Jiggerpole Jigging Jug fishing Longline fishing Spin fishing Tip-up Trolling Trotline Fishing nets Cast net Cheena vala Drift net Ghost nets Gill net Glass floats Haaf net Hand net Ice jigger Lampara net Lampuki net Lave net Lift net Salambaw Seine net Surrounding net Tangle net Trawl net Turtle excluder device Fish traps Almadraba Barrier net Corf Crab trap Double-Heart of Stacked Stones Eel buck Fish corral Fish nest Fish wheel Fishing basket Fishing weir Lobster trap Putcher fishing Trabucco Other Basnig Blast fishing Cormorant fishing Cyanide fishing Dredging Electrofishing Electric pulse fishing Fish aggregating device Fish toxins Fishfinder Fishing light attractor Flossing Ice fishing Kite fishing Muro-ami Otter fishing Pa-aling Payaos Shrimp baiting Snagging v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Creel_(basket)&oldid=1286810181 " Categories : Containers Basket weaving Fishing equipment Food storage containers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 03:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Creel (basket) 4 languages Add topic

