Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and relation to Falun Gong 2 Finances Toggle Finances subsection 2.1 Money laundering allegations 3 Distribution and marketing 4 Editorial stance 5 Notable coverage Toggle Notable coverage subsection 5.1 "Nine Commentaries on the Communist Party" editorials 5.2 Pro-Trump conspiracy theories and disinformation 5.3 COVID-19 coverage and misinformation 5.4 Other 6 Social media activity and bans Toggle Social media activity and bans subsection 6.1 Ads banned by Facebook and YouTube 6.2 Removal of The BL (The Beauty of Life) from Facebook 6.3 Removal of TruthMedia from Facebook 6.4 SafeChat 7 Censorship by the Chinese government 8 White House controversies 9 Assessments 10 Litigation 11 Awards 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents The Epoch Times 22 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Far-right newspaper affiliated with Falun Gong Not to be confused with Unix time , which is sometimes called Epoch time.

The Epoch Times Front page of The Epoch Times New York edition for March 18, 2016 Type International newspaper Format Broadsheet Owner(s) Epoch Media Group Founder(s) John Tang Publisher Epoch Media Group Founded May 20, 2000 ; 25 years ago ( 2000-05-20 ) Political alignment Far-right [ 1 ] Language Multiple, mainly Chinese and English Headquarters 229 W. 28th St., New York, NY 10001, United States of America Website theepochtimes .com The Epoch Times Traditional Chinese 大紀元時報 Simplified Chinese 大纪元时报 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Dàjìyuán Shíbào This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Epoch Times is a far-right [ 1 ] international multi-language newspaper and media company affiliated with the Falun Gong new religious movement .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The newspaper, based in New York City , is part of the Epoch Media Group, which also operates New Tang Dynasty (NTD) Television.

[ 13 ] The Epoch Times has websites in 35 countries but is blocked in mainland China .

[ 14 ] The Epoch Times opposes the Chinese Communist Party , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 12 ] trumpets far-right politicians and movements in Europe, [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 12 ] and has supported President Donald Trump in the U.S.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] A 2019 report by NBC News showed it to be the second-largest funder of pro-Trump Facebook advertising after the Trump campaign itself.

[ 13 ] [ 21 ] [ 12 ] The Epoch Times frequently runs stories promoting other Falun Gong–affiliated groups, such as the performing arts company Shen Yun .

[ 19 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The Epoch Media Group's news sites and YouTube channels have promoted conspiracy theories such as QAnon , the Great Replacement , anti-vaccine misinformation and false claims of fraud in the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ 30 ] In June 2024, allegations of money laundering were leveled at Bill Guan, the group's chief financial officer .

[ 31 ] History and relation to Falun Gong The Epoch Times was founded in 2000 by John Tang and other Chinese Americans affiliated with the Falun Gong new religious movement.

[ 12 ] Tang was a graduate student in Georgia at the time; he began the newspaper in his basement.

[ 19 ] The founders said they were responding to censorship inside China and a lack of international understanding about the Chinese government's repression of Falun Gong.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] By 2003, The Epoch Times website and group of newspapers had grown into one of the largest Chinese-language news sites and newspaper groups outside China, with local editions in the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Indonesia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and major Western European countries.

[ 34 ] The first English edition launched online in September 2003, followed by the first print edition in 2004.

[ 35 ] The English Australian edition was launched in Sydney in 2005.

[ 13 ] Nick Couldry and James Curran wrote in 2003 that the paper represents a "major step in the evolution of Falun Gong-related alternative media" and may be part of a de facto media alliance with democracy activists in exile.

[ 36 ] In 2003, sociologist Yuezhi Zhao wrote that the paper "displays an indisputable ideological and organizational affinity with Falun Gong" and that it strongly emphasizes negative portrayals of the Chinese government and positive portrayals of Falun Gong. Per Zhao, Epoch portrays itself as neutral, independent, and public-interest oriented.

[ 34 ] In 2005, the San Francisco Chronicle reported that "three new U.S.-based, Chinese-language media outlets that provide provocative reporting about the Communist Party, government oppression and social unrest in China (namely The Epoch Times , Sound of Hope , and NTDTV) have ties to the Falun Gong spiritual movement". When interviewed, executives at each outlet claimed they did not represent the Falun Gong movement as a whole.

[ 15 ] Associated Press reporter Nahal Toosi wrote in 2006 that it is "technically inaccurate" to say that Falun Gong owns The Epoch Times, though many of the paper's staff are Falun Gong practitioners. Toosi noted: "some observers" have said that Falun Gong uses the newspaper for its public relations campaigns and that the paper is connected with the group and carries sympathetic coverage of it.

[ 37 ] The English Epoch Times chair Stephen Gregory has denied that The Epoch Times is directly connected to Falun Gong.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Independent reporters in the U.S. have confirmed the connection.

[ 13 ] [ 19 ] [ 38 ] In 2008, David Ownby, director of the Center for East Asian Studies at the Université de Montréal and the author of Falun Gong and the Future of China , said Falun Gong practitioners set up the newspaper with their own money. He described The Epoch Times as wishing to be taken seriously as a global newspaper rather than being judged on the basis of its strong association with Falun Gong. He wrote: " Epoch Times is a newspaper with a mission, that of reporting on issues bearing on human rights throughout the world, which allows for considerable focus on China and Falun Gong." [ 33 ] Canadian scholar Clement Tong wrote that The Epoch Times "operates as a mouthpiece" for Falun Gong without an official statement of affiliation with the movement.

[ 40 ] In 2009, Li Hongzhi , the founder of Falun Gong, appeared at the newspaper's headquarters in Manhattan and called for the expansion of The Epoch Times to "become regular media".

[ 13 ] Li has called The Epoch Times "our media", along with the NTD digital production company and the Shen Yun dance troupe.

[ 13 ] [ 41 ] Two former employees said that top editors traveled to meet with Li at Falun Gong's compound, Dragon Springs , where he weighed in on editorial and strategic decisions; The Epoch Times denied that a meeting took place.

[ 19 ] Former Epoch Times employees have noted Falun Gong practitioners' involvement in the management and editorial process.

[ 13 ] Former employees, some speaking anonymously, have said Epoch Times workers were encouraged to attend weekly "Fa study" sessions outside work hours to study Li's teachings.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Former employees have said that criticizing The Epoch Times amounts to disobeying Li.

[ 19 ] The Epoch Times runs frequent promotional stories about the related Shen Yun dance troupe.

The New Yorker 's review of Shen Yun called The Epoch Times "the world's foremost purveyor of Shen Yun content".

[ 22 ] Since 2009, The Epoch Times has published 17,000 articles related to Shen Yun, promoting it and attacking its critics by insinuating that they are agents of the Chinese Communist Party.

[ 43 ] In a 2018 report, the conservative think tank Hoover Institution wrote, "the space for truly independent Chinese-language media in the United States has shrunk to a few media outlets supported by the adherents of Falun Gong, the banned religious sect in China, and a small publication and website called Vision Times ", the report noting that the latter is also associated with Falun Gong.

[ 44 ] In a 2019 report, Reporters Without Borders wrote, "Aside from the Epoch Times newspaper and New Tang Dynasty Television, which are run by the Falun Gong, a religious movement persecuted in China, and China Digital Times , a website founded by a leading US-based critic of the regime, the United States now has few truly independent diaspora media." [ 45 ] In 2019, an NBC News investigative report suggested The Epoch Times 's political coverage may be affected by Falun Gong believers' anticipation of a judgment day in which communists are sent to hell and Falun Gong's allies are spared. Former Epoch Times employees told NBC News that Donald Trump is viewed as a key anti-communist ally, [ 13 ] allegedly hastening that judgment day.

[ 46 ] In 2020, Vox identified China Uncensored and NTD as affiliates of The Epoch Times , as part of a multilingual "media empire".

[ 47 ] The Epoch Times sold a building in Middletown, New York , to Falun Gong-aligned website company Gan Jing World in 2022, with the building then opening as Gan Jing World's headquarters in July 2022. The Falun Dafa Gan Jing World Foundation was incorporated in 2023 at the same building in Middletown.

[ 48 ] Gan Jing World's director of media relations, Nick Janicki, has denied that there is any corporate connection between Gan Jing World and the Epoch Times , but said the founders are "good friends".

[ 49 ] The Epoch Times publishes articles promoting Gan Jing World, presenting them as news. In turn, media owned by Epoch Media Group are promoted on the Gan Jing World website, including on the front page. Gan Jing World's content consists of videos that are often republished from YouTube without the original creator's consent.

[ 49 ] In 2024, YouTube issued a cease and desist order to Gan Jing World for unauthorized republishing of content obtained from YouTube.

[ 50 ] In 2024, The Epoch Times entered the film industry with Epoch Studios (a branch of the Epoch Times Association) and its first release, The Firing Squad starring Kevin Sorbo and Cuba Gooding Jr.

The film was written and direct by Timothy A. Chey . The executive director of Epoch Studios, Sally Sun, has previously supervised Epoch documentaries and streaming specials.

[ 51 ] Finances According to NBC News , "little is publicly known about the precise ownership, origins or influences of The Epoch Times ", and it is loosely organized into several regional tax-free nonprofits , under the umbrella of the Epoch Media Group, together with New Tang Dynasty Television .

[ 13 ] [ 19 ] The Epoch Times limits its expenses by primarily hiring unsalaried part-time volunteers.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The newspaper's revenue has increased rapidly in recent years, from $3.8 million in 2016 to $8.1 million in 2017 (with spending of $7.2 million), $12.4 million in 2018 [ 54 ] and $15.5 million in 2019.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Tax documents indicate that between 2012 and 2016, the group received $900,000 from a principal at Renaissance Technologies , a hedge fund led at the time by the conservative political donor Robert Mercer .

[ 57 ] Chris Kitze, a former NBC executive and creator of the fake news website Before It's News who also manages a cryptocurrency hedge fund , joined the paper's board as vice president in 2017.

[ 54 ] A 2020 New York Times report called The Epoch Times 's recent wealth "something of a mystery".

Steve Bannon , the former executive chairman of Breitbart News who produced a documentary with NTD, said "I'd give them a number" on a project budget and "they'd come back and say, 'We're good for that number.'" Former employees say they were told The Epoch Times is financed by subscriptions, ads and donations from wealthy Falun Gong practitioners.

[ 19 ] Between 2019 and 2021, The Epoch Times increased its revenue by 685%, reaching $122 million in 2021. Since 2019, it has gone mostly digital, spending millions on Facebook and YouTube advertisements (Facebook later banned the website, saying it "leveraged foreign actors posing as Americans to push political content"). As of 2023 [update] , The Epoch Times claims to be the US newspaper with the fourth-highest number of subscribers; this ranking cannot be verified as their circulation data is not audited by independent organizations.

[ 58 ] Money laundering allegations On June 3, 2024, the chief financial officer of The Epoch Times , Weidong "Bill" Guan, was indicted on federal charges in the Southern District of New York and charged with one count of conspiring to commit money laundering and two counts of bank fraud in a transnational scheme that lasted from 2020 to May 2024.

[ 31 ] [ 59 ] The Department of Justice (DOJ) said that under Guan's leadership, The Epoch Times 's Make Money Online team had purchased crime proceeds using cryptocurrency and transferred them into bank accounts held by entities affiliated with The Epoch Times .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] According to the DOJ, tens of millions in money laundered funds were transferred to The Epoch Times 's bank accounts, inflating its revenue by 410%.

[ 31 ] The Epoch Times said in a statement that Guan was "innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt", adding that it had "suspended him until this matter is resolved".

[ 61 ] Founder John Tang later resigned from his role as CEO and the company's management was handed over to a transitional team. On July 1, 2024, Janice Trey was appointed as interim CEO.

[ 62 ] In response to the incident, the paper published statements written by Li Hongzhi, which criticized the paper's alleged financial misconduct and partisanship, calling on Falun Gong practitioners to cease making personal attacks on American political figures.

[ 63 ] Distribution and marketing ÉpoqueTimes office in Montreal 's Chinatown in 2015 The Epoch Times publishes in 21 languages and 33 countries, [ 12 ] and has print editions in eight languages: Chinese, English, Spanish, Hebrew, Vietnamese, Japanese, Korean, and Indonesian.

[ 14 ] Special print editions have also been erratically published in France.

[ 64 ] Between 2013 and 2020, The Epoch Times created 117,274 Facebook posts, rapidly increasing its social media audience by publishing its own far-right political content interspersed with clickbait entertainment videos obtained from media licensing companies such as Jukin Media .

[ 2 ] According to a Facebook report released in August 2021, a subscription page for The Epoch Times received 44.2 million views between April and June 2021.

[ 28 ] Facebook data showed that one of the most popular pages in the first quarter of 2021 was a page run by The Epoch Times .

[ 25 ] [ 65 ] With 9.1 million Facebook followers in November 2021, The Epoch Times exceeded the follower counts of far-right news organizations Breitbart News and Newsmax at the time.

[ 2 ] Videos and ads from the Epoch Media Group, including The Epoch Times and New Tang Dynasty (NTD), totaled 3 billion views on Facebook, YouTube and Twitter in April 2019, according to the analytics company Tubular. This ranked it 11th among all video creators, and ahead of any other traditional news publisher, according to NBC News.

[ 13 ] As of 2021 [update] , The Epoch Times was the 7th most followed account on Gab , a social networking service known for its far-right userbase.

[ 66 ] In 2024, billboards appeared in multiple US cities marketing The Epoch Times 's website with the slogan "#1 Trusted News" alongside a portrait of its reporter Joshua Philipp. Local news outlets questioned the veracity of the slogan in light of The Epoch Times 's history of publishing misinformation and the DOJ's indictment of its chief financial officer.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Editorial stance This article is part of a series on Conservatism in China Ideologies Authoritarian Capitalism Party-state Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural Dai Jitao Thought Monarchism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Neoauthoritarianism Social Traditionalist Confucianism Neo New Legalism Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Civilization state Chinese culture Genealogy book Great Unity Duty Elitism Meritocracy Exceptionalism Familialism Filial piety Mandate of Heaven Hierarchy Humaneness Irredentism Law and order Rectification of names Respect Sinicization Sinocentrism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Technocracy Zhonghua minzu History 1992 Consensus Boluan Fanzheng Boxer Rebellion Chinese Civil War Chinese Cultural Renaissance Dang Guo Dynasties of China Han Empire of China (1915–1916) History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Imperial China Imperial examination Tributary system Manchu Restoration Nanjing decade Martial law in Taiwan Language policy New Life Movement Project National Glory Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Shanghai massacre Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Tongzhi Restoration Self-Strengthening Movement White Terror in Taiwan Xueheng School Intellectuals Bell Chang (Ya-chung) Chen (Yuan) Chao Confucius Dai Dong Gan Gu Hu (Hanmin) Hu (Xijin) Jaw Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Kang Li (Ao) Li (Hongzhi) Li (Zehou) Liang Liu Pan Liu Shang Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Xiong Zhang (Weiwei) Zheng (Yongnian) Zhu Zou Politicians Imperial China Chao Duke Shao Wen Emperor Wu (Han) Yang Yongle Yuan Zhang Duke Zhou Republic of China (before 1949) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Li Lin Soong Yuan People's Republic of China (Mainland) Hu Huang Jiang Wang Xi Hong Kong Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chiu Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Jaw Lee Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Sun Yu Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party ( factions ) Hong Kong Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association People First Party Young China Party Overseas Malaysian Chinese Association Historical parties Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Hong Kong Co-operative Resources Centre Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Congress Party Alliance Republican Party The Motorists' Party of ROC Overseas Ryukyu Guomindang Tibet Improvement Party Alliances Pro-Kuomintang camp Republic of China mainland China Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau Literature America Against America Analects Classic of Filial Piety The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Active China Youth Service & Recreation Center Institute of Revolutionary Practice Defunct Blue Shirts Society Group of 89 National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Media Mainland China Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times TVBS United Daily News Overseas The Epoch Times Former Central Daily News Shen Bao By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Variants and movements Anti-communism Conservative localism in Hong Kong Hanfu Movement Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Fascism Han chauvinism Hui pan-nationalism Imperialism State nationalism Related topics Anti-national sentiments Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan Baizuo Falun Gong Four big families of Hong Kong Liberalism in China (opposing) Pro-ROC sentiment " Straight man cancer " Taishang Taiwanese nationalism (opposing) World League for Freedom and Democracy Conservatism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e Part of a series on Anti-communism History Conflicts and military engagements Revolutions and violence after 1917 Russia White movement Basmachi Finland Whites Hungary Germany Chinese Civil War Spanish Civil War Bando nacional World War II and aftermath Axis powers Anti-Comintern Pact Collaboration Eastern Front Anti-Soviet insurgencies Yugoslav Front Chetniks Post-war period in Germany Resistance in Poland (1944–1989) Greek Civil War Reverse Course Malayan Emergency Korean War Indochina wars Vietnam War Central American crisis New Order Afghan conflict Afghan mujahideen Operation Cyclone Revolutions of 1989 Repression and mass killings White Terror Russia Pogroms Hungary China Shanghai Spain Greece Taiwan Finnish Civil War prison camps First Red Scare Palmer Raids The Holocaust Bodo League massacre Guatemalan genocide Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 Operation Condor 1981–1982 Iran Massacres East Timor genocide Miscellaneous McCarthyism Decommunization Russia Ukraine Ideologies Anti-imperialism Anti-Marxism Anti-Stalinist Left Liberal socialism Anti-Sovietism Christian democracy Class collaboration Conservatism Authoritarian Neo- Fascism Nazism Neo- Para- Post- Islamism Liberalism Classical Cold War Neo- Personal ideologies Chiangism Fujimorism Khomeinism Metaxism Orthodox Peronism Pinochetism Reaganism Thatcherism Nationalisms Afghan Chinese French Révolution nationale Hong Kong Hungarian Szeged Idea Indonesian Pancasila Korean Ilminism Polish Romanian Russian Spanish National Catholicism Taiwanese Huadu Ukrainian Natsdems Vietnamese Person Dignity Theory Prominent figures Adenauer Antonescu Bandera Batista Berlusconi Boris III Bordaberry Buckley Bush Castelo Branco Chiang Churchill Cohn Dollfuss Dulles Duvalier (François) Duvalier (Jean-Claude) Eisenhower Franco Fujimori Goldwater Habre Habyarimana Hácha Hitler Hoover Horthy John Paul II Johnson Kennedy Khomeini Kishi Kohl Kolchak Lee K. Y.

MacArthur Mannerheim Marcos McCarthy Médici Metaxas Mihailović Milei Montt Mulroney Mussolini Nedić Ngo Nicholas II Nol Pahlavi II Palmer Papadopoulos Park Pavelić Pétain Piłsudski Pinochet Pius XII Poroshenko Reagan Rhee Sann Saakashvili Salazar Selassie Smith Stroessner Suharto Thanom Thatcher Tiso Tunku Vargas (earlier) Videla Wałęsa Welch Yeltsin Political parties Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Party (United States) Democratic Progressive Party Democratic Republican Party (South Korea) FET y de las JONS Golkar Greater Japan Patriotic Party Independent Anti-Communist Party of the West Kataeb Party Khmer Serei Kuomintang (historical, now factions) Law and Justice Liberal Democratic Party (Japan) Liberal Party Brazil South Korea Liberty Korea Party Nazi Party National Fascist Party Republican Party Chile United States Social Republican Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Anti-Communist Action Argentine Anticommunist Alliance CIA activities Indonesia Italy Japan Vietnam Contras Falun Gong The Epoch Times Freikorps Iron Front John Birch Society National Revolutionary Army NATO Pancasila Youth Propaganda Due Ukrainian Insurgent Army Unification Church Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation World League for Freedom and Democracy By region China Central and Eastern Europe Japan Tenkō Uyoku dantai Taiwan " Green Terror " Laws and systems Anti-Socialist Laws Peace Preservation Law Temporary Provisions (Taiwan) National Security Act (South Korea) Decree against Communism Communist Control Act of 1954 Ukrainian decommunization laws Anti-Infiltration Act Crucial Communism Teaching Act See also Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Lavender Scare Anti-national sentiments Chinese PRC Jewish Judeo-Bolshevism North Korean Soviet Union Russian Anti anti-communism Capitalism Cold War Post Second Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Totalitarianism Western Bloc " Free World " Pro-Americanism Pro-ROC sentiment " Free China " Red Scare Red-baiting U.S. policy toward authoritarian governments Communism portal Politics portal v t e The Epoch Times is an ardent opponent of the Chinese Communist Party , [ 13 ] and politically adopts ultraconservative views.

[ 71 ] Since a shift in the newspaper's approach in 2016, the newspaper received significant attention for its favorable coverage of the Trump administration , [ 13 ] [ 21 ] the American far-right , [ 72 ] the German far-right , [ 17 ] [ 73 ] and the French far-right .

[ 18 ] [ 71 ] According to NBC News, The Epoch Times "generally stayed out of U.S. politics" before 2016 "unless they dovetailed with Chinese interests". Ben Hurley, a former Falun Gong practitioner and Epoch Times writer until 2013, said the paper was critical of abortion and LGBT people and that Falun Gong practitioners "saw communism everywhere", including in internationalist figures like Hillary Clinton and Kofi Annan , "but there was more room for disagreements in the early days".

[ 13 ] Since 2016, according to NBC News, The Epoch Times has promoted favorable coverage of Trump's campaign and presidency, and emphasized topics like Islamic terrorism and illegal immigration to the United States . It has also emphasized "what the publication claims is a labyrinthian, global conspiracy led by [Hillary] Clinton and former President Barack Obama to tear down Trump".

[ 13 ] According to private statements from top Epoch Time s journalists, Falun Gong founder Li directed the paper to increase its coverage of Trump in 2016.

[ 43 ] A former Epoch Times reporter who covered the 2016 campaign, Steve Klett, said his editors had encouraged favorable coverage of Trump after he won the Republican nomination, and that "they seemed to have this almost messianic way of viewing Trump as the anti-Communist leader who would bring about the end of the Chinese Communist Party".

[ 19 ] After Trump was elected, The Epoch Times hired Brendan Steinhauser, a Tea Party strategist, to reach out to more conservatives and encourage the Trump administration to oppose the persecution of Falun Gong.

[ 19 ] The Epoch Times picks up mainstream newswire stories and in some places can resemble a community newspaper.

[ 74 ] According to sociologist Yuezhi Zhao, "While mainstream newspapers typically treat Web versions as an extension of the already-existing print version, The Epoch Times website serves as the master for all its worldwide papers." [ 34 ] The Epoch Times is known for alleging conspiracies involving former Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin , [ 75 ] under whose administration Falun Gong was suppressed in China.

The newspaper is at odds with the Taiwanese -owned and U.S.-based Chinese language newspaper World Journal , calling it a "megaphone for the evil Chinese Communist Party".

[ 75 ] In September 2017, the German edition, The Epoch Times Deutschland , which became online-only in 2012, was described by online magazine The China File as aligned with the German far-right, and attractive to supporters of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) party and the anti-immigrant group Pegida .

[ 17 ] Stefanie Albrecht, a reporter for the German broadcaster RTL who spent several days inside The Epoch Times 's Berlin office while investigating the far right, said that the staffers she met were all Falun Gong practitioners who had no journalistic training and did not check facts , trusting instead in the alternative sources they consulted. During her time at The Epoch Times 's office, Albrecht was exposed to debunked conspiracy theories such as Pizzagate , the chemtrail conspiracy theory , weather-changing machines and the Great Replacement .

[ 18 ] [ 12 ] In France , The Epoch Times gives "an unfettered platform to Jean-Marie Le Pen , the patriarch of the French far right, and his daughter, Marine , who leads the nationalist party her father founded", according to The New Republic .

[ 18 ] The Epoch Times publishes climate change denial content.

[ 28 ] [ 76 ] It promotes doubt about modern science and medicine, in line with Falun Gong's teachings. Elise Thomas of the Institute for Strategic Dialogue noted, "Falun Gong has a history of rejecting modern medicine, which obviously intersects neatly with the beliefs of many anti-vax communities." Ben Hurley said, "They've been anti-medicine for a long time. Ex-believers know many people that have died from treatable conditions. It's their belief that they don't need medicine, because they're superhuman beings." [ 35 ] In July 2023, Falun Gong founder Li told Epoch Times journalists that it should not favor one political party over the other. Following the allegations of money laundering by the paper's CFO, Li issued a statement calling on Falun Gong adherents not to attack politicians from either political party.

[ 43 ] Howard Polskin, founder of The Righting, says that this may signal the Epoch Times changing its brand.

[ 63 ] Notable coverage "Nine Commentaries on the Communist Party" editorials In November 2004, the Chinese version of The Epoch Times published a series of editorials titled "Nine Commentaries on the Communist Party". The editorials argued that China would not be free or prosperous until it was rid of the party, which it said was at odds with China's cultural and spiritual values.

[ 77 ] The Epoch Times also organized a campaign called the Tuidang movement, urging people to quit the Chinese Communist Party, and said that more than 2 million people had resigned.

[ 78 ] A report by the OpenNet Initiative said that 90% of websites mentioning the phrase "Nine Commentaries" were blocked in mainland China as of 2005.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Caylan Ford, a former staff writer for The Epoch Times, wrote in a 2009 guest opinion article in The Christian Science Monitor that millions of copies of the "Nine Commentaries" articles were circulated in China by email, fax, and underground printing houses. Ford wrote that the campaign differed from the 1989 and 2008 democracy movements in China by drawing on Buddhist and Daoist spirituality.

[ 77 ] In 2012, a former People's Liberation Army Air Force officer testified to the United States Congressional-Executive Commission on China that he had been sentenced to four years of prison for distributing a "Nine Commentaries" DVD in Beijing.

[ 81 ] The Tuidang movement was called one of the top global events in 2011 by Russian economist Andrey Illarionov , who cited claims by The Epoch Times that over 100 million people had quit.

[ 82 ] Li Yi, a Hong Kong-based democratic activist, questioned The Epoch Times 's claims about the number of resignations in an Apple Daily opinion piece in 2006, warned that the Tuidang movement could be using "lies to fight lies", and wrote that the propagandistic nature of the movement could hurt the integrity of the pro-democracy community.

[ 83 ] According to China scholar David Ownby, the Nine Commentaries are a "condemnation of communism and a direct indictment of the legitimacy of the Chinese Communist Party's rule in China". While acknowledging the "unnecessary violence" the Chinese Communist Party has inflicted, Ownby finds that the lack of balance and nuance in tone and style makes the editorials resemble "anti-Communist propaganda written in Taiwan in the 1950s".

[ 33 ] Journalist Oscar Schwartz called the Nine Commentaries a "quasi- McCarthyist screed".

[ 84 ] Pro-Trump conspiracy theories and disinformation Woman at Million MAGA March on November 14, 2020, in Washington, D.C., distributing copies of The Epoch Times featuring a headline that quotes Donald Trump's disputed claim about the results of the 2020 United States presidential election .

The Epoch Times has promoted an array of pro- Donald Trump conspiracy theories [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] and is known as one of Trump's closest media allies and defenders.

[ 85 ] [ 21 ] The paper has financially benefited from its promotion of Trump conspiracies, increasing its revenue nearly fourfold during the first three years of Trump's administration (from $3.9 million in 2016 to $15.5 million in 2019) as it catered to Trump's most ardent supporters, to whom the paper marketed itself via targeted social media advertising.

[ 28 ] [ 88 ] The publication championed Trump's Spygate conspiracy theory in its news coverage and advertising, and the Epoch Media Group's Edge of Wonder videos on YouTube spread the far-right, pro-Trump QAnon conspiracy theory [ 13 ] and embraced false QAnon claims.

[ 89 ] An NBC News report found that two of Edge of Wonder 's hosts have been a creative director and chief photo editor at The Epoch Times . The newspaper promoted Edge of Wonder videos in dozens of Facebook posts through 2019.

[ 13 ] In September 2019, during the Trump–Ukraine scandal , Hunter Biden 's Wikipedia article included dubious claims about his business dealings in Ukraine and his father Joe Biden 's motivations for going after a Ukrainian prosecutor; the claims were sourced to The Epoch Times and The New American .

[ 90 ] The Epoch Times promoted the conspiracy theory that Joe Biden had abused his power in 2016 to protect Hunter's business interests in Ukraine.

[ 91 ] During the February 2020 Iowa Democratic caucuses , The Epoch Times shared viral disinformation from the conservative group Judicial Watch that falsely alleged inflated voter rolls.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] The disinformation, which went viral on Facebook, was debunked by fact checkers and the Iowa secretary of state.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] A Harvard media expert said that The Epoch Times employed a "classic disinformation tactic" known as " trading up the chain ", in which false stories are repackaged and shared.

[ 92 ] After Trump lost the 2020 United States presidential election , The Epoch Times consistently sought to question the election results.

[ 20 ] The organization produced a 93-minute video that falsely suggested widespread fraud in the counting; one interviewee, attorney Lin Wood , falsely alleged that China had bought an American election vendor.

[ 29 ] Versions of the video on YouTube, the Epoch Times website and NTD were viewed hundreds of thousands of times.

[ 29 ] The Epoch Times created a network of seven new YouTube channels to disseminate election disinformation and other false claims, including falsehoods about the Nashville Christmas Day bombing .

[ 85 ] Only one of the seven YouTube channels disclosed its ties to The Epoch Times or Falun Gong.

[ 85 ] In the two and a half months after their creation, the disinformation channels garnered tens of millions of views and at least 1.1 million subscribers.

[ 85 ] One of the channels ("Eye Opener With Michael Lewis") portrays itself as an independent effort by the host "and a few friends".

[ 85 ] After the videos' false and misleading claims were reported, YouTube removed several of the videos in accordance with the site's policy against election disinformation.

[ 85 ] The newspaper helped publicize the January 6, 2021, Trump rally in Washington, D.C., that led to the storming of the Capitol by a violent pro-Trump mob. Afterward, one of its columnists suggested that the riot was a " false flag " operation, [ 20 ] [ 96 ] and Michael Lewis's Epoch Times -linked YouTube channel echoed the same lie, suggesting that the Capitol attack was orchestrated by " antifa " as part of an "old Communist tactic".

[ 85 ] COVID-19 coverage and misinformation See also: COVID-19 misinformation and COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy The Epoch Times has spread misinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic in print and via social media including Facebook and YouTube.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] In 2022, Raquel Miguel of the European watchdog EU DisinfoLab said, " The Epoch Times has played a noticeable role in transmitting and amplifying many anti-vaccine narratives".

[ 12 ] According to Josef Holnburger of the Center for Monitoring, Analysis and Strategy , a German extremism monitoring agency, The Epoch Times 's German edition has been the most shared outlet among Germany's COVID-skeptic movement.

[ 35 ] It has promoted anti-CCP rhetoric and conspiracy theories about the pandemic, for example through an eight-page special edition called "How the Chinese Communist Party Endangered the World", which was distributed unsolicited in April 2020 to mail customers in the United States, Canada, and Australia, [ 99 ] [ 100 ] and in June 2020 in the United Kingdom.

[ 101 ] In the newspaper, the SARS-CoV-2 virus is known as the " CCP virus", [ 97 ] [ 99 ] [ 91 ] and a commentary in the paper posed the question, "is the novel coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan an accident occasioned by weaponizing the virus at that [Wuhan P4 virology] lab?" [ 97 ] [ 99 ] The paper's editorial board suggested that COVID-19 patients cure themselves by "condemning the CCP" and "maybe a miracle will happen".

[ 54 ] In France, "special" French-language print editions of The Epoch Times were distributed in 2021 during anti- Health pass protests .

[ 64 ] In Germany, The Epoch Times has published articles blasting the legitimacy of PCR tests and promoting conspiracy theories about vaccination mishaps.

[ 12 ] The misinformation tracker NewsGuard called the French page of The Epoch Times one of the "super-spreaders" of COVID-19 misinformation on Facebook, citing an Epoch Times article that suggested the virus was artificially created.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] NewsGuard later changed the rating of the English edition of The Epoch Times from green to red.

[ 14 ] A February 17, 2020, Epoch Times story shared a map from the internet that falsely alleged massive sulfur dioxide releases from crematoria during the COVID-19 pandemic in China, speculating that 14,000 bodies may have been burned.

[ 104 ] A fact check by AFP reported that the map was a NASA forecast taken out of context.

[ 104 ] A widely viewed video released by The Epoch Times on April 7, 2020, was flagged by Facebook as "partly false" for "the unsupported hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 is a bioengineered virus released from a Wuhan research laboratory". The video featured Judy Mikovits , an anti-vaccination activist.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] The fact-checker Health Feedback said of the video that "several of its core scientific claims are false and its facts, even when accurate, are often presented in a misleading way".

[ 98 ] The video was a 54-minute feature on Joshua Philipp's Crossroads EpochTV series.

[ 20 ] [ 106 ] On April 29, 2020, a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) story reported that some Canadians were upset to receive a special edition of The Epoch Times that called COVID-19 the "CCP virus". The CBC later retracted a headline on its story that had quoted a recipient saying the special edition was "racist and inflammatory", and the CBC also retracted a claim that The Epoch Times edition had concluded that COVID-19 was a bioweapon.

[ 99 ] Opinion columns published by conservative tabloid The Toronto Sun accused the CBC of bias against The Epoch Times [ 107 ] [ 108 ] and said the CBC's report may have misled readers into thinking The Epoch Times was spreading anti-Asian sentiment.

[ 108 ] In February 2021, an investigator for EU DisinfoLab found that Tierra Pura , a Spanish-language website first launched in Argentina in March 2020 that publishes COVID-19 misinformation, is closely linked to The Epoch Times and Falun Gong. At the time, the site was the most shared outlet in Spain's COVID-19-skeptic Telegram channels and groups.

The Epoch Times and Tierra Pura denied being linked.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] In January 2022, the German edition of The Epoch Times amplified accusations by German activist Steffen Löhnitz that the Austrian government had deliberately inflated infection numbers to justify a lockdown. It said Löhnitz had been digging up "correct numbers" and reported his claims of "massive fraud" as fact. The Epoch Times story was shared by figures from Querdenken , Germany's anti-lockdown movement.

[ 12 ] Other In 2010, the paper ran an interview with Canadian Conservative Member of Parliament Rob Anders wherein Anders alleged that the Chinese government used gifts and business deals in attempts to influence Canadian political decisions.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] The Epoch Times published a web series with conservative commentator Larry Elder , a candidate in the 2021 recall election against California governor Gavin Newsom .

[ 114 ] Social media activity and bans Ads banned by Facebook and YouTube The Epoch Media Group spent $11 million on Facebook ads in 2019, [ 20 ] including, over a six-month period in 2019, more than $1.5 million on about 11,000 pro-Trump Facebook advertisements purchased by The Epoch Times .

[ 13 ] [ 115 ] [ 20 ] According to publicly available Facebook ad data reported by NBC News, The Epoch Times spent more on pro-Trump ads than any group except the Trump campaign itself.

[ 13 ] [ 115 ] Political ad spending on Facebook in April 2019 through an account called "Coverage of the Trump Presidency by The Epoch Times" exceeded any politician's spending except Trump's and Joe Biden 's. Journalist Judd Legum wrote in May 2019 that The Epoch Times ads were "boosting Donald Trump and floating conspiracy theories about Joe Biden".

[ 116 ] In August 2019, Facebook banned The Epoch Times from advertising on its platform after finding that the paper broke its political transparency rules by publishing pro-Trump subscription ads through sockpuppet pages such as "Honest Paper" and "Pure American Journalism".

[ 46 ] [ 117 ] A Facebook representative told NBC: "Over the past year we removed accounts associated with The Epoch Times for violating our ad policies, including trying to get around our review systems." [ 46 ] The Epoch Times publisher, Stephen Gregory, wrote in response that the paper did not intend to violate Facebook's rules and that its video ads were advertisements for subscriptions to the newspaper.

[ 46 ] After Facebook banned it from advertising, the newspaper shifted its spending to YouTube , where it has spent more than $1.8 million on ads, some promoting conspiracy theories, since May 2018.

[ 42 ] [ 19 ] YouTube demonetized Edge of Wonder , a program of the Epoch Media Group, on its platform, and removed Epoch Times ads relating to COVID-19.

[ 118 ] Removal of The BL (The Beauty of Life) from Facebook In October 2019, the fact-checking website Snopes reported close links between The Epoch Times and a large network of Facebook pages and groups called The BL ( The Beauty of Life ) that shared pro-Trump views and conspiracy theories such as QAnon . At that time, The BL had spent at least $510,698 on Facebook advertising.

[ 119 ] Hundreds of the ads were removed for violations of Facebook's advertising rules. By December 2019, the BL network of pages had 28 million Facebook followers, according to Snopes .

[ 120 ] The editor-in-chief of The BL had previously worked as editor-in-chief of The Epoch Times, and several other BL employees were listed as current or former Epoch Times employees.

[ 119 ] The BL was registered in Middletown , New York , to an address that also was registered to Falun Gong's Sound of Hope radio network and was associated with the YouTube series Beyond Science, and Snopes found "the outlet as a whole is literally the English-language edition of Epoch Times Vietnam".

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Snopes found that The BL was using more than 300 fake Facebook profiles based in Vietnam and other countries, using names, stock photos and celebrity photos in their profiles to emulate Americans, to administer more than 150 pro-Trump Facebook groups amplifying its content.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] The Epoch Times and The BL denied being affiliated with each other, although the latter acknowledged that a "few of our staff" previously worked for The Epoch Times .

[ 119 ] In December 2019, Facebook announced it had removed a large network of accounts, pages, and groups linked to The BL and Epoch Media Group for coordinated inauthentic behavior on behalf of a foreign actor. The network had 55 million followers on Facebook and Instagram, and $9.5 million had been spent on Facebook ads through its accounts.

[ 122 ] The New York Times reported that The BL had used fake profile photos generated by artificial intelligence . The Atlantic Council Digital Forensic Research Lab director Graham Brookie said the coordinated network of fake accounts demonstrated "an eerie, tech-enabled future of disinformation". Facebook's head of security policy, Nathaniel Gleicher, said, "What's new here is that this is purportedly a U.S.-based media company leveraging foreign actors posing as Americans to push political content. We've seen it a lot with state actors in the past." [ 123 ] [ 86 ] In August 2020, Snopes reported that The BL had evaded Facebook's link ban by creating a clone named The Lion in July. Facebook placed a link ban on The Lion after Snopes contacted it.

[ 124 ] Removal of TruthMedia from Facebook On August 6, 2020, Facebook removed hundreds of fake accounts by a digital company called TruthMedia that promoted Epoch Times and NTD content and pro-Trump conspiracy theories about COVID-19 and protests in the United States.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] The operation included 303 Facebook accounts, 181 pages, 44 Facebook groups and 31 Instagram accounts, [ 127 ] which in total were followed by more than 2 million people.

[ 126 ] Snopes and NBC News reported that TruthMedia had ties to the Epoch Media Group, [ 128 ] [ 126 ] but Stephen Gregory, publisher of The Epoch Times , denied this.

[ 126 ] TruthMedia, now banned from Facebook, continues to operate YouTube channels in Chinese, English, Japanese, and Vietnamese, and has accounts on Pinterest and Twitter .

[ 125 ] It appears to have begun a petition to the White House to "start calling the novel coronavirus the CCP virus".

[ 126 ] [ 125 ] SafeChat In March 2021, Politico reported that SafeChat, a social media platform rife with disinformation and conspiracy theories about President Joe Biden that is popular with Trump supporters and Chinese dissidents, was closely linked to The Epoch Times and Falun Gong.

[ 129 ] Censorship by the Chinese government In some cases The Epoch Times operates in a hostile overseas environment, in which "overseas Chinese media companies choosing to remain independent or publish non-approved content become the targets of an aggressive campaign of elimination or control".

[ 130 ] In one instance, Chinese diplomatic officials made threats against media for reporting Falun Gong-related content; in other cases, advertisers and distributors have been threatened for supporting The Epoch Times .

[ 131 ] Communist Party authorities have been accused of resorting to "militant methods" against the paper and its staff, including attacking staff and destroying computer equipment.

[ 130 ] In 2006, the International Federation of Journalists criticized what it called a "dirty war" against The Epoch Times , citing incidents such as The Epoch Times 's Hong Kong printing plant being broken into and damaged by unidentified men, and Epoch's offices in Sydney and Toronto receiving suspicious mail envelopes suspected of containing toxic materials. The IFJ also noted incidences of Epoch Times staff and advertisers being intimidated, and newspapers being confiscated, in what it characterized as "a vicious witch-hunt aimed at crushing the voice of dissent".

[ 132 ] The newspaper was briefly banned from Malaysia after coming under reported pressure by the Chinese Communist Party.

[ 133 ] In 2010, the Brisbane office of the Epoch Times was targeted in a drive-by shooting by two assailants with an air rifle. A projectile was fired through the front window of the office.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] In 2016, the newspaper was removed from the pharmacy of Australian National University after the president of the Chinese Students and Scholars Association confronted the pharmacist and threw out the papers. The incident drew national media coverage over questions of Chinese government-sponsored overseas student organizations.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] In November 2019, Reporters Without Borders called on Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam to protect press freedoms after The Epoch Times said four masked arsonists with batons had damaged its printing press.

[ 138 ] Additionally, in a 2019 report, Reporters Without Borders said that The Epoch Times 's chief technical officer, Li Yuan, was assaulted in his Atlanta , Georgia , home on February 8, 2006, by "suspected Chinese government agents" who took his two laptops.

[ 45 ] On April 12, 2021, the Hong Kong printing facility was vandalized during working hours, in the presence of staff members. The attack was captured by the surveillance camera, CCTV .

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] The 2022 film Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness was blocked from release in China after the film was submitted for review and footage that made reference to The Epoch Times was found.

[ 141 ] The Hong Kong print edition of the newspaper ceased publication after September 17, 2024, due to the expiry of its printer's contract which could not be renewed.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] White House controversies In April 2006, a reporter with temporary Epoch Times press credentials unfurled a protest banner and heckled China's leader Hu Jintao at a summit with President George W. Bush , shouting, "Stop him from killing!" and "Evil people will die early", prompting Chinese officials to refuse to attend a ceremonial lunch in protest.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] The Epoch Times later disassociated itself from the reporter.

[ 146 ] In September 2018, Epoch Times photographer Samira Bouaou broke White House protocol and handed Trump a folder.

[ 53 ] In August 2020, the White House Correspondents' Association objected to the Trump administration's bending of COVID-19 social distancing rules in press briefings to favor The Epoch Times, The Gateway Pundit and One America News Network .

[ 147 ] [ 91 ] Assessments Ming Xia, a political science professor at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York , wrote in 2007 that The Epoch Times represents part of Falun Gong 's strategic effort to expand to non-practitioners, and "embed itself into the large civil society for influence and legitimacy".

[ 37 ] In 2018, he stated that The Epoch Times staff "are not professional journalists and do not follow the protocols professional journalists abide by ".

[ 53 ] The misinformation tracker NewsGuard said that The Epoch Times "fails to gather and present information responsibly, rarely corrects or clarifies errors and remains opaque as to its ownership and funding".

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] The Epoch Times has been criticized by some scholars for biases, particularly regarding the Chinese Communist Party and mainland China issues, as well as for being a "mouthpiece" of the Falun Gong movement.

[ 153 ] James To, a New Zealand political scientist, described The Epoch Times as the "primary mouthpiece" of Falun Gong, writing that it "lacks credibility", despite the newspaper posing a "viable threat to the CCP" by publishing articles about the party's negative aspects.

[ 154 ] In his book Blocked on Weibo: What Gets Suppressed on China's Version of Twitter and Why, University of Toronto research fellow Jason Q. Ng referred to the paper's coverage of mainland China issues as "heavily biased against the Communist Party" and thus its reportage "should be viewed skeptically".

[ 155 ] A 2018 report by the Hoover Institution , a conservative think tank, called The Epoch Times one of the few independent Chinese-language media outlets in the U.S. not taken over by businessmen sympathetic to the Chinese government and one that remains "independent of PRC control".

[ 44 ] The report also said that reports on China by The Epoch Times and other outlets affiliated with Falun Gong, which is banned from China, are "uneven".

[ 44 ] In his 2019 book, Becoming Activists in Global China: Social Movements in the Chinese Diaspora , sociologist Andrew Junker argued that "simply by increasing the plurality of voices in the diaspora Chinese-language public sphere," The Epoch Times was "playing a progressive role" despite the Falun Gong community's "pariah status" limiting the publication's influence.

[ 156 ] Seth Hettena wrote in The New Republic that The Epoch Times "has built a global propaganda machine, similar to Russia's Sputnik or RT , that pushes a mix of alternative facts and conspiracy theories that has won it far-right acolytes around the world".

[ 18 ] Joan Donovan of the Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard University called The Epoch Times "a known disinformation operation".

[ 92 ] Jennifer Grygiel, an associate professor of communication at Syracuse University 's S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications , said that The Epoch Times is "a notorious outlet that has been known to spread disinformation and misinformation".

[ 28 ] James Bettinger, a professor of communications at Stanford University and the director of the John S. Knight Journalism Fellowships, said "Even if Epoch Times is not associated with Falun Gong, if they consistently write about Falun Gong in the same perspective, or if there are no articles examining Falun Gong, people would perceive it as being not credible." [ 74 ] Orville Schell, dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at University of California, Berkeley , said in 2005 that "It's hard to vouch for their quality because it's difficult to corroborate, but it's not something to be dismissed as pure propaganda." [ 15 ] In his 2008 book on Falun Gong, David Ownby wrote that The Epoch Times articles are "well written and interesting, if occasionally idiosyncratic in their coverage".

[ 33 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] According to Ownby, the newspaper has been praised and also criticized for a perceived bias against the CCP, and support of Falun Gong practitioners and other dissidents such as Tibetans, Taiwanese independence advocates, democracy activists, Uyghurs and others. The paper is therefore often assessed in light of its connection to Falun Gong, rather than a thorough analysis of its editorial content.

[ 33 ] Jiao Guobiao , a former Beijing University journalism professor who was dismissed after criticizing the CCP propaganda department , proposed that even if The Epoch Times published only negative information highly critical of the CCP, its attacks could never begin to counterbalance the propaganda the party publishes about itself. In addressing media balance, Jiao noted that the Chinese public lacked negative, critical information about their country. As such, he noted for a need of media balance based on the principles of freedom, equality, and legality, and that media balance "is the result of the collective imbalances of all".

[ 149 ] Haifeng Huang, professor of political science at the University of California, said, "I'm not exactly clear why they have become such a major pro-Trump voice" but "part of it is perhaps because they regard President Trump as tough on the Chinese government and therefore a natural ally for them".

[ 42 ] The web-only German edition of the paper, Epoch Times Deutschland , has aligned with the anti-immigration far-right in Germany, favorably commenting on Alternative for Germany and Pegida while criticizing mainstream German media as untrustworthy.

[ 17 ] Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian of Foreign Policy writes that "It's not clear why the German website of a Falun Gong newspaper would choose to promote right-wing populism in Germany" but that the decision could be a business decision to drive an increase in views of the publication, or because such views reflect the teaching of Falun Gong leader Li Hongzhi , "who believes that mixed-race children are 'pitiable' and 'physically and intellectually incomplete'".

[ 17 ] A German media report described the outlet as a "favorite" of Pegida supporters, along with Sputnik News and Kopp Report , and found that its articles critical of immigration have been shared almost daily.

[ 73 ] A report by the Institute for Strategic Dialogue , a London-based think tank, said the German edition of The Epoch Times "primarily runs anti-West, anti-American and pro-Kremlin content—a high proportion of this content is based on unverified information".

[ 18 ] [ 159 ] In December 2019, the English Wikipedia deprecated the English and Chinese online versions of The Epoch Times as an "unreliable source" to use as a reference in Wikipedia, with editors calling it "an advocacy group for the Falun Gong, and [...] a biased or opinionated source that frequently publishes conspiracy theories".

[ 160 ] In March 2022, Angelo Carusone , head of watchdog group Media Matters for America , said that The Epoch Times "go[es] where the center for the strongest infrastructure or possibility of getting as much audience and influence and reach is", and added that this complexity makes it "radically different and hard to understand". According to Carusone, the metric of success for The Epoch Times is simply influence rather than money or a specific political agenda.

[ 12 ] Litigation The Epoch Times and its co-founder Dana Cheng sued Maine Beacon reporter Dan Neumann for defamation after Neumann reported on Cheng's promotion of conspiracy theories about the January 6 Capitol attack in June 2021. In October 2022, the paper lost an effort to revive the lawsuit, with the judges finding that the alleged defamatory reporting was substantially true .

[ 161 ] Awards In 2014, the newspaper's reporting won several journalism awards, which The New York Times later described as indicative of The Epoch Times "edging closer to Mr. Li's vision of a respectable news outlet", before it changed course in 2015 and 2016 to focus on viral content and a "Trump pivot".

[ 19 ] References ^ a b Sources describing The Epoch Times as a far-right publication: [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] ^ a b c Peng, Yilang; Yang, Tian; Fang, Kecheng (October 27, 2023).

"The dark side of entertainment? How viral entertaining media build an attention base for the far-right politics of The Epoch Times " .

New Media & Society .

27 (4).

Sage : 2087– 2108.

doi : 10.1177/14614448231205893 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2024 . Retrieved September 19, 2024 .

We examined the Facebook newsfeed history of The Epoch Times ( N = 117,274 posts from 2013 to 2020), which transitioned from a niche anti-China publication to an influential player in US far-right politics. [...] Our case— The Epoch Times —is an important example of far-right media outlets using far-right political content to attract attention.

^ Zeng, Jing; Schäfer, Mike S. (October 21, 2021).

"Conceptualizing "Dark Platforms". Covid-19-Related Conspiracy Theories on 8kun and Gab" .

Digital Journalism .

9 (9).

Routledge : 1321– 1343.

doi : 10.1080/21670811.2021.1938165 .

In contrast, Gab users who shared more far-right "fake news" websites are relatively more visible on Gab. Some of the most cited sources under this category include the Unhived Mind ( N = 2,729), Epoch Times ( N = 1,303), Natural News ( N = 1,301), Breitbart ( N = 769), the Gateway Pundit ( N = 422), and InfoWars ( N = 656).

^ Zhang, Xinyi; Davis, Mark (June 7, 2022).

"E-extremism: A conceptual framework for studying the online far right" .

New Media & Society .

26 (5).

SAGE : 2954– 2970.

doi : 10.1177/14614448221098360 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

S2CID 249482748 .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2022 .

Beyond US-based far-right news websites such as Breitbart , Infowars and Epoch Times , other alternative online media outlets include Australia-based XYZ and The Unshackled , Canada-based Rebel News and UK-based Politicalite.com and PoliticalUK.co.uk , just to name a few, which operate as far-right metapolitical channels and counter-publics that strive to influence mainstream culture and discourse (Holt, 2019).

^ Bloom, Mia ; Moskalenko, Sophia (September 8, 2021).

"January 6, 2021: Capitol Hill, the Failed Insurrection" .

Pastels and Pedophiles: Inside the Mind of QAnon .

Stanford University Press .

doi : 10.1515/9781503630611-003 .

ISBN 978-1-5036-3061-1 .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2022 – via De Gruyter .

The 26-minute video featured a discredited scientist, Dr. Judy Mikovits, describing a secret plot by global elites like Bill Gates and Dr. Anthony Fauci to use the pandemic to profit and seize political power. Mikovits soon became a regular guest on far-right media channels, and she became the darling of far-right publications like The Epoch Times and Gateway Pundit .

^ Kaiser, Jonas (2019). "In the heartland of climate scepticism: A hyperlink network analysis of German climate sceptics and the US right wing". In Forchtner, Bernard (ed.).

The Far Right and the Environment: Politics, Discourse and Communication .

Routledge . p. 265.

ISBN 978-1-351-10402-9 .

^ Weisskircher, Manès (September 11, 2020). "Neue Wahrheiten von rechts außen? Alternative Nachrichten und der "Rechtspopulismus" in Deutschland" [New truths from the far-right? Alternative news and "right-wing populism" in Germany].

Forschungsjournal Soziale Bewegungen (in German).

33 (2).

De Gruyter : 474– 490.

doi : 10.1515/fjsb-2020-0040 .

S2CID 222004415 .

In Deutschland existiert eine Vielzahl an alternativen Nachrichten-Plattformen von Rechtsaußen. Der Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2019 nennt Junge Freiheit, Compact online, PI News und Epoch Times als Plattformen mit der häufigsten Nutzung (Newman 2019: 86).

[In Germany there is a large number of alternative news platforms from the far-right. The Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2019 names Junge Freiheit, Compact online, PI News and Epoch Times as the platforms with the most frequent use (Newman 2019: 86).] ^ Braune, Joan (December 22, 2023).

"Steve Bannon's Kali-Yuga" .

Understanding and Countering Fascist Movements: From Void to Hope .

Routledge . p. 75.

doi : 10.4324/9781003031604-4 .

ISBN 978-1-003-83113-6 . Retrieved September 19, 2024 – via Google Books .

Bannon also collaborated with the far-right Epoch Times newspaper, which is closely connected to the intensely anticommunist and pro-Trump Chinese Falun Gong cult, and produced a docudrama for a Falun Gong television platform.

^ Hobbs, Renee (2020).

Mind Over Media: Propaganda Education for a Digital Age .

W. W. Norton & Company . p. 113.

ISBN 978-0-393-71351-0 .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2023 . Retrieved November 6, 2020 – via Google Books .

Perhaps you have seen those annoying YouTube ads for The Epoch Times . It's a U.S. based international newspaper that's owned by the Falun Gong religious movement, who also own the performing arts company, Shen Yun.

The Epoch Times has discovered the profitability of promoting far-right politicians in Europe and the United States and they also advance anti-vaccination conspiracy theories on their YouTube channel.

^ Hune-Brown, Nicholas (December 12, 2017).

"The traditional Chinese dance troupe China doesn't want you to see" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2022 .

^ Alba, Davey (December 1, 2021).

"Those Cute Cats Online? They Help Spread Misinformation" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2022 . Retrieved March 19, 2022 .

Next to the video was a link to subscribe to The Epoch Times, a newspaper that is tied to Falun Gong ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Perrone, Alessio; Loucaides, Darren (March 10, 2022).

"A key source for Covid-skeptic movements, the Epoch Times yearns for a global audience" .

Coda Media .

Archived from the original on March 13, 2022 . Retrieved March 13, 2022 .

But its shift to the far-right actually started in Europe when in 2015 refugees from the Middle East migrated to EU countries. It was then that the German edition of Epoch Times started to enjoy a steep rise in web traffic, coinciding with its coverage of the anti-migrant group Pegida and frequent interviews with politicians from the emerging right-wing populist party Alternative for Germany, or AfD.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Zadrozny, Brandy; Collins, Ben (August 20, 2019).

"Trump, QAnon and an impending judgment day: Behind the Facebook-fueled rise of The Epoch Times" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2022 . Retrieved January 15, 2022 .

^ a b c d "The Epoch Times" (PDF) .

NewsGuard . 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ a b c Hua, Vanessa (December 18, 2005).

"Dissident media linked to Falun Gong / Chinese-language print, broadcast outlets in U.S. are making waves" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2012 . Retrieved December 9, 2006 .

^ Wilson, Jason (April 30, 2021).

"Falun Gong-aligned media push fake news about Democrats and Chinese communists" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2021 . Retrieved November 16, 2021 .

^ a b c d e Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany (September 23, 2017).

"The German Edition of Falun Gong's 'Epoch Times' Aligns with the Far Right" .

ChinaFile . Center on U.S.-China Relations at Asia Society .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2017.

^ a b c d e f Hettena, Seth (September 17, 2019).

"The Obscure Newspaper Fueling the Far-Right in Europe" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Roose, Kevin (October 24, 2020).

"How The Epoch Times Created a Giant Influence Machine" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f van Zuylen-Wood, Simon (January 12, 2021).

"MAGA-land's Favorite Newspaper" .

The Atlantic .

ISSN 1072-7825 .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 15, 2021 .

^ a b c Brown, Hayes (October 23, 2018).

"A Newspaper Banned In China Is Now One Of Trump's Biggest Defenders" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2019 . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ a b Tolentino, Jia (March 19, 2019).

"Stepping Into the Uncanny, Unsettling World of Shen Yun" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2021 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Gafni, Matthias (January 11, 2020).

"Behind the blitz: Falun Gong practitioners spend millions on Shen Yun ads. How do they do it?" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ Kurlantzick, Joshua (March 19, 2023), "China's Mixed Effectiveness", Beijing's Global Media Offensive: China's Uneven Campaign to Influence Asia and the World , Oxford University Press , pp. 259–C11.P130, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197515761.003.0011 , ISBN 978-0-19-751576-1 , Many of the conspiracy theories produced by publications linked to Epoch Times have nothing to do with China at all but rather with QAnon, fake claims of voter fraud in the United States, and other issues.

^ a b Callery, James; Goddard, Jacqui (August 23, 2021).

"Most-clicked link on Facebook spread doubt about Covid vaccine" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2022 . Retrieved December 22, 2021 .

Facebook's data on the first quarter of this year shows that one of its most popular pages was an article by The Epoch Times , a far-right newspaper that has promoted QAnon conspiracy theories and misleading claims of voter fraud related to the 2020 US election.

^ Alba, Davey (August 23, 2019).

"Facebook Bans Ads From The Epoch Times" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ "The battle in miniature" .

The Economist . October 10, 2020.

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2020 . Retrieved June 20, 2022 .

she got her news from the far-right One America News Network and Epoch Times , a pro-Trump newspaper produced by the Falun Gong sect that has spread the anti-Semitic QAnon conspiracy.

^ a b c d e Waldman, Scott (August 27, 2021).

"Climate denial newspaper flourishes on Facebook" .

E&E News .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2022 . Retrieved January 8, 2022 .

The Epoch Times , a far-right newspaper that echoes anti-vaccine messages and promoted former President Trump's false election claims, received 44.2 million views between April and June for a page that offers to sign up subscribers, according to a report released by Facebook last week.

^ a b c Swenson, Ali; Joffe-Block, Jude (December 25, 2020).

"Lengthy video makes false claims about 2020 election" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 13 ] [ 26 ] [ 12 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ excessive citations ] ^ a b c Baragona, Justin (June 3, 2024).

"Feds Accuse Far-Right Newspaper of Being a Money Laundering Operation" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2024 . Retrieved June 4, 2024 – via Yahoo! Finance .

^ Thomas Lum (August 11, 2006).

"China and Falun Gong" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 5, 2012.

^ a b c d e Ownby, David (May 1, 2008).

"David Meets Goliath: The Conflict between Falun Gong and the Chinese State" .

Falun Gong and the Future of China .

Oxford University Press . pp.

161– 228.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195329056.003.0006 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved August 30, 2023 .

^ a b c Zhao, Yuezhi , "Falun Gong, Identity, and the Struggle over Meaning Inside and Outside China", pp. 209–223 in Contesting Media Power: Alternative Media in a Networked World , edited by Nick Couldry and James Curran (Rowman & Littlefield, 2003) ^ a b c Loucaides, Darren; Perrone, Alessio (March 10, 2022).

"The media giant you've never heard of, and why you should pay attention" .

openDemocracy .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2022 . Retrieved December 6, 2022 .

^ Couldry, Nick; Curran, James (2003).

Contesting Media Power: Alternative Media in a Networked World . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

ISBN 978-0742575202 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ a b c Toosi, Nahal (February 5, 2007).

"Paper denies representing Falun Gong" .

The Washington Post .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2017 . Retrieved December 4, 2015 .

^ a b Riley-Smith, Ben (August 20, 2019).

"US conservative media outlet's ties to Chinese spiritual movement put in spotlight" .

The Daily Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2022 . Retrieved January 22, 2022 .

^ Gregory, Stephen (June 20, 2019).

"Our Response to NBC News' Inappropriate Questions" .

The Epoch Times .

Archived from the original on August 8, 2021 . Retrieved January 22, 2022 .

^ Tong, Clement (2015).

"Western Apocalyptic Narratives in the International Arena" . In Jean-Guy A. Goulet; Liam D. Murphy; Anastasia Panagakos (eds.).

Religious Diversity Today: Experiencing Religion in the Contemporary World . Vol. 3. ABC-CLIO. p. 71.

ISBN 978-1440833328 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved December 3, 2015 .

^ "Fa Teaching Given at the 2010 New York Fa Conference" .

www.falundafa.org . September 5, 2010.

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved August 15, 2020 .

^ a b c Roose, Kevin (February 5, 2020).

"Epoch Times, Punished by Facebook, Gets a New Megaphone on YouTube" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ a b c d Hong, Nicole; Rothfeld, Michael (December 30, 2024).

"Shen Yun Needed Publicity. The Epoch Times Wrote 17,000 Articles" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 30, 2024 . Retrieved December 30, 2024 .

^ a b c "Chinese Influence & American Interests: Promoting Constructive Vigilance" (PDF) . Hoover Institution. November 29, 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 24, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ a b "RSF Report: "China's Pursuit of a New World Media Order" " . RSF.Reporters without Borders. March 25, 2019.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ a b c d Zadrozny, Brandy ; Collins, Ben (August 23, 2019).

"Facebook bans ads from The Epoch Times after huge pro-Trump buy" . CNBC.

Archived from the original on October 7, 2019 . Retrieved October 7, 2019 .

^ Nguyen, Terry (November 27, 2020).

"Why fake news is so hard to combat in Asian American communities" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Bredderman, William (August 14, 2024).

"The Little Town Being Taken Over by Falun Gong" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2024 . Retrieved September 7, 2024 .

^ a b Grevy Gotfredsen, Sarah (March 19, 2024).

"Unpacking Gan Jing World" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2024 . Retrieved June 3, 2024 .

^ Maiberg, Emanuel; Koebler, Jason (March 27, 2024).

"YouTube Issues Cease and Desist to Bizarre Chinese YouTube Clone" .

404 Media .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2024 . Retrieved September 7, 2024 .

^ Ortiz, Erik; Arkin, Daniel (July 6, 2024).

"Epoch Times, the conspiratorial pro-Trump outlet, enters a new market: Faith-based movies" . NBC News.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 30, 2024 .

^ Lawrence, Susan V. (April 14, 2004).

"Falun Gong Fields Media Weapons" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2023 . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

^ a b c Nakamura, David; Shih, Gerry (September 18, 2018).

"White House reviews incident involving The Epoch Times photographer handing a folder to Trump" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2018.

The photographer, identified by other photojournalists as Samira Bouaou, passed the purple-colored folder to Trump as he was walking out of the East Room on Sept. 12 after delivering remarks at a reception for the Congressional Medal of Honor Society.

^ a b c Eli Clifton (May 26, 2020).

"This NBC executive became a conspiracy king and a pro-Trump media boss" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Markay, Lachlan (January 12, 2021).

"Epoch Times nearly quadrupled revenue during the first three years of the Trump administration" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ "DocumentCloud" .

beta.documentcloud.org .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ Eli Clifton (May 5, 2020).

"The Hedge Fund Man Behind Pro-Trump Media's New War on China" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2020 . Retrieved May 6, 2020 .

^ Zadrozny, Brandy (October 13, 2023).

"How the conspiracy-fueled Epoch Times went mainstream and made millions" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2023 . Retrieved October 14, 2023 .

^ a b Luscombe, Richard (June 3, 2024).

"DoJ accuses far-right Epoch Times of being money-laundering operation" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved June 4, 2024 .

^ Honderich, Holly (June 4, 2024).

"The Epoch Times CFO charged with $67m money laundering scheme" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2024 . Retrieved June 4, 2024 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (June 5, 2024).

"How a pro-Trump media outlet allegedly funneled tens of millions in an illicit money laundering scheme" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2024 . Retrieved June 8, 2024 .

^ "Statement From the Board of The Epoch Times Association Inc" .

The Epoch Times . July 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 30, 2024 .

^ a b Joffe-Block, Jude (June 15, 2024).

"Money laundering charges raise questions about the direction of The Epoch Times" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 .

^ a b Cohen, Claudia (August 13, 2021).

"The Epoch Times, ce mystérieux média sino-américain distribué aux anti-passe sanitaire" [The Epoch Times, the mysterious Chinese-American media distributed at anti-Health pass].

Le Figaro (in French).

Archived from the original on February 8, 2022 . Retrieved May 22, 2022 .

^ Dwoskin, Elizabeth (August 21, 2021).

"Facebook says post that cast doubt on covid-19 vaccine was most popular on the platform from January through March" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2022 . Retrieved May 5, 2023 .

^ Lee, Micah (March 15, 2021).

"Inside Gab, the Online Safe Space for Far-Right Extremists" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2021 . Retrieved October 28, 2021 .

^ Varn, Kathryn (June 21, 2024).

"Billboards for The Epoch Times boast "#1 Trusted News." Here's the real story" .

Axios .

Tampa Bay .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2024 . Retrieved September 23, 2024 .

^ Jess, Steve; Ziegler, Zac (September 19, 2024).

"Fact Check AZ: Is The Epoch Times really '#1 trusted news'?" .

Arizona Public Media .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2024 . Retrieved September 23, 2024 .

^ Christian, Sue Ellen; Force, Mary; Lando, Ben (March 29, 2024).

"A billboard campaign in southwest Michigan claims the Epoch Times is "#1 trusted news." Is it?" .

NowKalamazoo .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2024 . Retrieved September 23, 2024 .

^ Smith, Marty (February 11, 2024).

"Who Is Behind the Billboards Advertising The Epoch Times?" .

Willamette Week .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 23, 2024 .

^ a b Rougerie, Pamela (April 25, 2021).

"Epoch Times, NTD... Des sites complotistes pilotés par une "secte" chinoise ultraconservatrice" [Epoch Times, NTD... Conspiratorial Sites Driven by an Ultraconservative Chinese "Sect"].

Le Parisien (in French).

Archived from the original on June 26, 2022 . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ Entwistle, Bryanna (August 28, 2024).

"Donald Trump's China Rhetoric Has Changed. The Epoch Times' Support For Him Has Not" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved September 24, 2024 .

^ a b Winterbauer, Stefan (March 18, 2016).

"Kopp, Sputnik, Epoch Times & Co: Nachrichten aus einem rechten Paralleluniversum | MEEDIA" (in German).

Archived from the original on December 12, 2019 . Retrieved August 26, 2022 .

^ a b Eugenia Chien, "Falun Gong-Linked Media Venture Makes Waves, Raises Questions" [ usurped ] New America Media , News Analysis, May 16, 2006 ^ a b "The Chinese Press Battles For Hearts And Minds Abroad" .

HuffPost Canada . February 13, 2014.

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved February 7, 2020 .

^ Paul, Kari (September 16, 2021).

"Facebook steps up fight against climate misinformation – but critics say effort falls short" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2022 . Retrieved January 13, 2022 .

In 2021 June, one of the most-viewed sites on Facebook was a subscription page for the Epoch Times, a far-right newspaper known for climate denial.

^ a b Caylan Ford (October 21, 2009).

"An underground challenge to China's status quo" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Archived from the original on August 5, 2016.

^ "全球兴起退出中共运动" .

Voice of America (in Chinese). June 7, 2005.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ OpenNet Initiative .

"Internet Filtering in China in 2004–2005: A Country Study" .

2005 . Archived from the original on April 10, 2016.

^ BBC Monitoring 張強 (September 26, 2005).

"分析：互聯網的民主力量引起反彈" .

BBC (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on August 8, 2014 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ Congressional-Executive Commission on China (2013).

"Falun Gong in China: Review and Update" (PDF) . U.S. Government Printing Office. pp.

62– 99.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 1, 2015 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ Andrey Illarionov) (January 1, 2012).

"БЕЗ ДУРАКОВ, Андрей Илларионов" .

Echo of Moscow (in Russian).

Archived from the original on March 13, 2016.

^ 李怡 (March 9, 2006).

"還要「真、善、忍」嗎？" . 蘋果日報. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015 . Retrieved November 29, 2015 .

^ Schwartz, Oscar (October 17, 2020).

"Stranger Than Fiction" .

The Atavist Magazine .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2022 . Retrieved April 22, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h Silverman, Craig (January 8, 2021).

"This Pro-Trump YouTube Network Sprang Up Just After He Lost" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2022 .

^ a b "Facebook says a pro-Trump media outlet used artificial intelligence to create fake people and push conspiracies" .

NBC News . December 20, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2019 . Retrieved December 23, 2019 .

^ Bensinger, Ken; Homans, Charles (June 3, 2024).

"Epoch Times Executive Accused of Laundering $67 Million" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2024 . Retrieved June 5, 2024 .

^ Lachlan Markay (January 12, 2021).

"Epoch Times revenue soared on Trump conspiracies" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ "This massive YouTube channel is normalizing QAnon" .

The Daily Dot . August 27, 2019.

Archived from the original on September 15, 2019 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ Stanley-Becker, Isaac (September 25, 2019).

"Checking the Web on Hunter Biden? A 36-year-old physicist helps decide what you'll see" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 19, 2022 .

^ a b c Mackey, Robert (August 15, 2020).

"White House Plants Pro-Trump Conspiracy Theorists Among Reporters in Briefing Room" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2022 . Retrieved July 31, 2022 .

^ a b c Zadrozny, Brandy ; Abbruzzese, Jason (February 5, 2020).

" 'Wake-up call': Iowa caucus disinformation serves as warning about 2020 election" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2020 . Retrieved February 29, 2020 .

^ a b Wong, Julia Carrie (February 4, 2020).

"Rightwing groups spread false information about voter rolls hours before Iowa caucuses" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2022 . Retrieved February 13, 2022 .

^ Zadrozny, Brandy (February 7, 2020).

"Debunked claims about Iowa voter fraud pushed by conservative activists" . NBC News.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2020 . Retrieved February 29, 2020 .

^ Paris Martineau; Louise Matsakis.

"Iowa Misinformation Spreads Online, Despite New Policies" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 .

Archived from the original on March 15, 2020 . Retrieved February 29, 2020 .

^ Hanneman, Joseph (February 18, 2023).

"Undercover DC Police Officer Pushed Protesters Toward Capitol, Climbed Over Barricade: Court Filing" .

The Epoch Times .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2023 . Retrieved August 8, 2023 .

New filings by Jan. 6 defendant William Pope of Topeka, Kansas, also show MPD bicycle officers stopping four armed men in plainclothes on Jan. 6. The men turned out to be federal agents. Video included with Pope's filings also shows uniformed MPD officers saying, 'We were set up [to fail on Jan. 6].' ^ a b c Manavis, Sarah (April 22, 2020).

"How US conspiracy theorists are targeting local government in the UK" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 7, 2020 .

^ a b Rougerie, Pablo (April 17, 2020).

"Viral video promotes the unsupported hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 is a bioengineered virus released from a Wuhan research laboratory" .

Science Feedback . Health Feedback.

Archived from the original on September 16, 2024 . Retrieved September 16, 2024 .

^ a b c d Bellemare, Andrea; Ho, Jason; Nicholson, Katie (April 29, 2020).

"Some Canadians who received unsolicited copy of Epoch Times upset by claim that China was behind virus" .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 13, 2020 .

^ "Anti-communist organisation descends on Wagga to spread publication" .

Nine News . April 21, 2020.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2022 . Retrieved March 13, 2022 .

^ Ondrak, Joe (June 15, 2020).

"Disinformation to Your Door: The Epoch Times Begins UK Mail Campaign" .

Logically .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2023 . Retrieved January 3, 2023 .

^ Holroyd, Matthew (May 4, 2020).

"Coronavirus: 'Super-spreaders' of COVID-19 misinformation on Facebook identified" .

Euronews .

Archived from the original on May 13, 2020 . Retrieved May 12, 2020 .

^ "Facebook 'Super-spreaders': Europe – NewsGuard" .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ a b "This map is a forecast based on past data, not real-time satellite readings" .

AFP Fact Check . February 20, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 23, 2020 . Retrieved February 23, 2020 .

^ Gramenz, Jack (April 16, 2020).

"Controversial virus doco hidden" .

The Courier Mail .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2021 . Retrieved October 16, 2021 .

^ a b "Scientists Haven't Found Proof The Coronavirus Escaped From A Lab In Wuhan. Trump Supporters Are Spreading The Rumor Anyway" .

BuzzFeed News . April 22, 2020.

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 7, 2020 .

^ Furey, Anthony (April 30, 2020).

"Chinese Canadian dissidents are under attack, and the CBC has joined the pile-on" .

Toronto Sun .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 14, 2020 .

^ a b Matas and Kilgour, David (May 10, 2020).

"Opinion: The CBC, the CCP and COVID-19" .

Toronto Sun .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Hazard, Laura Owen (February 12, 2021).

"The dark side of translation: The Epoch Times reportedly spreads disinformation through new brands" .

Nieman Lab .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2022 . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ Loucaides, Darren (June 18, 2021).

"Who is behind Spanish Telegram's storm of Covid-19 disinformation?" .

Coda Media .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2022 . Retrieved March 13, 2022 .

^ Miguel, Raquel (February 10, 2021).

"TIERRA PURA, PRODUCT OF THE PANDEMIC: A new Spanish-language disinformation outlet with connections to The Epoch Times ecosystem" . EU DisinfoLab.

Archived from the original on July 5, 2022 . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ Greenaway, Norma (August 3, 2010).

"Liberals decry secrecy around CSIS report" .

Vancouver Sun . Archived from the original on August 5, 2010 . Retrieved May 25, 2012 .

^ "Chinese-Canadian leader laments spy agency allegations" .

Vancouver Courier . July 29, 2010. Archived from the original on May 19, 2012 . Retrieved May 25, 2012 .

^ Weigel, David (July 22, 2021).

"The Trailer: Whatever happened to Medicare-for-all?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2021 . Retrieved August 9, 2021 .

^ a b Gilbert, Ben (August 21, 2019).

"Aside from the Trump campaign itself, the biggest spender on pro-Trump Facebook ads is reportedly a secretive New York-based newspaper" .

Business Insider . Insider Inc.

Archived from the original on August 21, 2019.

^ Legum, Judd (May 3, 2019).

"FWIW: Where are they now?" .

ACRONYM . Archived from the original on October 19, 2019 . Retrieved June 10, 2019 .

^ Gartenberg, Chaim (August 23, 2019).

"Epoch Times banned from advertising after sneaking pro-Trump propaganda onto Facebook" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ "YouTube ads are rife with coronavirus conspiracies – from the same right-wing site" .

The Daily Dot . May 19, 2020.

Archived from the original on June 12, 2021 . Retrieved June 12, 2021 .

^ a b c d "Expanding Pro-Trump Outlet 'The BL' Is Closely Linked to The Epoch Times" .

Snopes.com . October 11, 2019.

Archived from the original on March 28, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2019 .

^ a b c "If Facebook Is Dealing with Deceptive 'BL' Network, It's Not Working" .

Snopes.com . December 13, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 15, 2019 .

^ "How a Pro-Trump Network Is Building a Fake Empire on Facebook and Getting Away with It" .

Snopes.com . November 12, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2021 . Retrieved December 15, 2019 .

^ "Removing Coordinated Inauthentic Behavior From Georgia, Vietnam and the US" .

About Facebook . December 20, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2019 . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ "Facebook Discovers Fakes That Show Evolution of Disinformation" .

The New York Times . December 20, 2019.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2020 . Retrieved January 3, 2019 .

^ Kasprak, Alex (August 5, 2020).

"Media Outlet The BL Evaded a Facebook Ban By Making Copy of Self" .

Snopes .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2024 . Retrieved September 16, 2024 .

^ a b c "Facebook Takes Down Inauthentic Network Associated With Truth Media" (PDF) .

Graphika . August 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 9, 2020 . Retrieved August 16, 2020 .

^ a b c d e "Facebook removes troll farm posing as African-American support for Donald Trump" .

NBC News . August 6, 2020.

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved August 7, 2020 .

^ "July 2020 Coordinated Inauthentic Behavior Report" .

About Facebook . August 6, 2020.

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved August 7, 2020 .

^ "Facebook Removes Another Misinformation Network Linked to Epoch Times" .

Snopes.com . August 6, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 20, 2021 . Retrieved August 7, 2020 .

^ Scott, Mark; Nguyen, Tina (March 16, 2021).

"MAGA voters discovered a new home online. But it isn't what it seems" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2023 . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

^ a b To, James Jiann Hua (2014).

Qiaowu: Extra-Territorial Policies for the Overseas Chinese . Brill. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 978-9004272286 .

^ "The Long Shadow of Chinese Censorship" .

Freedom House .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2024 . Retrieved February 28, 2024 .

^ "IFJ Condemns China's "Brutal Vendetta" Against Independent Newspaper" . March 1, 2006.

Archived from the original on June 23, 2020 . Retrieved June 23, 2020 .

^ a b Sun, Wanning (2009).

Media and the Chinese Diaspora: Community, Communications and Commerce . Routledge. p. xi.

ISBN 978-1134263592 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

...the Epoch Times – a globally circulated pro-Falun Gong, anti-Communist Chinese-language newspaper...

^ "Issues facing diaspora communities in Australia submission 74" (PDF) .

^ "Drive-by shooting won't stop Sunnybank-based Chinese-language newspaper Epoch Times, say staff" .

The Courier Mail .

^ Joske, Alexander; Wen, Philip (October 7, 2016).

"The 'patriotic education' of Chinese students at Australian universities" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2019 . Retrieved August 20, 2019 .

^ "Canberra pharmacy at front line of China's push for global influence" .

Australian Financial Review . September 1, 2016.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2019 . Retrieved August 20, 2019 .

^ "Following the Epoch Times arson attack, RSF urges the Hong Kong government to address violence against the press" . Reporters Without Borders. November 22, 2019. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020 . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ "Epoch Times defiant after Hong Kong printing press ransacked" .

France 24 .

Agence France-Presse . April 13, 2021.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

^ "Masked men ransack Epoch Times printer in Hong Kong" .

Committee to Protect Journalists . April 13, 2021.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

^ Tartaglione, Nancy (April 30, 2022).

" 'Doctor Strange In The Multiverse Of Madness' Unlikely To Get China Release Following Online Backlash" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2022 . Retrieved May 19, 2022 .

^ "Epoch Times ceases publication on 9/18. Website continues to operate" .

Archived from the original on September 7, 2024 . Retrieved September 7, 2024 .

^ "Epoch Times media outlet to suspend print edition in Hong Kong" .

South China Morning Post . September 7, 2024.

Archived from the original on September 7, 2024 . Retrieved September 7, 2024 .

^ Baker, Peter (2013).

Days of Fire: Bush and Cheney in the White House (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-53692-9 .

OCLC 861219250 .

^ "Protester disrupts Hu speech at White House" .

NBC News . April 20, 2006.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2023 . Retrieved July 13, 2023 .

^ Bone, James (April 22, 2006).

"Ivy League students avoid shady business of protest" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2021 . Retrieved July 13, 2023 .

^ Farhi, Paul (August 14, 2020).

"Two sites that amplify hoaxes given special treatment at Trump's briefings despite restrictions" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2020 . Retrieved August 15, 2020 .

^ Groot, Gerry; Stafford, Glen (2012).

"China and South Australia" . In John Spoehr; Purnendra Jain (eds.).

The Engaging State: South Australia's Engagement with the Asia-Pacific Region . Wakefield Press. p. 103.

ISBN 978-1743051573 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved December 1, 2015 .

In related vein, another paper with wide distribution but published elsewhere is The Epoch Times (Dajiyuan shibao), the qigong meditation religious group Falun gong mouth-piece, which runs a strong anti-communist line.

^ a b Thornton, Patricia M. (2008). "Manufacturing Dissent in Transnational China". In Kevin J. O'Brien (ed.).

Popular Protest in China . Harvard Contemporary China. Vol. 15. Harvard University Press. pp.

199– 200.

ISBN 978-0674041585 .

^ James Jiann Hua To (2014).

Qiaowu: Extra-Territorial Policies for the Overseas Chinese . Brill. p. 97.

ISBN 978-9004272286 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Ellwood, Robert S.; Csikszentmihalyi, Mark A. (2007).

"East Asian Religions" . In Jacob Neusner (ed.).

World Religions in America . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 217.

ISBN 978-1611640472 .

... the Epoch Times , an anticommunist newspaper connected with Falun Gong organization...

^ Denton, Kirk A. (2011).

"Yan'an as a Site of Memory" . In Marc Andre Matten (ed.).

Places of Memory in Modern China: History, Politics, and Identity . Leiden Series in Comparative Historiography. Vol. 5. Brill. p. 268.

ISBN 978-9004219014 .

An article in the anti-Communist, Falun Gong Epoch Times claims, without citing any sources, that [Commumist soldier Zhang Side's] death was the result of an accident involving opium use.

^ [ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 133 ] [ 152 ] ^ To, James (December 2012).

"Beijing's Policies for Managing Han and Ethnic-Minority Chinese Communities Abroad" .

Journal of Current Chinese Affairs .

41 (4): 183– 221.

doi : 10.1177/186810261204100407 .

^ Ng, Jason Q. (2013).

Blocked on Weibo: What Gets Suppressed on China's Version of Twitter (And Why) . New Press. p. 127.

ISBN 978-1595588715 .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Junker, Andrew, ed. (2019), "Becoming Activists in Global China" , Becoming Activists in Global China: Social Movements in the Chinese Diaspora , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 186, ISBN 978-1-108-48299-8 , archived from the original on June 4, 2024 , retrieved May 4, 2024 ^ Morais, Betsy. " The Epoch Times doesn't like to brag", Capital Magazine, June 23, 2010 ^ Berkley Center for Religion, Peace and World Affairs at Georgetown University.

"David Ownby" .

berkleycenter.georgetown.edu .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2019 . Retrieved March 2, 2019 .

^ "Make Germany Great Again: Kremlin, Alt-Right and International Influences in the 2017 German Elections" (PDF) .

Institute for Strategic Dialogue . 2017.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 19, 2019 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ Benjakob, Omer (January 9, 2020).

"Why Wikipedia is Much More Effective Than Facebook at Fighting Fake News" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2020 . Retrieved April 26, 2020 .

^ Kalmbacher, Colin (October 26, 2022).

"Epoch Times Loses Defamation Lawsuit About 'Substantially True' Reporting on Co-Founder's Jan. 6th Conspiracy Theories" .

Law & Crime .

Archived from the original on March 18, 2023 . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

External links Official website v t e Falun Gong Main articles History Li Hongzhi Teachings Persecution Falun Gong in Hong Kong Falun Gong outside mainland China Falun Buddha Society (Singapore) Dragon Springs Media The Epoch Times New Tang Dynasty Television ( China Uncensored ) Sound of Hope Vision Times ( Vision Times Media Australia ) Shen Yun Related topics China Tribunal Coalition to Investigate the Persecution of Falun Gong Kilgour–Matas report ( Organ harvesting from Falun Gong practitioners in China ) Qigong Tiananmen Square self-immolation incident The Firing Squad Ultrasurf 610 Office Falun (symbol) Books Falun Gong: The End of Days Falun Gong and the Future of China The Religion of Falun Gong Revenge of the Forbidden City Portals : Journalism United States China The Epoch Times at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National United States Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6wdvv
Cached time: 20250817044212
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.858 seconds
Real time usage: 2.202 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14008/1000000
Revision size: 158595/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 554530/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13521/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 685721/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.101/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18709958/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1722.398      1 -total
 56.72%  976.936      1 Template:Reflist
 22.97%  395.551     86 Template:Cite_web
 12.90%  222.212     44 Template:Cite_news
  6.85%  118.022      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
  6.68%  115.086      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  5.88%  101.206      5 Template:Cite_journal
  4.91%   84.535     16 Template:Cite_book
  4.46%   76.847      1 Template:Infobox_newspaper
  4.25%   73.257      1 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1988214:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044212 and revision id 1306244895. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Epoch_Times&oldid=1306244895 " Categories : 2000 establishments in New York City Newspapers established in 2000 Anti-communism in the United States Anti–People's Republic of China sentiment Falun Gong propaganda Chinese-American culture in New York City Chinese-language newspapers (Traditional Chinese) Chinese-language newspapers published in Canada Chinese-language newspapers published in Hong Kong Chinese-language newspapers published in the United States Asian-American press Conservative media in the United States American conservative websites Far-right publications in the United States Free daily newspapers French-language newspapers published in the United States German-language newspapers published in New York (state) Internet-related controversies Media bias controversies Mass media and entertainment controversies Newspapers published in New York City Non-English-language newspapers published in New York (state) Spanish-language newspapers German-language newspapers French-language newspapers Japanese-language newspapers Banned newspapers Anti-vaccination media COVID-19 misinformation Fake news websites Ultraconservatism Overseas Chinese newspapers Propaganda in the United States Propaganda newspapers and magazines Right-wing newspapers Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from June 2024 CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from February 2024 Use American English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Epoch Times 22 languages Add topic

