Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Some examples of exterior spaces 3 Applications of exterior spaces 4 References Toggle the table of contents Exterior space 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards .

No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In mathematics , the notion of externology in a topological space X generalizes the basic properties of the family ε X cc = {E ⊆ X : X\E is a closed compact subset of X} of complements of the closed compact subspaces of X , which are used to construct its Alexandroff compactification . An externology permits to introduce a notion of end [ 1 ] point, to study the divergence of nets in terms of convergence to end points and it is a useful tool for the study and classification of some families of non compact topological spaces. It can also be used to approach a topological space as the limit of other topological spaces: the externologies are very useful when a compact metric space embedded in a Hilbert space is approached by its open neighbourhoods .

Definition [ edit ] Let (X,τ) be a topological space. An externology on (X,τ) is a non-empty collection ε of open subsets satisfying: If E 1 , E 2 ∈ ε , then E 1 ∩ E 2 ∈ ε ; if E ∈ ε, U ∈ τ and E ⊆ U , then U ∈ ε .

An exterior space (X,τ,ε) consists of a topological space (X,τ) together with an externology ε . An open E which is in ε is said to be an exterior-open subset . A map f:(X,τ,ε) → (X',τ',ε') is said to be an exterior map if it is continuous and f −1 (E) ∈ ε , for all E ∈ ε' .

The category of exterior spaces and exterior maps will be denoted by E . It is remarkable that E is a complete and cocomplete category.

Some examples of exterior spaces [ edit ] For a space (X,τ) one can always consider the trivial externology ε tr ={X} , and, on the other hand, the total externology ε tot =τ . Note that an externology ε is a topology if and only if the empty set is a member of ε if and only if ε=τ .

Given a space (X,τ) , the externology ε X cc of the complements of closed compact subsets of X permits a connection with the theory of proper maps .

Given a space (X,τ) and a subset A⊆X the family ε(X,A)={U⊆X:A⊆U,U∈τ} is an externology in X . Two particular cases with important applications on shape theory and on dynamical systems , respectively, are the following: If A is a closed subspace of the Hilbert cube X=Q the externology ε A =ε(Q,A) is a resolution of A in the sense of the shape theory.

Let X be a continuous dynamical system and P the subset of periodic points ; we can consider the externology ε(X,P) . More generally, if A is an invariant subset the externology ε(X,A) is useful to study the dynamical properties of the flow .

Applications of exterior spaces [ edit ] Proper homotopy theory : [ 1 ] A continuous map f:X→Y between topological spaces is said to be proper if for every closed compact subset K of Y , f −1 (K) is a compact subset of X . The category of spaces and proper maps will be denoted by P . This category and the corresponding proper homotopy category are very useful for the study of non compact spaces. Nevertheless, one has the problem that this category does not have enough limits and colimits and then we can not develop the usual homotopy constructions like loops , homotopy limits and colimits, etc. An answer to this problem is the category of exterior spaces E which admits Quillen model structures and contains as a full subcategory the category of spaces and proper maps; that is, there is full and faithful functor P → E which carries a topological space (X,τ) to the exterior space (X,τ,ε X cc ) .

Proper LS category : The problem of finding Ganea and Whitehead characterizations of this proper invariant can not be faced within the proper category because of the lack of (co)limits. Nevertheless, an extension of this invariant to the category of exterior spaces permits to find a solution to such a problem. This numerical proper invariant has been applied to the study of open 3- manifolds .

Shape theory : Many shape invariants (Borsuk groups, Quigley inward and approaching groups) of a compact metric space can be obtained as exterior homotopy groups of the exterior space determined by the open neighborhoods of a compact metric space embedded in the Hilbert cube.

Discrete and continuous dynamical systems (semi-flows and flows) : There are many constructions that associate an exterior space to a dynamical system, for example: Given a continuous (discrete) flow one can consider the exterior spaces induced by the open neighborhoods of the subset of periodic points , Poisson periodic points, omega limits , etc. The constructions and properties of these associated exterior spaces are used to study the dynamical properties of the (semi-flow) flow.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "proper homotopy theory in nLab" .

ncatlab.org .

M. Cárdenas, F.F. Lasheras and A. Quintero.

Detecting cohomology classes for the proper LS category. The case of semi-stable 3-manifolds , Math. Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc. (2011).

A. Del Río, L.J. Hernández and M.T. Rivas Rodríguez.

S-Types of global towers of spaces an exterior spaces , Appl. Categ. Struct., 17 no. 3, 287–301, (2009).

L. Español, J. M. García-Calcines, M. C. Mínguez.

On proper and exterior sequentiality ,  Appl. Categ. Struct., 18 , no. 6, 653–668, (2010).

J.I. Extremiana, L.J. Hernández and M.T. Rivas.

Postnikov factorizations at infinity , Topol. Appl., 153 , 370–393, (2005).

J.I. Extremiana, L.J. Hernández and M.T. Rivas.

An approach to dynamical systems using exterior spaces . Scientific contributions in honor of Mirian Andrés Gómez, 307Đ318, Univ. La Rioja Serv. Publ., Logroño, 2010.

J.M. García-Calcines, P. R. García-Díaz,  A. Murillo Mas.

A Whitehead-Ganea approach for proper Lusternik–Schnirelmann category . Math. Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc.

142 (2007), no. 3, 439—457.

J.M. García-Calcines, P. R. García-Díaz,  A. Murillo Mas, The Ganea conjecture in proper homotopy via exterior homotopy theory . Math. Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc.

149 (2010), no. 1, 75—91.

J.M. García-Calcines, M. García Pinillos and L.J. Hernández.

A closed model category for proper homotopy and shape theories , Bull. Aust. Math. Soc.

57 no.2, 221—242, (1998).

J.M. García-Calcines and L.J. Hernández.

Sequential homology , Topol. Appl.

114 /2, 201–225, (2001).

J.M. García-Calcines, M. García Pinillos and  L.J. Hernández.

Closed simplicial model structures for exterior and proper homotopy , Appl. Categ. Struct.

12 , no.3, 225–243, (2004).

M. García-Pinillos, L.J. Hernández Paricio and M.T. Rivas Rodríguez.

Exact sequences and closed model categories , Appl. Categ. Struct., 18 , no. 4, 343–375 (2010). DOI 10.1007/s10485-008-9176-x (2009).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exterior_space&oldid=1257839983 " Categories : Topology Homotopy theory Hidden categories: Articles needing cleanup from January 2012 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles without a reason field from January 2012 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from January 2012 Wikipedia articles that are too technical from November 2024 All articles that are too technical Articles needing cleanup from November 2024 Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from November 2024 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 16 November 2024, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Exterior space 1 language Add topic

