Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Laboratories 3 Divisions 4 Presidents 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare 9 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto Français Italiano Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian research institute You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(March 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Italian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 496 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare Location Rome , Italy Website www .infn .it The Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare ( INFN ; "National Institute for Nuclear Physics") is the coordinating institution for nuclear , particle , theoretical and astroparticle physics in Italy.

History [ edit ] INFN was founded on the 8th of August 1951, to further the nuclear physics research tradition initiated by Enrico Fermi in Rome , in the 1930s. The INFN collaborates with CERN , Fermilab and various other laboratories in the world. In recent years it has provided important contributions to grid computing .

During the latter half of the 1950s, the INFN designed and constructed the first Italian electron accelerator—the electron synchrotron developed in Frascati . In the early 1960s, it also constructed in Frascati the first ever electron-positron collider ( ADA - Anello Di Accumulazione ), under the scientific leadership of Bruno Touschek .

[ 1 ] In 1968, Frascati began operating ADONE ( big AdA), which was the first high-energy particle collider , having a beam energy of 1.5 GeV.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] During the same period, the INFN began to participate in research into the construction and use of ever-more powerful accelerators being conducted at CERN .

The INFN has Sezioni (Divisions) in most major Italian universities and four national laboratories. It has personnel of its own, but it is mostly the main funding agency for high-energy physics in Italy. University personnel can be affiliated with INFN and receive from it research grants.

Laboratories [ edit ] Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso , situated near the Gran Sasso mountain Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro , in Legnaro Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati , in Frascati Laboratori Nazionali del Sud, in Catania Divisions [ edit ] Bari Bologna Bologna - CNAF Cagliari Catania Ferrara Firenze Firenze - GGI Genova Lecce Milano Milano - Bicocca Napoli Padova Pavia Perugia Pisa Roma Roma - II Roma - III Torino Trento - TIFPA Trieste Presidents [ edit ] 1954-1959 Gilberto Bernardini ( it ) 1960-1965 Edoardo Amaldi 1966-1970 Giorgio Salvini 1970-1975 Claudio Villi ( it ) 1976-1977 Alberto Gigli Berzolari 1977-1983 Antonino Zichichi 1983-1992 Nicola Cabibbo 1993-1998 Luciano Maiani 1998-2004 Enzo Iarocci 2004–2011 Roberto Petronzio 2011–2019 Fernando Ferroni 2019–current Antonio Zoccoli See also [ edit ] AURIGA : a gravitational wave experiment European Gravitational Observatory , a collaboration with CNRS of France FLUKA The INFN Grid Project: INFN involvement in grid computing Møller scattering Touschek effect – an effect first observed in ADA and explained by Bruno Touschek (after whom it is now named), whereby the beam lifetime of storage rings is reduced due to loss of the colliding particles from scattering.

References [ edit ] ^ ADA ^ Hoddeson, Lillian ; Brown, Laurie ; Riordan, Michael ; Dresden, Max (1997).

The Rise of the Standard Model: Particle Physics in the 1960s and 1970s . Cambridge University Press. pp.

25 –26.

ISBN 0-521-57816-7 .

^ Preger, M.; Murtas, F. (1997-03-20).

"ADONE ( 1969-1993 )" . Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati . Retrieved 2008-09-16 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Istituto_Nazionale_di_Fisica_Nucleare&oldid=1248546639 " Categories : 1951 establishments in Italy Institutes associated with CERN Physics institutes in Italy Research institutes established in 1951 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles containing Italian-language text Italy articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates without coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 September 2024, at 03:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare 9 languages Add topic

