Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Partial definition 2 Hierarchy of consistency strength 3 Motivations and epistemic status 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Large cardinal 15 languages Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français 한국어 עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses of "Cardinal", see Cardinal (disambiguation) .

Set theory concept Large cardinal hierarchy, ordered from bottom to top in terms of strength.

In the mathematical field of set theory , a large cardinal property is a certain kind of property of transfinite cardinal numbers . Cardinals with such properties are, as the name suggests, generally very "large" (for example, bigger than the least α such that α=ω α ). The proposition that such cardinals exist cannot be proved in the most common axiomatization of set theory, namely ZFC , and such propositions can be viewed as ways of measuring how "much", beyond ZFC, one needs to assume to be able to prove certain desired results. In other words, they can be seen, in Dana Scott 's phrase, as quantifying the fact "that if you want more you have to assume more".

[ 1 ] There is a rough convention that results provable from ZFC alone may be stated without hypotheses, but that if the proof requires other assumptions (such as the existence of large cardinals), these should be stated. Whether this is simply a linguistic convention, or something more, is a controversial point among distinct philosophical schools (see Motivations and epistemic status below).

A large cardinal axiom is an axiom stating that there exists a cardinal (or perhaps many of them) with some specified large cardinal property.

Most working set theorists believe that the large cardinal axioms that are currently being considered are consistent with ZFC.

[ 2 ] These axioms are strong enough to imply the consistency of ZFC. This has the consequence (via Gödel's second incompleteness theorem ) that their consistency with ZFC cannot be proven in ZFC (assuming ZFC is consistent).

There is no generally agreed precise definition of what a large cardinal property is, though essentially everyone agrees that those in the list of large cardinal properties are large cardinal properties.

Partial definition [ edit ] A necessary condition for a property of cardinal numbers to be a large cardinal property is that the existence of such a cardinal is not known to be inconsistent with ZF and that such a cardinal Κ would be an uncountable initial ordinal for which L Κ is a model of ZFC. If ZFC is consistent , then ZFC does not imply that any such large cardinals exist.

Hierarchy of consistency strength [ edit ] A remarkable observation about large cardinal axioms is that they appear to occur in strict linear order by consistency strength . That is, no exception is known to the following: Given two large cardinal axioms A 1 and A 2 , exactly one of three things happens: ZFC+ A 1 is consistent if and only if ZFC+ A 2 is consistent; ZFC+ A 1 proves that ZFC+ A 2 is consistent; or ZFC+ A 2 proves that ZFC+ A 1 is consistent.

These are mutually exclusive, unless one of the theories in question is actually inconsistent.

In case 1, we say that A 1 and A 2 are equiconsistent . In case 2, we say that A 1 is consistency-wise stronger than A 2 (vice versa for case 3). If A 2 is stronger than A 1 , then ZFC+ A 1 cannot prove ZFC+ A 2 is consistent, even with the additional hypothesis that ZFC+ A 1 is itself consistent (provided of course that it really is). This follows from Gödel's second incompleteness theorem .

The observation that large cardinal axioms are linearly ordered by consistency strength is just that, an observation, not a theorem. (Without an accepted definition of large cardinal property, it is not subject to proof in the ordinary sense.) Also, it is not known in every case which of the three cases holds.

Saharon Shelah has asked, "[i]s there some theorem explaining this, or is our vision just more uniform than we realize?" Woodin , however, deduces this from the Ω-conjecture , the main unsolved problem of his Ω-logic .  It is also noteworthy that many combinatorial statements are exactly equiconsistent with some large cardinal rather than, say, being intermediate between them.

The order of consistency strength is not necessarily the same as the order of the size of the smallest witness to a large cardinal axiom. For example, the existence of a huge cardinal is much stronger, in terms of consistency strength, than the existence of a supercompact cardinal , but assuming both exist, the first huge is smaller than the first supercompact.

Motivations and epistemic status [ edit ] Large cardinals are understood in the context of the von Neumann universe V, which is built up by transfinitely iterating the powerset operation, which collects together all subsets of a given set. Typically, models in which large cardinal axioms fail can be seen in some natural way as submodels of those in which the axioms hold. For example, if there is an inaccessible cardinal , then "cutting the universe off" at the height of the first such cardinal yields a universe in which there is no inaccessible cardinal. Or if there is a measurable cardinal , then iterating the definable powerset operation rather than the full one yields Gödel's constructible universe , L, which does not satisfy the statement "there is a measurable cardinal" (even though it contains the measurable cardinal as an ordinal).

Thus, from a certain point of view held by many set theorists (especially those inspired by the tradition of the Cabal ), large cardinal axioms "say" that we are considering all the sets we're "supposed" to be considering, whereas their negations are "restrictive" and say that we're considering only some of those sets. Moreover the consequences of large cardinal axioms seem to fall into natural patterns (see Maddy, "Believing the Axioms, II"). For these reasons, such set theorists tend to consider large cardinal axioms to have a preferred status among extensions of ZFC, one not shared by axioms of less clear motivation (such as Martin's axiom ) or others that they consider intuitively unlikely (such as V = L ). The hardcore realists in this group would state, more simply, that large cardinal axioms are true .

This point of view is by no means universal among set theorists. Some formalists would assert that standard set theory is by definition the study of the consequences of ZFC, and while they might not be opposed in principle to studying the consequences of other systems, they see no reason to single out large cardinals as preferred. There are also realists who deny that ontological maximalism is a proper motivation, and even believe that large cardinal axioms are false. And finally, there are some who deny that the negations of large cardinal axioms are restrictive, pointing out that (for example) there can be a transitive set model in L that believes there exists a measurable cardinal, even though L itself does not satisfy that proposition.

See also [ edit ] List of large cardinal properties Notes [ edit ] ^ Bell, J. L. (1985).

Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory . Oxford University Press. viii.

ISBN 0-19-853241-5 .

^ Joel, Hamkins (2022-12-24).

"Does anyone still seriously doubt the consistency of ZFC?" .

MathOverflow .

References [ edit ] Drake, F. R. (1974).

Set Theory: An Introduction to Large Cardinals (Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics; V. 76) . Elsevier Science Ltd.

ISBN 0-444-10535-2 .

Jech, Thomas (2002).

Set theory, third millennium edition (revised and expanded) . Springer.

ISBN 3-540-44085-2 .

Kanamori, Akihiro (2003).

The Higher Infinite : Large Cardinals in Set Theory from Their Beginnings (2nd ed.). Springer.

ISBN 3-540-00384-3 .

Kanamori, Akihiro; Magidor, M. (1978), "The evolution of large cardinal axioms in set theory" (PDF) , Higher Set Theory , Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 669, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, pp.

99– 275, doi : 10.1007/BFb0103104 , ISBN 978-3-540-08926-1 , retrieved September 25, 2022 Maddy, Penelope (1988). "Believing the Axioms, I".

Journal of Symbolic Logic .

53 (2): 481– 511.

doi : 10.2307/2274520 .

JSTOR 2274520 .

Maddy, Penelope (1988). "Believing the Axioms, II".

Journal of Symbolic Logic .

53 (3): 736– 764.

doi : 10.2307/2274569 .

JSTOR 2274569 .

S2CID 16544090 .

Shelah, Saharon (2002). "The Future of Set Theory".

arXiv : math/0211397 .

Solovay, Robert M.

; William N. Reinhardt ; Akihiro Kanamori (1978).

"Strong axioms of infinity and elementary embeddings" (PDF) .

Annals of Mathematical Logic .

13 (1): 73– 116.

doi : 10.1016/0003-4843(78)90031-1 .

Woodin, W. Hugh (2001). "The continuum hypothesis, part II".

Notices of the American Mathematical Society .

48 (7): 681– 690.

External links [ edit ] "Large Cardinals and Determinacy" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Large_cardinal&oldid=1305394697 " Categories : Axioms of set theory Large cardinals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Large cardinal 15 languages Add topic

