Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History 3 Phases Toggle Phases subsection 3.1 Launch 3.2 Reaching space 3.2.1 Alternatives 3.3 Leaving orbit 3.4 Astrodynamics 3.5 Transfer energy 3.6 Reaching space station 3.7 Reentry 3.8 Landing and recovery 4 Types Toggle Types subsection 4.1 Uncrewed 4.2 Human 4.3 Sub-orbital 4.4 Point-to-point 4.5 Orbital 4.6 Interplanetary 4.7 Interstellar 4.8 Intergalactic 5 Spacecraft Toggle Spacecraft subsection 5.1 Propulsion 5.2 Launch systems 5.2.1 Expendable 5.2.2 Reusable 6 Challenges Toggle Challenges subsection 6.1 Safety 6.2 Weightlessness 6.3 Radiation 6.4 Life support 6.5 Space weather 6.6 Environmental considerations 6.7 Regulation 6.8 Access 7 Applications 8 Spacefaring Toggle Spacefaring subsection 8.1 Global coordination 8.2 Crewed spacefaring nations 8.3 Uncrewed spacefaring nations 8.4 Suborbital 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Spaceflight 107 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Seeltersk Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Uncrewed spaceflight ) Flight into or through outer space For other uses, see Spaceflight (disambiguation) .

Tracy Caldwell Dyson in the International Space Station 's Cupola Part of a series on Spaceflight History History of spaceflight Space Race Timeline of spaceflight Space probes Lunar missions Mars missions Applications Communications Earth observation Exploration Espionage Military Navigation Colonization Habitation Exploration Telescopes Tourism Spacecraft Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Cargo spacecraft Crewed spacecraft Apollo Lunar Module Space capsules Space Shuttle Space stations Spaceplanes Vostok Space launch Spaceport Launch pad Expendable and reusable launch vehicles Escape velocity Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceflight types Sub-orbital Orbital Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic List of space organizations Space agencies Space forces Companies Spaceflight portal v t e Spaceflight (or space flight ) is an application of astronautics to fly objects, usually spacecraft , into or through outer space , either with or without humans on board . Most spaceflight is uncrewed and conducted mainly with spacecraft such as satellites in orbit around Earth , but also includes space probes for flights beyond Earth orbit. Such spaceflights operate either by telerobotic or autonomous control. The first spaceflights began in the 1950s with the launches of the Soviet Sputnik satellites and American Explorer and Vanguard missions.

Human spaceflight programs include the Soyuz , Shenzhou , the past Apollo Moon landing and the Space Shuttle programs . Other current spaceflight are conducted to the International Space Station and to China's Tiangong Space Station .

Spaceflights include the launches of Earth observation and telecommunications satellites, interplanetary missions , the rendezvouses and dockings with space stations , and crewed spaceflights on scientific or tourist missions.

Spaceflight can be achieved conventionally via multistage rockets , which provide the thrust to overcome the force of gravity and propel spacecraft onto suborbital trajectories . If the mission is orbital , the spacecraft usually separates the first stage and ignites the second stage , which propels the spacecraft to high enough speeds that it reaches orbit. Once in orbit, spacecraft are at high enough speeds that they fall around the Earth rather than fall back to the surface.

Most spacecraft, and all crewed spacecraft, are designed to deorbit themselves or, in the case of uncrewed spacecraft in high-energy orbits, to boost themselves into graveyard orbits . Used upper stages or failed spacecraft, however, often lack the ability to deorbit themselves. This becomes a major issue when large numbers of uncontrollable spacecraft exist in frequently used orbits, increasing the risk of debris colliding with functional satellites. This problem is exacerbated when large objects, often upper stages, break up in orbit or collide with other objects, creating often hundreds of small, hard to find pieces of debris. This problem of continuous collisions is known as Kessler syndrome .

Terminology [ edit ] There are several terms that refer to a flight into or through outer space .

A space mission refers to a spaceflight intended to achieve an objective. Objectives for space missions may include space exploration , space research , and national firsts in spaceflight.

Space transport is the use of spacecraft to transport people or cargo into or through outer space. This may include human spaceflight and cargo spacecraft flight.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of spaceflight For a chronological guide, see Timeline of spaceflight .

The first theoretical proposal of space travel using rockets was published by Scottish astronomer and mathematician William Leitch , in an 1861 essay "A Journey Through Space".

[ 1 ] More well-known is Konstantin Tsiolkovsky 's work, " Исследование мировых пространств реактивными приборами " ( The Exploration of Cosmic Space by Means of Reaction Devices ), published in 1903. In his work, Tsiolkovsky describes the fundamental rocket equation: Δ Δ v = v e ln ⁡ ⁡ m 0 m f {\displaystyle \Delta v=v_{e}\ln {\frac {m_{0}}{m_{f}}}} Where: ( Δ Δ v {\displaystyle \Delta v} ) is the change in the rocket's velocity ( v e {\displaystyle v_{e}} ) is the exhaust velocity ( m 0 {\displaystyle m_{0}} ) and ( m f {\displaystyle m_{f}} ) are the initial and final masses of the rocket This equation, known as the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation , can be used to find the total Δ Δ v {\displaystyle \Delta v} , or potential change in velocity. This formula, which is still used by engineers, is a key concept of spaceflight.

Spaceflight became a practical possibility with the work of Robert H. Goddard 's publication in 1919 of his paper A Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes . His application of the de Laval nozzle to liquid-fuel rockets improved efficiency enough for interplanetary travel to become possible. After further research, Goddard attempted to secure an Army contract for a rocket-propelled weapon in the first World War but his plans were foiled by the November 11, 1918 armistice with Germany . After choosing to work with private financial support, he was the first to launch a liquid-fueled rocket on March 16, 1926.

During World War II , the first guided rocket, the V-2 , was developed and employed as a weapon by Nazi Germany . During a test flight in June 1944, one such rocket reached space at an altitude of 189 kilometers (102 nautical miles), becoming the first human-made object to reach space.

[ 2 ] At the end of World War II, most of the V-2 rocket team, including its head, Wernher von Braun , surrendered to the United States, and were expatriated to work on American missiles at what became the Army Ballistic Missile Agency , producing missiles such as Juno I and Atlas . The Soviet Union , in turn, captured several V2 production facilities and built several replicas, with 5 of their 11 rockets successfully reaching their targets. (This was relatively consistent with Nazi Germany's success rate.) The Soviet Union developed intercontinental ballistic missiles to carry nuclear weapons as a counter measure to United States bomber planes in the 1950s. The Tsiolkovsky-influenced Sergey Korolev became the chief rocket designer, and derivatives of his R-7 Semyorka missiles were used to launch the world's first artificial Earth satellite , Sputnik 1 , on October 4, 1957.

The U.S., after the launch of Sputnik and two embarrassing failures of Vanguard rockets , launched Explorer 1 on February 1, 1958. Three years later, the USSR launched Vostok 1, carrying cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into orbit. The US responded with the suborbital launch of Alan Shepard on May 5, 1961, and the orbital launch of John Glenn on February 20, 1962. These events were followed by a pledge from U.S.

President John F. Kennedy to go to the moon and the creation of the Gemini and Apollo programs. After successfully performing a rendezvous and docking and an EVA , the Gemini program ended just before the Apollo 1 tragedy. Following multiple uncrewed test flights of the Saturn 1B and the Saturn V , the U.S. launched the crewed Apollo 7 mission into low Earth orbit . Shortly after its successful completion, the U.S. launched Apollo 8 (first mission to orbit the Moon), Apollo 9 (first Apollo mission to launch with both the CSM and the LEM ) and Apollo 10 (first mission to nearly land on the Moon). These events culminated with the first crewed Moon landing, Apollo 11 , and six subsequent missions, five of which successfully landed on the Moon.

Spaceflight has been widely employed by numerous government and commercial entities for placing satellites into orbit around Earth for a broad range of purposes. Certain government agencies have also sent uncrewed spacecraft exploring space beyond the Moon and developed continuous crewed human presence in space with a series of space stations , ranging from the Salyut program to the International Space Station .

Phases [ edit ] Launch [ edit ] Main article: Space launch Rockets are the only means currently capable of reaching orbit or beyond. Other non-rocket spacelaunch technologies have yet to be built, or remain short of orbital speeds. A rocket launch for a spaceflight usually starts from a spaceport (cosmodrome), which may be equipped with launch complexes and launch pads for vertical rocket launches and runways for takeoff and landing of carrier airplanes and winged spacecraft. Spaceports are situated well away from human habitation for noise and safety reasons.

ICBMs have various special launching facilities.

A launch is often restricted to certain launch windows . These windows depend upon the position of celestial bodies and orbits relative to the launch site. The biggest influence is often the rotation of the Earth. Once launched, orbits are normally located within relatively constant flat planes at a fixed angle to the axis of the Earth, and the Earth rotates within this orbit.

A launch pad is a fixed structure designed to dispatch airborne vehicles. It generally consists of a launch tower and flame trench. It is surrounded by equipment used to erect, fuel, and maintain launch vehicles. Before launch, the rocket can weigh hundreds of tons. The Space Shuttle Columbia , on STS-1 , weighed 2030 metric tons (4,480,000 lb) at takeoff.

Reaching space [ edit ] The most commonly used definition of outer space is everything beyond the Kármán line , which is 100 kilometers (62 mi) above the Earth's surface. (The United States defines outer space as everything beyond 50 miles (80 km) in altitude.) Rocket engines remain the only currently practical means of reaching space, with planes and high-altitude balloons failing due to lack of atmosphere and alternatives such as space elevators not yet being built. Chemical propulsion, or the acceleration of gases at high velocities, is effective mainly because of its ability to sustain thrust even as the atmosphere thins.

Alternatives [ edit ] Main article: Non-rocket spacelaunch Many ways to reach space other than rocket engines have been proposed. Ideas such as the space elevator , and momentum exchange tethers like rotovators or skyhooks require new materials much stronger than any currently known. Electromagnetic launchers such as launch loops might be feasible with current technology. Other ideas include rocket-assisted aircraft/spaceplanes such as Reaction Engines Skylon (currently in early stage development), scramjet powered spaceplanes, and RBCC powered spaceplanes. Gun launch has been proposed for cargo.

Leaving orbit [ edit ] Main articles: Escape velocity and Parking orbit On some missions beyond LEO (Low Earth Orbit) , spacecraft are inserted into parking orbits, or lower intermediary orbits. The parking orbit approach greatly simplified Apollo mission planning in several important ways. It acted as a "time buffer" and substantially widened the allowable launch windows . The parking orbit gave the crew and controllers time to thoroughly check out the spacecraft after the stresses of launch before committing it for a long journey to the Moon.

[ 3 ] Launched in 1959, Luna 1 was the first known artificial object to achieve escape velocity from the Earth (replica pictured) .

[ 4 ] Robotic missions do not require an abort capability and require radiation minimalization only for delicate electronics, and because modern launchers routinely meet "instantaneous" launch windows, space probes to the Moon and other planets generally use direct injection to maximize performance by limiting the boil off of cryogenic propellants . Although some might coast briefly during the launch sequence, they do not complete one or more full parking orbits before the burn that injects them onto an Earth escape trajectory.

The escape velocity from a celestial body decreases as the distance from the body increases. However, it is more fuel-efficient for a craft to burn its fuel as close as possible to its periapsis (lowest point); see Oberth effect .

[ 5 ] Astrodynamics [ edit ] Main article: Orbital mechanics Astrodynamics is the study of spacecraft trajectories, particularly as they relate to gravitational and propulsion effects. Astrodynamics allows for a spacecraft to arrive at its destination at the correct time without excessive propellant use. An orbital maneuvering system may be needed to maintain or change orbits.

Non-rocket orbital propulsion methods include solar sails , magnetic sails , plasma-bubble magnetic systems , and using gravitational slingshot effects.

Ionized gas trail from Shuttle reentry Recovery of Discoverer 14 return capsule by a C-119 airplane Transfer energy [ edit ] The term "transfer energy" means the total amount of energy imparted by a rocket stage to its payload. This can be the energy imparted by a first stage of a launch vehicle to an upper stage plus payload, or by an upper stage or spacecraft kick motor to a spacecraft .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Reaching space station [ edit ] Main articles: Space rendezvous and Docking and berthing of spacecraft In order to reach a space station , a spacecraft would have to arrive at the same orbit and approach to a very close distance (e.g. within visual contact). This is done by a set of orbital maneuvers called space rendezvous .

After rendezvousing with the space station, the space vehicle then docks or berths with the station. Docking refers to joining of two separate free-flying space vehicles, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] while berthing refers to mating operations where an inactive vehicle is placed into the mating interface of another space vehicle by using a robotic arm .

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Reentry [ edit ] Main article: Atmospheric reentry Vehicles in orbit have large amounts of kinetic energy. This energy must be discarded if the vehicle is to land safely without vaporizing in the atmosphere. Typically this process requires special methods to protect against aerodynamic heating . The theory behind reentry was developed by Harry Julian Allen . Based on this theory, reentry vehicles present blunt shapes to the atmosphere for reentry. Blunt shapes mean that less than 1% of the kinetic energy ends up as heat reaching the vehicle, and the remainder heats the atmosphere.

Landing and recovery [ edit ] The Mercury , Gemini , and Apollo capsules splashed down in the sea. These capsules were designed to land at relatively low speeds with the help of a parachute. Soviet/Russian capsules for Soyuz make use of a big parachute and braking rockets to touch down on land.

Spaceplanes like the Space Shuttle land like a glider .

After a successful landing, the spacecraft, its occupants, and cargo can be recovered. In some cases, recovery has occurred before landing: while a spacecraft is still descending on its parachute, it can be snagged by a specially designed aircraft. This mid-air retrieval technique was used to recover the film canisters from the Corona spy satellites.

Types [ edit ] Uncrewed [ edit ] Sojourner takes its Alpha particle X-ray spectrometer measurement of Yogi Rock on Mars.

The MESSENGER spacecraft at Mercury (artist's interpretation) Main article: Uncrewed spacecraft These paragraphs are an excerpt from Uncrewed spacecraft .

[ edit ] Uncrewed spacecraft or robotic spacecraft are spacecraft without people on board. Uncrewed spacecraft may have varying levels of autonomy from human input, such as remote control , or remote guidance. They may also be autonomous , in which they have a pre-programmed list of operations that will be executed unless otherwise instructed. A robotic spacecraft for scientific measurements is often called a space probe or space observatory .

Many space missions are more suited to telerobotic rather than crewed operation, due to lower cost and risk factors. In addition, some planetary destinations such as Venus or the vicinity of Jupiter are too hostile for human survival, given current technology. Outer planets such as Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune are too distant to reach with current crewed spaceflight technology, so telerobotic probes are the only way to explore them. Telerobotics also allows exploration of regions that are vulnerable to contamination by Earth micro-organisms since spacecraft can be sterilized. Humans can not be sterilized in the same way as a spaceship, as they coexist with numerous micro-organisms, and these micro-organisms are also hard to contain within a spaceship or spacesuit.

The first uncrewed space mission was Sputnik , launched October 4, 1957 to orbit the Earth. Nearly all satellites , landers and rovers are robotic spacecraft. Not every uncrewed spacecraft is a robotic spacecraft; for example, a reflector ball is a non-robotic uncrewed spacecraft. Space missions where other animals but no humans are on-board are called uncrewed missions.

Many habitable spacecraft also have varying levels of robotic features. For example, the space stations Salyut 7 and Mir , and the International Space Station module Zarya , were capable of remote guided station-keeping and docking maneuvers with both resupply craft and new modules.

Uncrewed resupply spacecraft are increasingly used for crewed space stations .

Human [ edit ] Main article: Human spaceflight ISS crew member stores samples.

The first human spaceflight was Vostok 1 on April 12, 1961, on which cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin of the USSR made one orbit around the Earth. In official Soviet documents, there is no mention of the fact that Gagarin parachuted the final seven miles.

[ 12 ] As of 2020, the only spacecraft regularly used for human spaceflight are Soyuz , Shenzhou , and Crew Dragon . The U.S.

Space Shuttle fleet operated from April 1981 until July 2011.

SpaceShipOne has conducted three human suborbital space flights.

Sub-orbital [ edit ] Main article: Sub-orbital spaceflight The North American X-15 in flight. X-15 flew above 100 km (62 mi) twice and both of the flights were piloted by Joe Walker (astronaut) .

On a sub-orbital spaceflight the spacecraft reaches space and then returns to the atmosphere after following a (primarily) ballistic trajectory. This is usually because of insufficient specific orbital energy , in which case a suborbital flight will last only a few minutes, but it is also possible for an object with enough energy for an orbit to have a trajectory that intersects the Earth's atmosphere, sometimes after many hours.

Pioneer 1 was NASA's first space probe intended to reach the Moon. A partial failure caused it to instead follow a suborbital trajectory to an altitude of 113,854 kilometers (70,746 mi) before reentering the Earth's atmosphere 43 hours after launch.

The most generally recognized boundary of space is the Kármán line 100 km (62 mi) above sea level. (NASA alternatively defines an astronaut as someone who has flown more than 80 km (50 mi) above sea level.) It is not generally recognized by the public that the increase in potential energy required to pass the Kármán line is only about 3% of the orbital energy (potential plus kinetic energy) required by the lowest possible Earth orbit (a circular orbit just above the Kármán line.) In other words, it is far easier to reach space than to stay there. On May 17, 2004, Civilian Space eXploration Team launched the GoFast rocket on a suborbital flight, the first amateur spaceflight. On June 21, 2004, SpaceShipOne was used for the first privately funded human spaceflight .

Point-to-point [ edit ] Point-to-point, or Earth to Earth transportation, is a category of sub-orbital spaceflight in which a spacecraft provides rapid transport between two terrestrial locations.

[ 13 ] A conventional airline route between London and Sydney , a flight that normally lasts over twenty hours , could be traversed in less than one hour.

[ 14 ] While no company offers this type of transportation today, SpaceX has revealed plans to do so as early as the 2020s using Starship . Suborbital spaceflight over an intercontinental distance requires a vehicle velocity that is only a little lower than the velocity required to reach low Earth orbit.

[ 15 ] If rockets are used, the size of the rocket relative to the payload is similar to an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM). Any intercontinental spaceflight has to surmount problems of heating during atmospheric re-entry that are nearly as large as those faced by orbital spaceflight.

Orbital [ edit ] Main article: Orbital spaceflight Apollo 6 heads into orbit.

A minimal orbital spaceflight requires much higher velocities than a minimal sub-orbital flight, and so it is technologically much more challenging to achieve. To achieve orbital spaceflight, the tangential velocity around the Earth is as important as altitude. In order to perform a stable and lasting flight in space, the spacecraft must reach the minimal orbital speed required for a closed orbit .

Interplanetary [ edit ] Main articles: Interplanetary spaceflight and Interplanetary mission Interplanetary spaceflight is flight between planets within a single planetary system . In practice, the use of the term is confined to travel between the planets of the Solar System . Plans for future crewed interplanetary spaceflight missions often include final vehicle assembly in Earth orbit, such as NASA's Constellation program and Russia's Kliper / Parom tandem.

Interstellar [ edit ] Main article: Interstellar travel New Horizons is the fifth spacecraft put on an escape trajectory leaving the Solar System .

Voyager 1 , Voyager 2 , Pioneer 10 , Pioneer 11 are the earlier ones. The one farthest from the Sun is Voyager 1 , which is more than 100 AU distant and is moving at 3.6 AU per year.

[ 16 ] In comparison, Proxima Centauri , the closest star other than the Sun, is 267,000 AU distant. It will take Voyager 1 over 74,000 years to reach this distance. Vehicle designs using other techniques, such as nuclear pulse propulsion are likely to be able to reach the nearest star significantly faster. Another possibility that could allow for human interstellar spaceflight is to make use of time dilation , as this would make it possible for passengers in a fast-moving vehicle to travel further into the future while aging very little, in that their great speed slows down the rate of passage of on-board time. However, attaining such high speeds would still require the use of some new, advanced method of propulsion .

Dynamic soaring as a way to travel across interstellar space has been proposed as well.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Intergalactic [ edit ] Main article: Intergalactic travel Intergalactic travel involves spaceflight between galaxies, and is considered much more technologically demanding than even interstellar travel and, by current engineering terms, is considered science fiction . However, theoretically speaking, there is nothing to conclusively indicate that intergalactic travel is impossible. To date several academics have studied intergalactic travel in a serious manner.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Spacecraft [ edit ] Main article: Spacecraft An Apollo Lunar Module on the lunar surface Spacecraft are vehicles designed to operate in space.

The first 'true spacecraft' is sometimes said to be Apollo Lunar Module , [ 22 ] since this was the only crewed vehicle to have been designed for, and operated only in space; and is notable for its non-aerodynamic shape.

Propulsion [ edit ] Main article: Spacecraft propulsion Spacecraft today predominantly use rockets for propulsion , but other propulsion techniques such as ion drives are becoming more common, particularly for uncrewed vehicles, and this can significantly reduce the vehicle's mass and increase its delta-v .

Launch systems [ edit ] Main article: Launch vehicle Launch systems are used to carry a payload from Earth's surface into outer space.

Expendable [ edit ] Main article: Expendable launch system Most current spaceflight uses multi-stage expendable launch systems to reach space.

Reusable [ edit ] Main article: Reusable launch system The first reusable spacecraft, the X-15 , was air-launched on a suborbital trajectory on 19 July 1963. The first partially reusable orbital spacecraft, the Space Shuttle , was launched by the USA on the 20th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin 's flight, on 12 April 1981. During the Shuttle era, six orbiters were built, all of which flown in the atmosphere and five of which flown in space. The Enterprise was used only for approach and landing tests, launching from the back of a Boeing 747 and gliding to deadstick landings at Edwards AFB, California . The first Space Shuttle to fly into space was the Columbia , followed by the Challenger , Discovery , Atlantis , and Endeavour . The Endeavour was built to replace the Challenger , which was lost in January 1986. The Columbia broke up during reentry in February 2003.

The first automatic partially reusable spacecraft was the Buran ( Snowstorm ), launched by the USSR on 15 November 1988, although it made only one flight. This spaceplane was designed for a crew and strongly resembled the US Space Shuttle, although its drop-off boosters used liquid propellants and its main engines were located at the base of what would be the external tank in the American Shuttle. Lack of funding, complicated by the dissolution of the USSR, prevented any further flights of Buran.

The Space Shuttle was retired in 2011 due mainly to its old age. The Shuttle's human transport role is to be replaced by the SpaceX Dragon 2 and CST-100 in the 2020s. The Shuttle's heavy cargo transport role is now done by commercial launch vehicles.

Scaled Composites SpaceShipOne was a reusable suborbital spaceplane that carried pilots Mike Melvill and Brian Binnie on consecutive flights in 2004 to win the Ansari X Prize .

The Spaceship Company has built its successor SpaceShipTwo . A fleet of SpaceShipTwos operated by Virgin Galactic planned to begin reusable private spaceflight carrying paying passengers ( space tourists ) in 2008, but this was delayed due to an accident in the propulsion development.

[ 23 ] SpaceX achieved the first vertical soft landing of a reusable orbital rocket stage on December 21, 2015, after delivering 11 Orbcomm OG-2 commercial satellites into low Earth orbit .

[ 24 ] The first Falcon 9 reflight occurred on 30 March 2017.

[ 25 ] SpaceX now routinely recovers and reuses their first stages and fairings .

[ 26 ] SpaceX is now developing a fully reusable super heavy lift rocket known as Starship , with the goal of drastically reducing the price of space exploration.

[ 27 ] As of April 2025, three Super Heavy boosters, the first stage of Starship, have been recovered.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] The X-15 pulling away from its drop launch plane The Space Shuttle Columbia seconds after engine ignition on mission STS-1 SpaceShipOne after its flight into space, 21 June 2004 Falcon 9 Flight 20 's first stage landing vertically on Landing Zone 1 in December 2015 Challenges [ edit ] Main articles: Human spaceflight and Effect of spaceflight on the human body Safety [ edit ] Main article: List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents All launch vehicles contain a huge amount of energy that is needed for some part of it to reach orbit. There is therefore some risk that this energy can be released prematurely and suddenly, with significant effects. When a Delta II rocket exploded 13 seconds after launch on January 17, 1997, there were reports of store windows 10 miles (16 km) away being broken by the blast.

[ 31 ] Space is a fairly predictable environment, but there are still risks of accidental depressurization and the potential failure of equipment, some of which may be very newly developed.

In April 2004 the International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety was established in the Netherlands to further international cooperation and scientific advancement in space systems safety.

[ 32 ] Weightlessness [ edit ] Main article: Weightlessness Astronauts on the ISS in weightless conditions.

Michael Foale can be seen exercising in the foreground.

In a microgravity environment such as that provided by a spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, humans experience a sense of "weightlessness." Short-term exposure to microgravity causes space adaptation syndrome , a self-limiting nausea caused by derangement of the vestibular system . Long-term exposure causes multiple health issues. The most significant is bone loss, some of which is permanent, but microgravity also leads to significant deconditioning of muscular and cardiovascular tissues.

Radiation [ edit ] Once above the atmosphere, radiation due to the Van Allen belts , solar radiation and cosmic radiation issues occur and increase. Further away from the Earth, solar flares can give a fatal radiation dose in minutes, and the health threat from cosmic radiation significantly increases the chances of cancer over a decade exposure or more.

[ 33 ] Life support [ edit ] Main article: Life support system In human spaceflight, the life support system is a group of devices that allow a human being to survive in outer space.

NASA often uses the phrase Environmental Control and Life Support System or the acronym ECLSS when describing these systems for its human spaceflight missions.

[ 34 ] The life support system may supply: air , water and food . It must also maintain the correct body temperature, an acceptable pressure on the body and deal with the body's waste products. Shielding against harmful external influences such as radiation and micro-meteorites may also be necessary. Components of the life support system are life-critical , and are designed and constructed using safety engineering techniques.

Space weather [ edit ] Main article: Space weather Aurora australis and Discovery , May 1991 Space weather is the concept of changing environmental conditions in outer space . It is distinct from the concept of weather within a planetary atmosphere , and deals with phenomena involving ambient plasma , magnetic fields, radiation and other matter in space (generally close to Earth but also in interplanetary , and occasionally interstellar medium ). "Space weather describes the conditions in space that affect Earth and its technological systems. Our space weather is a consequence of the behavior of the Sun, the nature of Earth's magnetic field, and our location in the Solar System." [ 35 ] Space weather exerts a profound influence in several areas related to space exploration and development. Changing geomagnetic conditions can induce changes in atmospheric density causing the rapid degradation of spacecraft altitude in Low Earth orbit . Geomagnetic storms due to increased solar activity can potentially blind sensors onboard spacecraft, or interfere with on-board electronics. An understanding of space environmental conditions is also important in designing shielding and life support systems for crewed spacecraft.

Environmental considerations [ edit ] Main articles: Space sustainability , Space debris , Graveyard orbit , and Spacecraft cemetery Exhaust pollution of rockets depends on the produced exhausts by the propellants reactions and the location of exhaustion. They mostly exhaust greenhouse gases and sometimes toxic components. Particularly at higher levels of the atmosphere the potency of exhausted gases as greenhouse gases increases considerably.

[ 36 ] Many solid rockets have chlorine in the form of perchlorate or other chemicals, and this can cause temporary local holes in the ozone layer. Re-entering spacecraft generate nitrates which also can temporarily impact the ozone layer. Most rockets are made of metals that can have an environmental impact during their construction.
While spaceflight altogether pollutes at a fraction of other human activities, it still does pollute heavily if calculated per passenger.

[ 36 ] In addition to the atmospheric effects there are effects on the near-Earth space environment. There is the possibility that orbit could become inaccessible for generations due to exponentially increasing space debris caused by spalling of satellites and vehicles ( Kessler syndrome ). Many launched vehicles today are therefore designed to be re-entered after use.

Regulation [ edit ] Main article: Space law A wide range of issues such as space traffic management or liability have been issues of spaceflight regulation.

Participation and representation of all humanity in spaceflight is an issue of international space law ever since the first phase of space exploration.

[ 37 ] Even though some rights of non-spacefaring countries have been secured, sharing of space for all humanity is still criticized as imperialist and lacking, understanding spaceflight as a resource.

[ 37 ] Access [ edit ] Inclusion has been a national and international issue, resulting in 1967 in the Outer Space Treaty and its claim of outer space as the " province of all mankind ". Furthermore social inclusion in human spaceflight has been demanded, with women to fly to space being limited, and minorities, like people with disability, only having been selected in European Space Agency 's 2022 astronaut group .

The dominating issue about access in most recent years has been the issue of space debris and space sustainability , since established spacefaring countries endanger access to outer space with their orbital space polluting activity.

[ 38 ] Applications [ edit ] Further information: Human presence in space This shows an extreme ultraviolet view of the Sun (the Apollo Telescope Mount SO82A Experiment) taken during Skylab 3 , with the Earth added for scale. On the right an image of the Sun shows a helium emissions, and there is an image on the left showing emissions from iron. One application for spaceflight is to take observation hindered or made more difficult by being on Earth's surface. Skylab included a massive crewed solar observatory that revolutionized solar science in the early 1970s using the Apollo-based space station in conjunction with crewed spaceflights to it.

Current and proposed applications for spaceflight include: Earth observation satellites such as spy satellites , weather satellites Space exploration Communication satellites Satellite television Satellite navigation Space telescopes Space tourism Protecting Earth from potentially hazardous objects Space colonization Most early spaceflight development was paid for by governments. However, today major launch markets such as communication satellites and satellite television are purely commercial, though many of the launchers were originally funded by governments.

Private spaceflight is a rapidly developing area: space flight that is not only paid for by corporations or even private individuals, but often provided by private spaceflight companies . These companies often assert that much of the previous high cost of access to space was caused by governmental inefficiencies they can avoid. This assertion can be supported by much lower published launch costs for private space launch vehicles such as Falcon 9 developed with private financing. Lower launch costs and excellent safety will be required for the applications such as space tourism and especially space colonization to become feasible for expansion.

Spacefaring [ edit ] Further information: Wiktionary:spacefaring Map showing countries with spaceflight capability Countries with independently developed human spaceflight programs Countries that have operated at least one human spaceflight program, if not independently Countries seeking to develop a human spaceflight program but also have developed or currently own a launch vehicle Countries who operate a launch vehicle and a satellite but currently have no plans to develop a crewed space vehicle Countries seeking to develop a launch vehicle Countries who operate an orbiting satellite but do not own a launch vehicle or have plans to produce one Countries who have a launch vehicle but do not currently operate a satellite To be spacefaring is to be capable of and active in the operation of spacecraft . It involves a knowledge of a variety of topics and development of specialised skills including: aeronautics ; astronautics ; programs to train astronauts ; space weather and forecasting; spacecraft operations; operation of various equipment; spacecraft design and construction; atmospheric takeoff and reentry; orbital mechanics (a.k.a. astrodynamics); communications; engines and rockets; execution of evolutions such as towing, microgravity construction, and space docking ; cargo handling equipment, dangerous cargos and cargo storage; spacewalking ; dealing with emergencies; survival at space and first aid; fire fighting; life support . The degree of knowledge needed within these areas is dependent upon the nature of the work and the type of vessel employed. "Spacefaring" is analogous to seafaring .

There has never been a crewed mission outside the Earth – Moon system. However, the United States, Russia, China, European Space Agency (ESA) countries, and a few corporations and enterprises have plans in various stages to travel to Mars (see Human mission to Mars ).

Spacefaring entities can be sovereign states , supranational entities, and private corporations . Spacefaring nations are those capable of independently building and launching craft into space.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] A growing number of private entities have become or are becoming spacefaring.

Global coordination [ edit ] The United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) has been the main multilateral body servicing international contact and exchange on space activity among spacefaring and non-spacefaring states.

Crewed spacefaring nations [ edit ] Further information: Human spaceflight Currently Russia , the United States and China are the only crewed spacefaring nations .
Spacefaring nations listed by date of first crewed launch: Soviet Union ( Russia ) (1961) United States (1961) China (2003) Uncrewed spacefaring nations [ edit ] Further information: Timeline of first orbital launches by country The following nations or organizations have developed their own launch vehicles to launch uncrewed spacecraft into orbit either from their own territory or with foreign assistance (date of first launch in parentheses): [ 42 ] Soviet Union (1957) United States (1958) France (1965) Italy (1967)★ Australia (1967)★ Japan (1970) China (1970) United Kingdom (1971) European Space Agency (1979) India (1980) Israel (1988) Ukraine (1991)* [ 43 ] Russia (1992)* Iran (2009) [ 44 ] North Korea (2012) [ 45 ] South Korea (2013)★ [ 46 ] New Zealand (2018)★ *Previously part of the Soviet Union ★Launch vehicle fully or partially developed by another country Also several countries, such as Canada, Italy, and Australia, had semi-independent spacefaring capability, launching locally built satellites on foreign launchers. Canada had designed and built satellites ( Alouette 1 and 2 ) in 1962 and 1965 which were orbited using U.S. launch vehicles. Italy has designed and built several satellites, as well as pressurized modules for the International Space Station . Early Italian satellites were launched using vehicles provided by NASA, first from Wallops Flight Facility in 1964 and then from a spaceport in Kenya ( San Marco Platform ) between 1967 and 1988; [ citation needed ] Italy has led the development of the Vega rocket programme within the European Space Agency since 1998.

[ 47 ] The United Kingdom abandoned its independent space launch program in 1972 in favour of co-operating with the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO) on launch technologies until 1974. Australia abandoned its launcher program shortly after the successful launch of WRESAT , and became the only non-European member of ELDO.

Suborbital [ edit ] Considering merely launching an object beyond the Kármán line to be the minimum requirement of spacefaring, Germany , with the V-2 rocket , became the first spacefaring nation in 1944.

[ 48 ] The following nations have only achieved suborbital spaceflight capability by launching indigenous rockets or missiles or both into suborbital space: Nazi Germany (June 20, 1944) East Germany (April 12, 1957) Canada (September 5, 1959) Lebanon (November 21, 1962) Switzerland (October 27, 1967) Argentina (April 16, 1969) Brazil (September 21, 1976) Spain (February 18, 1981) West Germany (March 1, 1981) Iraq (June 1984) South Africa (June 1, 1989) Sweden (May 8, 1991) Yemen (May 12, 1994) Pakistan (April 6, 1998) Taiwan (December 15, 1998) Syria (September 1, 2000) Indonesia (September 29, 2004) Democratic Republic of the Congo (2007) New Zealand (November 30, 2009) Norway (September 27, 2018) Netherlands (September 19, 2020) [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Turkey (October 29, 2020) See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal Technology portal Aerial landscape art – Visual art depicting the appearance of a landscape as viewed from an aircraft or spacecraft List of crewed spacecraft List of Solar System probes List of spaceflight records – Extreme benchmarks set off Earth by astronauts, launchers and probes List of uncrewed spacecraft by program – Overview of and topical guide to space exploration Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Orbiter (simulator) – 2000 video game or Solar System Simulator Animals in space Plants in space – Growth of plants in outer space Private spaceflight – Spaceflight not by a government Space and survival – Idea that spacefaring is necessary for long-term human survival Space advocacy – Advocacy for exploration and/or colonization of space Space colonization – Concept of permanent human habitation outside of Earth Human outpost – Human habitats located in environments inhospitable for humans Space logistics – Logistics for space travel Space travel in science fiction Spacecraft propulsion – Method used to accelerate spacecraft Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes Timeline of Solar System exploration Soviet space exploration history on Soviet stamps – Space exploration on Soviet stamps U.S. space exploration history on U.S. stamps – Overview of ventures beyond Earth as depicted for ease of American postage Kardashev scale – Measure of a civilization's evolution References [ edit ] ^ Leitch, William (1867).

God's Glory in the Heavens . A. Strahan.

^ Rogers, Lucy (2008).

It's ONLY Rocket Science: An Introduction in Plain English . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-387-75377-5 .

^ "Apollo lunar landing launch window: The controlling factors and constraints" . NASA.

^ "NASA – NSSDC – Spacecraft – Details" . Nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov . Retrieved November 5, 2013 .

^ Escape Velocity of Earth Archived 2007-07-13 at the Wayback Machine . Van.physics.uiuc.edu. Retrieved on 2011-10-05.

^ Erickson, Lance K. (2010).

Space Flight: History, Technology, and Operations . Government Institutes. p. 187.

^ "Musk pre-launch backgrounder on Falcon 9 Flight 20" (Press release). SpaceX. 22 December 2015. Archived from the original on 8 March 2017 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 .

^ a b Cook, John; Aksamentov, Valery; Hoffman, Thomas; Bruner, Wes (1 January 2011), ISS Interface Mechanisms and their Heritage (PDF) , Houston, Texas: Boeing , retrieved 31 March 2015 – via NASA, Docking is when one incoming spacecraft rendezvous with another spacecraft and flies a controlled collision trajectory in such a manner so as to align and mesh the interface mechanisms. The spacecraft docking mechanisms typically enter what is called soft capture, followed by a load attenuation phase, and then the hard docked position which establishes an air-tight structural connection between spacecraft. Berthing, by contrast, is when an incoming spacecraft is grappled by a robotic arm and its interface mechanism is placed close to the stationary interface mechanism. Then typically there is a capture process, coarse alignment and fine alignment, and then structural attachment.

^ "International Docking Standardization" (PDF) . NASA. 2009-03-17. p. 15 . Retrieved 2011-03-04 .

Docking: The joining or coming together of two separate free flying space vehicles ^ a b Fehse, Wigbert (2003).

Automated Rendezvous and Docking of Spacecraft . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521824927 .

^ a b "Advanced Docking/Berthing System – NASA Seal Workshop" (PDF) . NASA. 2004-11-04. p. 15. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 22, 2011 . Retrieved 2011-03-04 .

Berthing refers to mating operations where an inactive module/vehicle is placed into the mating interface using a Remote Manipulator System-RMS. Docking refers to mating operations where an active vehicle flies into the mating interface under its own power.

^ Vostok 1 . Astronautix.com. Retrieved on 2011-10-05.

^ Burghardt, Thomas (December 26, 2020).

"Preparing for "Earth to Earth" space travel and a competition with supersonic airliners" .

NASA Spaceflight . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

The most prevalent concept for suborbital Earth to Earth transportation comes from none other than Elon Musk and SpaceX. Primarily designed for transporting large payloads to Mars for the purpose of colonization, the next generation Starship launch system offers a bonus capability for transporting large amounts of cargo around Earth.

^ "Becoming a Multiplanetary Species" (PDF) . 68th annual meeting of the International Astronautical Congress in Adelaide, Australia. SpaceX. 29 September 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2018 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ Hoerr, David (May 5, 2008).

"Point-to-point suborbital transportation: sounds good on paper, but…" .

The Space Review . Retrieved November 5, 2013 .

^ "Spacecraft escaping the Solar System" . Heavens-Above GmbH. Archived from the original on April 27, 2007.

^ Mcrae, Mike (6 December 2022).

" 'Dynamic Soaring' Trick Could Speed Spacecraft Across Interstellar Space" .

ScienceAlert . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ Larrouturou, Mathias N.; Higgns, Andrew J.; Greason, Jeffrey K. (28 November 2022).

"Dynamic soaring as a means to exceed the solar wind speed" .

Frontiers in Space Technologies .

3 .

arXiv : 2211.14643 .

Bibcode : 2022FrST....317442L .

doi : 10.3389/frspt.2022.1017442 .

^ Burruss, Robert Page; Colwell, J. (September–October 1987). "Intergalactic Travel: The Long Voyage From Home".

The Futurist .

21 (5): 29– 33.

^ Fogg, Martyn (November 1988).

"The Feasibility of Intergalactic Colonisation and its Relevance to SETI" .

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

41 (11): 491– 496.

Bibcode : 1988JBIS...41..491F .

^ Armstrong, Stuart; Sandberg, Anders (2013).

"Eternity in six hours: intergalactic spreading of intelligent life and sharpening the Fermi paradox" (PDF) .

Acta Astronautica .

89 . Future of Humanity Institute, Philosophy Department, Oxford University: 1.

Bibcode : 2013AcAau..89....1A .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.04.002 .

^ Apollo Expeditions to the Moon: Chapter 10 . History.nasa.gov (1969-03-03). Retrieved on 2011-10-05.

^ Launch aircraft development continues while suborbital ship awaits investigation into fatal explosion in California , retrieved 2012-01-27.

^ "SpaceX on Twitter" .

Twitter .

^ "SpaceX successfuly [ sic ] launches first recycled rocket – video" .

The Guardian . Reuters. 31 March 2017.

^ "SpaceX Recovered Falcon Heavy Nose Cone, Plans to Re-fly it This Year (Photos)" .

Space.com . 12 April 2019.

^ Wattles, Jackie (29 September 2019).

"Elon Musk says SpaceX's Mars rocket will be cheaper than he once thought. Here's why" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ SpaceX Rolls Booster 12 to the Production Site After Catch | Starbase . NASASpaceflight. 2024-10-15 . Retrieved 2024-10-15 – via YouTube.

^ NASASpaceflight (2025-01-09).

SpaceX Launches Starship Flight 7 and Attempts Another Booster Catch . Retrieved 2025-01-17 – via YouTube.

^ NASASpaceflight (2025-03-06).

SpaceX Starship Flight 8 - Second Attempt . Retrieved 2025-04-22 – via YouTube.

^ "Unmanned rocket explodes after liftoff" . CNN.

^ "The second IAASS: Introduction" .

Congrex . European Space Agency. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 3 January 2009 .

^ Super Spaceships Archived 2019-07-13 at the Wayback Machine , NASA , 16 September 2002, Retrieved 25 October 2011.

^ "Breathing Easy on the Space Station" . NASA. Archived from the original on 2008-09-21.

^ Space Weather: A Research Perspective Archived 2009-03-26 at the Wayback Machine , National Academy of Sciences , 1997 ^ a b Gammon, Katharine (2021-07-19).

"How the billionaire space race could be one giant leap for pollution" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 2022-05-05 .

^ a b Haris Durrani (19 July 2019).

"Is Spaceflight Colonialism?" .

The Nation . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

^ Yap, Xiao-Shan; Heiberg, Jonas; Truffer, Bernhard (2023). "The emerging global socio-technical regime for tackling space debris: A discourse network analysis".

Acta Astronautica .

207 : 445– 454.

Bibcode : 2023AcAau.207..445Y .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2023.01.016 .

^ "spacefaring – Definitions from Dictionary.com" .

^ "Homework Help and Textbook Solutions | bartleby" .

www.bartleby.com . Archived from the original on March 26, 2005.

^ "space-faring nation" .

TheFreeDictionary.com .

^ "Space Today Online – Iran space satellite launch" .

www.spacetoday.org .

^ "Launches of Ukrainian LV" .

State Space Agency of Ukraine . Retrieved 20 April 2014 .

^ "Iran Launches Small Earth-Watching Satellite Into Orbit: Report" .

space.com . 2012-02-03 . Retrieved 2014-01-01 .

^ "North Korea defies warnings to launch rocket" . BBC. 12 December 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

^ "S. Korea successfully launches space rocket" .

xinhuanet.com . 2013-01-30. Archived from the original on 2013-02-04 . Retrieved 2013-02-10 .

^ "Vega Programme" .

www.esa.int . ESA. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016 . Retrieved February 10, 2013 .

^ Peenemünde, Walter Dornberger, Moewig, Berlin 1984.

ISBN 3-8118-4341-9 .

^ "T-Minus Engineering – T-Minus DART" .

www.t-minus.nl . Archived from the original on 2020-10-01 . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "Couriermail.com.au | Subscribe to The Courier Mail for exclusive stories" .

www.couriermail.com.au . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "Australia re-enters the space race" .

Cosmos Magazine . 2020-09-14 . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "Australian Space Agency" .

Twitter . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "Southern Launch" .

forum.nasaspaceflight.com . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "Upcoming Launches" .

Southern Launch . Archived from the original on 2020-11-23 . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "Successful fire" .

Twitter . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

Further reading [ edit ] Erik Gregerson (2010): An Explorer's Guide to the Universe – Unmanned Space Missions , Britannica Educational Publishing, ISBN 978-1-61530-052-5 (eBook) Neufeld, Michael J. (2018).

Spaceflight: A Concise History . Cambridge: The MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262536332 .

Sarah Scoles, "Why We'll Never Live in Space: The technological, biological, psychological and ethical challenges to leaving Earth", vol. 329, no. 3 (October 2023), pp. 22–29. "Perhaps the most significant concern is radiation , something that is manageable for today's astronauts flying in low-Earth orbit but would be a bigger deal for people traveling farther and for longer." (p. 25.) "On the edge of terrestrial frontiers, people were seeking, say, gold or more farmable land. In space, explorers can't be sure of the value proposition at their destination." (p. 27.) "Harmful extraterrestrial microbes could return with astronauts or equipment – a planetary-protection risk called backward contamination ." (p. 28.) Rebecca Boyle , "A Space Settler Walks into a Dome...: A very funny book about why living on Mars is a terrible idea" (review of Kelly Weinersmith and Zach Weinersmith , A City on Mars: Can We Settle Space, Should We Settle Space, and Have We Really Thought This Through?

, Penguin Press, 2023), Scientific American , vol. 329, no. 4 (November 2023), p. 93.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spaceflight .

Look up spaceflight in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Library resources about Spaceflight Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Aerospace engineering at Wikiversity Encyclopedia Astronautica Basics of Spaceflight Hankins, Tedd E.; Shuch, H. Paul (1987-03-04).

"Reflections – manned vs. unmanned spaceflight" (PDF) . Retrieved 2011-04-15 .

v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal v t e Spaceflight lists and timelines Timeline of spaceflight General Space exploration outline timeline Spacecraft Spaceflight records Space Race Rocket and missile technology Human spaceflight General Crewed spacecraft timeline by program Spaceflights 1961–1970 1971–1980 1981–1990 1991–2000 2001–2010 2011–2020 2021–present Soviet Russian Vostok and Voskhod Soyuz Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Shenzhou Gaganyaan Spacelab Artemis Civilian spaceflight Orbital Suborbital Salyut Expeditions Spaceflights crewed uncrewed Spacewalks Visitors Mir Expeditions ESA Spaceflights crewed uncrewed Spacewalks Visitors ISS Expeditions ESA Visiting Spaceflights crewed uncrewed Spacewalks Visitors Deployed Tiangong Expeditions Crewed Spaceflights Spacewalks Shuttle Crews Missions Rollbacks People Astronauts by name by year of selection Apollo Gemini Mercury Chinese Asian European Cosmonauts women Muslim Arab African American Ibero-America Space scientists Space travelers by name by first flight by nationality billionaires timeline by nationality Spaceflight-related human fatalities EVA 1965–1999 2000–2014 2015–2024 2025–present Cumulative spacewalk records Longest spacewalks Spacewalkers Solar System exploration Timeline Interplanetary voyages Landings on other planets rovers artificial objects Objects at Lagrange points Probes active future orbiters leaving the Solar System lunar probes Missions to the Moon Timeline of satellites Sample-return mission Mars Earth-orbiting satellites Communications satellite firsts CubeSats PocketQube Earth observation satellites Timeline of first Earth observation satellites Geosynchronous orbit GOES GPS Kosmos Magnetospheric NRO TDRS USA Vehicles Orbital launch systems Comparison Sounding rocket list Spacecraft uncrewed crewed heaviest Upper stages Sounding rocket Small-lift launch vehicle Medium-lift launch vehicle Heavy-lift launch vehicle Super heavy-lift launch vehicle Launches by rocket type Ariane Antares Atlas Atlas LV3B Atlas LV3C Black Brant Electron Delta DM-19 Delta 1 Delta II Delta III Delta IV Heavy Delta IV Medium Delta IV Falcon 9 and Heavy 2010–2019 2020–2022 2023 GSLV H-II and H3 Kosmos Long March Minotaur New Glenn Proton PSLV R-7 (including Semyorka, Molniya, Vostok, Voskhod and Soyuz) Scout SLS Starship Thor and Delta Thor-Agena Thor DM-18 Able Thor DM-18 Agena-A Thor DM-18 Thor DM-21 Agena-B Titan Tsyklon V-2 tests Vega Vulcan Zenit Launches by spaceport Satish Dhawan Agencies, companies and facilities Communications satellite companies comparison Private spaceflight companies Rocket launch sites Space agencies Spacecraft manufacturers Other mission lists and timelines First orbital launches by country First satellites by country NASA missions Constellation missions Timeline of first images of Earth from space Timeline of longest spaceflights Timeline of private spaceflight v t e Solar System Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Ceres Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Planets , dwarfs , minors Terrestrials Mercury Venus Earth Mars Giants Gas Jupiter Saturn Ice Uranus Neptune Dwarfs Ceres Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Large Minor Planets Salacia Varuna Ixion List Moons Earth Moon Claimed Mars Phobos Deimos Jupiter Ganymede Callisto Io Europa all 97 Saturn Titan Rhea Iapetus Dione Tethys Enceladus Mimas Hyperion Phoebe all 274 Uranus Titania Oberon Umbriel Ariel Miranda all 28 Neptune Triton Proteus Nereid all 16 Pluto Charon Nix Hydra Kerberos Styx Orcus Vanth Haumea Hiʻiaka Namaka Quaoar Weywot Makemake S/2015 (136472) 1 Gonggong Xiangliu Eris Dysnomia Exploration ( outline ) Colonization Discovery astronomy historical models timeline Space probes timeline list Human spaceflight space stations list programs Mercury Venus Moon mining Mars Ceres Asteroids mining Comets Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto Deep space Hypothetical objects Bagby's moon Chiron Coatlicue Counter-Earth Chrysalis Fifth Giant Hyperion Lilith Mercury's moon Neith Nemesis Nibiru Petit's moon Phaeton Planet Nine Effects Planet Ten Planet V Planet X Subsatellites Synestia Theia Themis Tyche Vulcan Vulcanoids Waltemath's moons Lists Comets Possible dwarf planets Gravitationally rounded objects Minor planets Natural satellites Solar System models Solar System objects by size by discovery date Interstellar and circumstellar molecules Rings Planetary Jovian Saturnian ( Rhean ?) Uranian Neptunian Minor objects' Charikloan Chironean Haumean Quaoarian Formation, evolution , contents, and History Star formation Accretion Accretion disk Excretion Capture theory Capture of Triton Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Coatlicue Co-orbital configuration Trojan moons Co-orbital moons Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disk instability EXCEDE Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Curation Sample-return mission Frost/Ice/Snow line Giant-impact hypothesis Grand tack hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Hill sphere Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium/space Interstellar cloud Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kordylewski cloud Kuiper belt Kuiper cliff Late Heavy Bombardment Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Nice model Nice 2 model Five-planet Nice model Oort cloud Oort limit Outer space Planet Disrupted Migration System Planetesimal Formation Merging stars Protoplanetary disk Ring system Roche limit vs. Hill sphere Rubble pile Scattered disc Small Solar System bodies Asteroid belt Asteroids Ceres Vesta Pallas Hygiea active List families PHA exceptional Kirkwood gap Centaurs Comets Damocloids Meteoroids Minor planets names and meanings moons Planetesimal Planetary orbit-crossers Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Trojans Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Trojan camp Greek camp Saturn Uranus Neptune Near-Earth objects NEAs Trans-Neptunian objects Kuiper belt Cubewanos Plutinos Detached objects Sednoids Scattered disc Hills cloud Oort cloud Oort limit Related Double planet Lagrange point Moonlet Syzygy Tidal locking Outline of the Solar System Solar System portal Astronomy portal Earth sciences portal Solar System → Local Interstellar Cloud → Local Bubble → Gould Belt → Orion Arm → Milky Way → Milky Way subgroup → Local Group → Local Sheet → Virgo Supercluster → Laniakea Supercluster → Local Hole → Observable universe → Universe Each arrow ( → ) may be read as "within" or "part of".

v t e Politics of outer space Spacefaring nations Space policy Space traffic management Space debris management Space Debris Working Group Space Debris Committee Planetary protection principle Post-detection policy Asteroid impact Prediction Avoidance Spaceguard The Spaceguard Foundation Space races Cold War Space Race Sputnik crisis Timeline Billionaire space race Mars race Records Space propaganda Space competition Chinese space program Two Bombs, One Satellite doctrine (1966–1976) Shuguang program (1966–1972) Chinese ASAT program (1964–) 2007 test Project 921 (1992–) Shenzhou program Tiangong program Space station Chinese Lunar Exploration Program (2003–) Mars and beyond Planetary Exploration of China (2016–) MARS-500 study ESA Science Programme European Launcher Development Organisation (1960–1975) Europa launcher programme (1962–1973) European Space Research Organisation (1964–1975) European Space Agency (1975–) EU/ESA Space Council European Cooperation for Space Standardization European Space Research and Technology Centre Concurrent Design Facility European Astronaut Centre ESA Centre for Earth Observation Living Planet Programme European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications European Data Relay System Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (1983–2010) European Space Astronomy Centre (2005–) European Space Security and Education Centre European Space Operations Centre ESTRACK network Guiana Space Centre Ariane launcher programme (1973–) Vega launcher programme (1998–) European Space Policy Institute Space Situational Awareness Programme Future Launchers Preparatory Programme Intermediate eXperimental Vehicle PRIDE Space Rider ESA Television Mars and beyond Mars Exploration Joint Initiative MARS-500 study Aurora programme ExoMars Horizon 2000 (1985–1995) SOHO Cassini–Huygens Huygens Cluster Cluster II XMM- Newton Rosetta INTEGRAL Herschel Planck Horizon 2000 Plus (1995–2015) ISS programme Politics Gaia LISA Pathfinder BepiColombo Cosmic Vision (2015–2025) Solar Orbiter Euclid ARIEL EnVision CHEOPS JUICE ATHENA LISA Comet Interceptor SMILE EU Space Programme Western European Union Satellite Centre (1992–2002) EU Satellite Centre (2002–) EU/ESA Space Council EU Commission DG Defence Industry and Space European GNSS Supervisory Authority (2004–2010) European GNSS Agency (2010–2021) EU Agency for the Space Programme (2021–) Galileo programme Copernicus programme EGNOS programme EUSST programme Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications European Union Aviation Safety Agency European Network of Civil Aviation Safety Investigation Authorities European Defence Agency Europe by Satellite Other European initiatives and bodies AeroSpace and Defence Industries Association of Europe Eurospace Eurocontrol Council of Europe Council of European Aerospace Societies European Broadcasting Union European Civil Aviation Conference European Committee for Standardization / European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations European Telecommunications Standards Institute European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites European Patent Organisation European Patent Office European Telecommunications Satellite Organization European Southern Observatory Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Indian space policy Department of Space Indian Human Spaceflight Programme Space Activities Bill Indian ASAT programme Mission Shakti British space programme Creation of the British National Committee for Space Research (1958) Start of the Ariel programme (1962) Black Arrow launcher (1964–1971) Creation of the British National Space Centre (1985) Outer Space Act 1986 Project Juno (1991) Space Innovation and Growth Team (2009–2010) Creation of the UK Space Agency (2010) Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 Space Industry Act 2018 UK Global Navigation Satellite System (2018–2020) 2021 Integrated Review Defence in a Competitive Age US space policy Truman space policy Operation Paperclip list of scientists Aerobee rocket program RAND Establishment of Cape Canaveral Eisenhower space policy WS-117L Project Vanguard Sputnik crisis Introduction to Outer Space 1958 NASA Act Space Act Agreement Cancellation of Man in Space Soonest Launch of Project Mercury Missile gap Launch of X-15 program Kennedy space policy Launch of the Mariner program Launch of the Gemini project Launch of the Apollo program " We choose to go to the Moon " Johnson space policy 1967 Outer Space Treaty Nixon space policy Moon landing Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law Launch of the Space Shuttle Program Skylab Ford space policy Apollo–Soyuz Launch of the Viking program Carter space policy Reagan space policy Citizens' Advisory Council Strategy of Technology doctrine Strategic Defense Initiative Space Station Freedom proposal 1984 Space Act 1985 anti-satellite missile test Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Rogers Report Ride Report George H. W. Bush space policy Space Exploration Initiative 1990 Augustine Committee Hubble Space Telescope National Space Council Clinton space policy Faster, better, cheaper Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Launch of the Mars Exploration Program 1998 Space Act Decadal Planning Team Launch of the X-37 program George W. Bush space policy Aerospace Industry Commission 2002 National missile defense directive Space Shuttle Columbia disaster Vision for Space Exploration Aldridge Commission ESAS 2005 NASA Act Launch of the Constellation program Operation Burnt Frost Obama space policy 2009 Augustine Committee Kennedy Space Center speech Cancellation of the Constellation program Launch of the Space Launch System program Redesign of the Orion program Flexible path Mars Exploration Joint Initiative 2010 NASA Act Title 51 Space Shuttle retirement Development of the Commercial Crew Program 2014 NASA Act 2015 Space Act Trump space policy Re-establishment of the National Space Council Creation of the Space Force Launch of the Artemis program Launch of the Lunar Gateway project Executive Order 13959 China exclusion policy of NASA International Traffic in Arms Regulations Full-spectrum dominance doctrine Budget of NASA House Committee on Space NESDIS Office of Space Commerce FCC FAA/AST NRO IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society Antennas & Propagation Society Broadcast Technology Society Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society Vehicular Technology Society USSR and Russia Soviet space program Stalin Operation Osoaviakhim (1946) list of scientists Khrushchev Sputnik program Sputnik crisis (1957) Vostok program (1960–1963) Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (1960–1982) Soviet crewed lunar programs (1961–1976) Voskhod program (1964–1966) Brezhnev Soyuz program (1967–) Interkosmos (1967–1991) Salyut program (1971–1986) Almaz (1973–1977) Buran program (1974–1993) Apollo–Soyuz (1975) Gorbachev Mir (1986–2001) Roscosmos Yeltsin Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS (1993–) Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Medvedev Medvedev modernisation programme 2010 Military doctrine Putin United Rocket and Space Corporation (2013–2015) 2014 Military doctrine 2015 Creation of Roscosmos Mars MARS-500 study ExoMars Other policies Australian space program Brazilian space program Emirati space program Japanese space program Kazakh space program Kenyan space program Lebanese space program North Korean space program Pakistani space program Space programme 2040 Philippine space program South Korean space program Ugandan space initiatives International Space Station programme Politics of the International Space Station United Nations International Civil Aviation Organization ITU-R Office for Outer Space Affairs UN-SPIDER Space Generation Advisory Council Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space General Assembly Fourth Committee Other intergovernmental or inter-agency bodies African Space Agency Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Committee on Space Research International Planetary Data Alliance International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Group on Earth Observations Global Standards Collaboration Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' International Mobile Satellite Organization International Space Exploration Coordination Group International Space Station Multilateral Coordination Board International Telecommunications Satellite Organization Intersputnik Orbital Debris Co-ordination Working Group Regional African Satellite Communication Organization Arab Satellite Communications Organization Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization Space law Partial Test Ban Treaty (1963) Outer Space Treaty (1967) Rescue Agreement (1968) Space Liability Convention (1972) US-USSR Cooperation Agreement (1972) Satellite Convention (1974) Registration Convention (1975) Bogota Declaration (1976) Moon Treaty (1979) Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space (1981) International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Agreement (1988) International Space Station Intergovernmental Agreement (1998) International Docking System Standard International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' (1999) Cape Town Treaty, Space Assets protocol (2012) Artemis Accords (2020) Space jurisdiction Common heritage of mankind Extraterrestrial real estate Astronomical naming conventions ITU Radio Regulations CCSDS standards ODCWG standards CEOS standards COSPAR standards International Designator IPDA standards GSC standards GEO standards ISECG standards Various conventions, treaties, agreements, memorandums, charters or declarations establishing and governing intergovernmental organisations or inter-agency bodies dealing with space affairs Commercial use Space industry India Russia United Kingdom United States Private spaceflight Launch market competition Space tourism Space advertising Space technology Space-based economy Space trade Space manufacturing Lunar resources Project Harvest Moon Asteroid mining Militarisation Space forces, units and formations Space forces Australia Brazil Canada China Colombia France Germany Iran AJA IRGC Israel Japan Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Pakistan Russia South Korea Spain Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States History Structure Vietnam Ranks and insignia Space commands France India Italy NATO NORAD United Kingdom United States Space warfare Space domain awareness Space weapon Anti-satellite weapon China India Russia United States Kinetic bombardment Kill vehicle Missile defense Military satellite Reconnaissance satellite Spaceplane Satellite jamming Space advocacy Air & Space Forces Association Alliance for Space Development National Space Society Space Frontier Foundation Mars Society Moon Society Students for the Exploration and Development of Space Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Modern Technologies British Interplanetary Society Coalition for Deep Space Exploration International Academy of Astronautics International Astronautical Federation International Astronomical Union Lunar Explorers Society Space Exploration Alliance Space Fellowship Space Force Association Space Foundation The Planetary Society v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐8plbs
Cached time: 20250818102534
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.756 seconds
Real time usage: 2.230 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20808/1000000
Revision size: 62702/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 649334/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18342/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 91/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 287322/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.877/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19312919/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1621.346      1 -total
 35.59%  577.073     18 Template:Navbox
 23.86%  386.931      1 Template:Reflist
 17.29%  280.393      1 Template:Politics_of_outer_space
  9.67%  156.729      1 Template:Public-sector_space_agencies
  9.24%  149.783     20 Template:Annotated_link
  9.10%  147.465      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.11%  131.441     27 Template:Cite_web
  7.83%  126.943    105 Template:Flag_decoration
  6.25%  101.299      5 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:77178:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818102534 and revision id 1295815889. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spaceflight&oldid=1295815889#Uncrewed " Categories : Spaceflight Astronautics Solar System Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spaceflight 107 languages Add topic

