Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Lyotard's thesis Toggle Lyotard's thesis subsection 2.1 Lyotard's proposal 2.2 Criticism of Lyotard's thesis 3 In narratology and communication 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Metanarrative 23 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Interlingua Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overarching narrative In social theory , a metanarrative (also master narrative , or meta-narrative and grand narrative ; French : métarécit or grand récit ) is an overarching narrative about smaller historical narratives, which offers a society legitimation through the anticipated completion of a (as yet unrealized) master idea. The term was popularized by the writing of French philosopher Jean-François Lyotard in 1979. Metanarrative is considered a foundational concept of postmodernism .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Master narrative and synonymous terms like metanarrative are also used in narratology to mean "stories within stories," as coined by literary theorist Gérard Genette .

[ 4 ] Examples of master narratives can be found in U.S.

high school textbooks according to scholar 
Derrick Alridge: "history courses and curricula are dominated by such heroic and celebratory master narratives as those portraying George Washington and Thomas Jefferson as the heroic ' Founding Fathers ,' Abraham Lincoln as the 'Great Emancipator,' and Martin Luther King, Jr.

, as the messianic savior of African Americans ." [ 5 ] Etymology [ edit ] " Meta " is Greek for "beyond"; "narrative" is a story that is characterized by its telling (it is communicated somehow).

[ 6 ] Although first used earlier in the 20th century, the term was brought into prominence by Jean-François Lyotard in 1979, with his claim that the postmodern was characterized precisely by mistrust of the "grand narratives" (such as ideas about Progress , Enlightenment , Emancipation , and Marxism ) that had formed an essential part of modernity .

[ 7 ] Metanarrative may be related and is often used interchangeably with metafiction but there is a distinction. The latter foregrounds or discloses the fictionality of a narrative while metanarrative does not undercut fiction.

[ 8 ] Lyotard's thesis [ edit ] In The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (1979), Lyotard highlights the increasing skepticism of the postmodern condition toward the supposed universality ("totalizing nature") of metanarratives and their reliance on some form of "transcendent and universal truth": [ 9 ] Simplifying to the extreme, I define postmodern as incredulity toward metanarratives. ... The narrative function is losing its functors, its great hero, its great dangers, its great voyages, its great goal. It is being dispersed in clouds of narrative language ... Where, after the metanarratives, can legitimacy reside?

Lyotard and other poststructuralist thinkers (like Michel Foucault ) [ 10 ] view this as a broadly positive development. They assert that attempts to construct grand theories unduly dismiss the natural chaos and disorder of the universe, and the power of an individual event.

[ 11 ] Sociology.org.uk [ better source needed ] (primarily the personal blog of Chris Livesey, as sustained over perhaps 12 years, in parallel to a long career in sociology education) states that it is unclear whether Lyotard's work is describing a global condition of skepticism towards metanarratives in postmodernity, or prescribing such skepticism. Lyotard's critics emphasize that metanarratives continue to play a major role in the postmodern world.

[ 12 ] Lyotard's proposal [ edit ] Lyotard proposed that metanarratives should give way to petits récits , or more modest and "localized" narratives, which can "throw off" a grand narrative by bringing into focus a singular event.

[ 13 ] Borrowing from the works of Wittgenstein and his theory of the "models of discourse", [ 14 ] Lyotard constructs his vision of a progressive politics , grounded in the cohabitation of a whole range of diverse and always locally legitimated language-games ; multiple narratives coexisting.

[ 15 ] Lyotard drew from Wittgenstein's notion of the language-game to reveal the multiplicity of meanings found within different contexts, including the meanings impact on our understanding of truth.

[ 16 ] The key concepts of Lyotard's thesis include: Skepticism of Universal Truths based on the postmodernist view criticism of the single narrative that can encompass all aspects of human life and experience; Fragmentation of Knowledge or "little narratives" that are more modest, fragmented, and specified to particular contexts.

[ 16 ] Postmodernists attempt to replace metanarratives by focusing on specific local contexts as well as on the diversity of human experience. They argue for the existence of a "multiplicity of theoretical standpoints" [ 17 ] rather than for grand, all-encompassing theories.

Criticism of Lyotard's thesis [ edit ] Johannes Willem Bertens and Douwe Fokkema argued that, in so far as one of Lyotard's targets was science, he was mistaken in thinking that science relies upon a grand narrative for social and epistemic validation, rather than on the accumulation of many lesser narrative successes.

[ 18 ] Lyotard himself also criticized the scientific content of his thesis and referred to it as "simply the worst of all my books." [ 19 ] In narratology and communication [ edit ] Metanarrative has a specific definition in narratology and communications theory. According to John Stephens and Robyn McCallum, a metanarrative "is a global or totalizing cultural narrative schema which orders and explains knowledge and experience " [ 20 ] – a story about a story, encompassing and explaining other "little stories" within conceptual models that assemble the "little stories" into a whole. Postmodern narratives will often deliberately disturb the formulaic expectations such cultural codes provide, [ 21 ] pointing thereby to a possible revision of the social code.

[ 22 ] In communication and strategic communication , a master narrative (or metanarrative) is a "transhistorical narrative that is deeply embedded in a particular culture".

[ 23 ] A master narrative is therefore a particular type of narrative, which is defined as a "coherent system of interrelated and sequentially organized stories that share a common rhetorical desire to resolve a conflict by establishing audience expectations according to the known trajectories of its literary and rhetorical form".

[ 23 ] The Consortium for Strategic Communication also maintains a website on master narratives.

[ 24 ] Others have related metanarratives to masterplots, "recurrent skeletal stories, belonging to cultures and individuals that play a powerful role in questions of identity, values, and the understanding of life." [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Antifoundationalism Eschatology Dispensationalism Local knowledge Metafiction Metacognition Neopragmatism New historicism Political narrative Thick description World view References [ edit ] ^ J. Childers/G. Hentzi eds., The Columbia Dictionary of Modern Literary and Cultural Criticism (1995) p. 186 ^ R. Appignanesi/C. Garratt, Postmodernism for Beginners (1995) pp. 102–3 ^ Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Explained to Children (1992) p. 29 ^ a b "Master Narrative".

The Encyclopedia of Literary and Cultural Theory . Vol. II, Literary Theory from 1966 to the Present: A-Z. Wiley. 2010-12-24.

doi : 10.1002/9781444337839.wbelctv2m003 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-8312-3 .

^ * Alridge, Derrick P. (2006). "The Limits of Master Narratives in History Textbooks: An Analysis of Representations of Martin Luther King, Jr".

Teachers College Record: The Voice of Scholarship in Education .

108 (4): 662– 686.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9620.2006.00664.x .

ISSN 0161-4681 .

^ The Meta-Narrative.

"Lesson 1: What is a Meta-Narrative?" .

YouTube . October 11, 2013.

^ Childers pp. 166–7 ^ Herman, David; Jahn, Manfred; Ryan, Marie-Laure (2010).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-45839-4 .

^ Lyotard, Jean-François.

Introduction:The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge ", 1979: xxiv–xxv.

Archived 2007-06-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ G. Gutting ed., The Cambridge Companion to Foucault (2007) p. 36 ^ C. Nouvet et al eds., Minima Moralia (2007) pp. xii–iv ^ "Metanarratives" . Archived from the original on 2012-07-01 . Retrieved 2012-08-28 .

^ Nouvet, p. xvi ^ Hans Bertens, The Idea of the Postmodern: A History , Routledge, 1995, p. 124.

ISBN 0-415-06011-7 ^ Jean-Francois Lyotard, The Differend (1988) pp. 151–161 ^ a b McQueen, Paddy (2010).

Key Concepts in Philosophy . London: Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-350-31484-9 .

^ Michael A. Peters, Poststructuralism, Marxism, and Neoliberalism: Between Theory and Politics , Rowman & Littlefield, 2001, p. 7.

ISBN 0-7425-0987-7 ^ J. W. Bertens/D. Fokkema, International Postmodernism (1997) p. 94 ^ Lotta Poetica , 3rd series, Vol. 1, No. 1, Milan: Edizioni Amadulo (1987) p. 82.

^ Stephens, John and Robyn McCallum. (1998).

Retelling Stories, Framing Culture: Traditional Story and Metanarratives in Children's Literature .

ISBN 0-8153-1298-9 .

^ J. W. Bertens/D. Fokkema, International Postmodernism (1997) p. 186 ^ E. D. Ermath, Sequel to History (1992) p. 156 ^ a b Halverson, Jeffry R., H.L. Goodall Jr. and Steven R. Corman.

Master Narratives of Islamist Extremism . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011. p. 14 ^ "CSC Center for Strategic Communication |" . Comops.org. Archived from the original on 2012-04-27 . Retrieved 2016-06-02 .

^ H. Porter Abbott, The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative , 2nd ed, Cambridge Introductions to Literature (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 236.

Sources [ edit ] Jean-François Lyotard .

The Postmodern Condition : A Report on Knowledge . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984 [1979], reprint 1997. Translated by Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi.

Further reading [ edit ] David Carr, Time, Narrative, and History (Indiana UP, 1986) Geoffrey Bennington , Lyotard: Writing the Event (1988) External links [ edit ] Media related to Metanarratives at Wikimedia Commons A Postmodern Strategy: Language Games v t e Jean-François Lyotard Books Discourse, Figure (1971) Libidinal Economy (1974) The Postmodern Condition (1979) The Differend (1983) Lessons on the Analytic of the Sublime (1991) Concepts Metanarrative v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism v t e Meta- Domains and methods Meta-analysis Metabibliography Metaclass Semantic Web Metacognition Meta-learning Metamemory Meta-communication Metacomputing Metadata Metadesign Metadiscourse Meta-emotion Metamood Metafiction Metagaming Metagenomics Metaheuristic Metahistory Metahumor Metaknowledge Metalanguage Metapragmatics Metasemantics Metalinguistics Metamaterials Metamathematics Metamedia Metamodeling Metamodernism Metamotivation Metanarrative Metaobject Meta-optimization Meta-organization Metaphenomics Metaphilosophy Metaepistemology Metaethics Metalogic Meta-ontology Metaphysics Metametaphysics Metapolitics Metapopulation Metaprogramming Metapsychiatry Metapsychology Metapuzzle Meta-reference Meta-regulation Metascience Metasociology Meta-system Metatheorem Metatheory Metaverse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metanarrative&oldid=1286752140 " Categories : Metanarratives Literary criticism Modernism Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 19:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metanarrative 23 languages Add topic

