Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 Decompression illness and dysbarism 2 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 2.1 Frequency 2.2 Onset 3 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 3.1 Ascent from depth 3.2 Leaving a high-pressure environment 3.3 Ascent to altitude or exposure to a low ambient pressure 4 Predisposing factors Toggle Predisposing factors subsection 4.1 Environmental 4.2 Individual 4.3 "Undeserved" decompression sickness 5 Mechanism Toggle Mechanism subsection 5.1 Inert gases 5.2 Isobaric counterdiffusion 5.3 Bubble formation 5.4 Pathophysiology 6 Diagnosis Toggle Diagnosis subsection 6.1 Test of pressure 6.2 Differential diagnosis 7 Prevention Toggle Prevention subsection 7.1 Underwater diving 7.2 Exposure to altitude 8 Treatment Toggle Treatment subsection 8.1 First aid 8.2 Delay of recompression 8.3 Transport of a symptomatic diver 8.4 In-water recompression 8.4.1 Contraindications 8.5 Definitive treatment 8.6 Altitude decompression sickness 9 Prognosis 10 Epidemiology Toggle Epidemiology subsection 10.1 DCS from hyperbaric exposure 10.2 DCS from hypobaric exposure 11 Timeline 12 Society and culture Toggle Society and culture subsection 12.1 Economics 13 Other animals 14 See also 15 Explanatory notes 16 References Toggle References subsection 16.1 Sources 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Decompression sickness 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Jawa Magyar Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Disorder caused by dissolved gases forming bubbles in tissues Not to be confused with Decompression illness or Decompression (diving) .

"The bends" redirects here. For other uses, see The Bends .

Medical condition Decompression sickness Other names Divers' disease, the bends, aerobullosis, caisson disease Two United States Navy sailors demonstrate treatment for decompression sickness inside a decompression chamber Specialty Emergency medicine Decompression sickness ( DCS ; also called divers' disease , the bends , aerobullosis , and caisson disease ) is a medical condition caused by dissolved gases emerging from solution as bubbles inside the body tissues during decompression . DCS most commonly occurs during or soon after a decompression ascent from underwater diving , but can also result from other causes of depressurisation, such as emerging from a caisson , decompression from saturation , flying in an unpressurised aircraft at high altitude, and extravehicular activity from spacecraft . DCS and arterial gas embolism are collectively referred to as decompression illness .

Since bubbles can form in or migrate to any part of the body, DCS can produce many symptoms, and its effects may vary from joint pain and rashes to paralysis and death. DCS often causes air bubbles to settle in major joints like knees or elbows, causing individuals to bend over in excruciating pain, hence its common name, the bends. Individual susceptibility can vary from day to day, and different individuals under the same conditions may be affected differently or not at all. The classification of types of DCS according to symptoms has evolved since its original description in the 19th century. The severity of symptoms varies from barely noticeable to rapidly fatal.

Decompression sickness can occur after an exposure to increased pressure while breathing a gas with a metabolically inert component, then decompressing too fast for it to be harmlessly eliminated through respiration, or by decompression by an upward excursion from a condition of saturation by the inert breathing gas components, or by a combination of these routes. Theoretical decompression risk is controlled by the tissue compartment with the highest inert gas concentration, which for decompression from saturation, is the slowest tissue to outgas.

The risk of DCS can be managed through proper decompression procedures , and contracting the condition has become uncommon. Its potential severity has driven much research to prevent it, and divers almost universally use decompression schedules or dive computers to limit their exposure and to monitor their ascent speed. If DCS is suspected, it is treated by hyperbaric oxygen therapy in a recompression chamber . Where a chamber is not accessible within a reasonable time frame, in-water recompression may be indicated for a narrow range of presentations, if there are suitably skilled personnel and appropriate equipment available on site. Diagnosis is confirmed by a positive response to the treatment. Early treatment results in a significantly higher chance of successful recovery.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Classification [ edit ] DCS is classified by symptoms. The earliest descriptions of DCS used the terms: "bends" for joint or skeletal pain; "chokes" for breathing problems; and "staggers" for neurological problems.

[ 3 ] In 1960, Golding et al.

introduced a simpler classification using the term "Type I ('simple')" for symptoms involving only the skin , musculoskeletal system , or lymphatic system , and "Type II ('serious')" for symptoms where other organs (such as the central nervous system ) are involved.

[ 3 ] Type II DCS is considered more serious and usually has worse outcomes.

[ 4 ] This system, with minor modifications, may still be used today.

[ 5 ] Following changes to treatment methods, this classification is now much less useful in diagnosis, [ 6 ] since neurological symptoms may develop after the initial presentation, and both Type I and Type II DCS have the same initial management.

[ 7 ] Decompression illness and dysbarism [ edit ] The term dysbarism encompasses decompression sickness, arterial gas embolism , and barotrauma , whereas decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism are commonly classified together as decompression illness when a precise diagnosis cannot be made.

[ 8 ] DCS and arterial gas embolism are treated very similarly because they are both the result of gas bubbles in the body.

[ 7 ] The U.S. Navy prescribes identical treatment for Type II DCS and arterial gas embolism.

[ 9 ] Their spectra of symptoms also overlap, although the symptoms from arterial gas embolism are generally more severe because they often arise from an infarction (blockage of blood supply and tissue death).

[ 10 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] See also: List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders While bubbles can form anywhere in the body, DCS is most frequently observed in the shoulders, elbows, knees, and ankles. Joint pain ("the bends") accounts for about 60% to 70% of all altitude DCS cases, with the shoulder being the most common site for altitude and bounce diving, and the knees and hip joints for saturation and compressed air work.

[ 11 ] Neurological symptoms are present in 10% to 15% of DCS cases with headache and visual disturbances being the most common symptom. Skin manifestations are present in about 10% to 15% of cases. Pulmonary DCS ("the chokes") is very rare in divers and has been observed much less frequently in aviators since the introduction of oxygen pre-breathing protocols.

[ 12 ] The table below shows symptoms for different DCS types.

[ 13 ] Signs and symptoms of decompression sickness [ 13 ] DCS type Bubble location Signs & symptoms (clinical manifestations) Musculoskeletal Mostly large joints of the limbs (elbows, shoulders, hip, wrists, knees, ankles) Localized deep pain, ranging from mild to excruciating. Sometimes a dull ache, more rarely a sharp pain.

Active and passive motion of the joint may aggravate the pain.

The pain may be reduced by bending the joint to find a more comfortable position.

If caused by altitude, pain can occur immediately or up to many hours later.

Cutaneous Skin Itching, usually around the ears, face, neck, arms, and upper torso Sensation of tiny insects crawling over the skin ( formication ) Mottled or marbled skin usually around the shoulders, upper chest and abdomen, with itching ( cutis marmorata ) Swelling of the skin, accompanied by tiny scar-like skin depressions ( pitting edema ) Neurologic Brain Altered sensation, tingling or numbness ( paresthesia ), increased sensitivity ( hyperesthesia ) Confusion or memory loss ( amnesia ) Visual abnormalities Unexplained mood or behaviour changes Seizures , unconsciousness Neurologic Spinal cord Ascending weakness or paralysis in the legs Urinary incontinence and fecal incontinence Girdling (also referred to as girdle, banding, or tightening feeling) around the abdominal region and/or chest Constitutional Whole body Headache Unexplained fatigue Generalised malaise, poorly localised aches Audiovestibular Inner ear [ 14 ] [ a ] Loss of balance Dizziness , vertigo , nausea , vomiting Hearing loss Pulmonary Lungs Dry persistent cough Burning chest pain under the sternum , aggravated by breathing Shortness of breath Frequency [ edit ] The relative frequencies of different symptoms of DCS observed by the U.S. Navy are as follows: [ 15 ] Symptoms by frequency Symptoms Frequency local joint pain 89% arm symptoms 70% leg symptoms 30% dizziness 5.3% paralysis 2.3% shortness of breath 1.6% extreme fatigue 1.3% collapse/unconsciousness 0.5% Onset [ edit ] Although the onset of DCS can occur rapidly after a dive, in more than half of all cases, symptoms do not begin to appear for at least an hour. In extreme cases, symptoms may occur before the dive has been completed. The U.S. Navy and Technical Diving International , a leading technical diver training organization, have published a table that documents the time to onset of first symptoms. The table does not differentiate between types of DCS, or types of symptom.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Onset of DCS symptoms Time to onset Percentage of cases within 1 hour 42% within 3 hours 60% within 8 hours 83% within 24 hours 98% within 48 hours 100% Causes [ edit ] Further information: Decompression (diving) § Bubble formation, growth and elimination DCS is caused by a reduction in ambient pressure that results in the formation of bubbles of inert gases within tissues of the body. It may happen when leaving a high-pressure environment, ascending from depth, or ascending to altitude. A closely related condition of bubble formation in body tissues due to isobaric counterdiffusion can occur with no change of pressure.

[ 18 ] Ascent from depth [ edit ] DCS is best known as a diving disorder that affects divers who have breathed gas that is at a higher pressure than the surface pressure, owing to the pressure of the surrounding water. The risk of DCS increases when diving for extended periods or at greater depth, without ascending gradually and making the decompression stops needed to slowly reduce the excess pressure of inert gases dissolved in the body. The specific risk factors are not well understood and some divers may be more susceptible than others under identical conditions.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] DCS has been confirmed in rare cases of breath-holding divers who have made a sequence of many deep dives with short surface intervals, and may be the cause of the disease called taravana by South Pacific island natives who for centuries have dived by breath-holding for food and pearls .

[ 21 ] Two principal factors control the risk of a diver developing DCS: the rate and duration of gas absorption under pressure – the deeper or longer the dive, the more gas is absorbed into body tissue in higher concentrations than normal ( Henry's Law ); [ 22 ] the rate and duration of outgassing on depressurization – the faster the ascent and the shorter the interval between dives the less time there is for absorbed gas to be offloaded safely through the lungs, causing these gases to come out of solution and form "micro bubbles" in the blood.

[ 23 ] Even when the change in pressure causes no immediate symptoms, rapid pressure change can cause permanent bone injury called dysbaric osteonecrosis (DON). DON can develop from a single exposure to rapid decompression.

[ 24 ] Leaving a high-pressure environment [ edit ] The principal features of a caisson are the workspace, pressurised by an external air supply, and the access tube with an airlock When workers leave a pressurized caisson or a mine that has been pressurized to keep water out, they will experience a significant reduction in ambient pressure .

[ 19 ] [ 25 ] A similar pressure reduction occurs when astronauts exit a space vehicle to perform a space-walk or extra-vehicular activity , where the pressure in their spacesuit is lower than the pressure in the vehicle.

[ 19 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] The original name for DCS was "caisson disease". This term was introduced in the 19th century, when caissons under pressure were used to keep water from flooding large engineering excavations below the water table , such as bridge supports and tunnels. Workers spending time in high ambient pressure conditions are at risk when they return to the lower pressure outside the caisson if the pressure is not reduced slowly. DCS was a major factor during the construction of Eads Bridge , when 15 workers died from what was then a mysterious illness, and later during the construction of the Brooklyn Bridge , where it incapacitated the project leader Washington Roebling .

[ 29 ] On the other side of the Manhattan island during construction of the Hudson River Tunnel , contractor's agent Ernest William Moir noted in 1889 that workers were dying due to decompression sickness; Moir pioneered the use of an airlock chamber for treatment.

[ 30 ] Ascent to altitude or exposure to a low ambient pressure [ edit ] A decompression from surface pressure at or near sea level to a lower ambient pressure due to altitude or artificial pressure reduction may cause bubble formation in supersaturated tissues, which is a manifestation of decompression sickness called altitude DCS, hypobaric DCS, or aerospace DCS. This is usually a decompression from saturation at surface pressure.

[ 31 ] The most common health risk on ascent to altitude is not decompression sickness but altitude sickness , or acute mountain sickness (AMS), which has an entirely different and unrelated set of causes and symptoms. AMS results not from the formation of bubbles from dissolved gases in the body but from exposure to a low partial pressure of oxygen and alkalosis . However, passengers in unpressurized aircraft at high altitude may also be at some risk of DCS.

[ 19 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 32 ] Altitude DCS became a problem in the 1930s with the development of high-altitude balloon and aircraft flights, but not as great a problem as AMS, which drove the development of pressurized cabins , which coincidentally controlled DCS. Commercial aircraft are now required to maintain the cabin at or below a pressure altitude of 2,400 m (7,900 ft) even when flying above 12,000 m (39,000 ft). Symptoms of DCS in healthy individuals are subsequently very rare unless there is a loss of pressurization or the individual has been diving recently.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Divers who drive up a mountain or fly shortly after diving are at particular risk even in a pressurized aircraft because the regulatory cabin altitude of 2,400 m (7,900 ft) represents only 73% of sea level pressure .

[ 19 ] [ 26 ] [ 35 ] Generally, the higher the altitude the greater the risk of altitude DCS but there is no specific, maximum, safe altitude below which it never occurs. There are very few symptoms at or below 5,500 m (18,000 ft) unless the person had predisposing medical conditions or had dived recently. There is a correlation between increased altitudes above 5,500 m (18,000 ft) and the frequency of altitude DCS but there is no direct relationship with the severity of the various types of DCS. A US Air Force study reports that there are few occurrences between 5,500 m (18,000 ft) and 7,500 m (24,600 ft) and 87% of incidents occurred at or above 7,500 m (24,600 ft).

[ 36 ] High-altitude parachutists may reduce the risk of altitude DCS if they flush nitrogen from the body by pre-breathing pure oxygen .

[ 37 ] A similar procedure is used by astronauts and cosmonauts preparing for extravehicular activity in low-pressure space suits .

[ 38 ] Predisposing factors [ edit ] See also: Physiology of decompression § Factors influencing decompression stress and risk Although the occurrence of DCS is not easily predictable, many predisposing factors are known. They may be considered as either environmental or individual. Decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism in recreational diving are associated with certain demographic, environmental, and dive style factors. A statistical study published in 2005 tested potential risk factors: age, gender, body mass index, smoking, asthma, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, previous decompression illness, years since certification, dives in the last year, number of diving days, number of dives in a repetitive series, last dive depth, nitrox use, and drysuit use. No significant associations with risk of decompression sickness or arterial gas embolism were found for asthma, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, smoking, or body mass index. Increased depth, previous DCI, larger number of consecutive days diving, and being male were associated with a higher risk for decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism. Nitrox and drysuit use, greater frequency of diving in the past year, increasing age, and years since certification were associated with lower risk, possibly as indicators of more extensive training and experience.

[ 39 ] Environmental [ edit ] The following environmental factors have been shown to increase the risk of DCS: A large pressure reduction ratio is more likely to cause DCS than a small one.

[ 26 ] [ 35 ] [ 40 ] Repetitive dives within a short period of time (a few hours) increase the risk of developing DCS. Repetitive ascents to altitudes above 5,500 metres (18,000 ft) within similar short periods increase the risk of developing altitude DCS.

[ 26 ] [ 40 ] The faster the ascent the greater the risk of developing DCS. The U.S. Navy Diving Manual indicates that ascent rates greater than about 20 m/min (66 ft/min) when diving increase the chance of DCS, while recreational dive tables such as the Bühlmann tables require an ascent rate of 10 m/min (33 ft/min) with the last 6 m (20 ft) taking at least one minute.

[ 41 ] An individual exposed to a rapid decompression (high rate of ascent) above 5,500 metres (18,000 ft) has a greater risk of altitude DCS than being exposed to the same altitude but at a lower rate of ascent.

[ 26 ] [ 40 ] The longer the duration of the dive, the greater is the risk of DCS. Longer flights, especially to altitudes of 5,500 m (18,000 ft) and above, carry a greater risk of altitude DCS.

[ 26 ] Underwater diving before flying – divers who ascend to altitude soon after a dive increase their risk of developing DCS even if the dive itself was within the dive table safe limits. Dive tables make provisions for post-dive time at surface level before flying to allow any residual excess nitrogen to outgas. However, the pressure maintained inside even a pressurized aircraft may be as low as the pressure equivalent to an altitude of 2,400 m (7,900 ft) above sea level. Therefore, the assumption that the dive table surface interval occurs at normal atmospheric pressure is invalidated by flying during that surface interval, and an otherwise-safe dive may then exceed the dive table limits.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Diving before travelling to altitude – DCS can occur without flying if the person moves to a high-altitude location on land immediately after diving, for example, scuba divers in Eritrea who drive from the coast to the Asmara plateau at 2,400 m (7,900 ft) increase their risk of DCS.

[ 45 ] diving at altitude – diving in water whose surface pressure is significantly below sea level pressure – for example, Lake Titicaca is at 3,800 m (12,500 ft). Versions of decompression tables for altitudes exceeding 300 m (980 ft), or dive computers with high-altitude settings or surface pressure sensors may be used to reduce this risk.

[ 42 ] [ 46 ] Individual [ edit ] Atrial septal defect (PFO) showing left-to-right shunt. A right-to-left shunt may allow bubbles to pass into the arterial circulation.

The following individual factors have been identified as possibly contributing to increased risk of DCS: Dehydration – Studies by Walder concluded that decompression sickness could be reduced in aviators when the serum surface tension was raised by drinking isotonic saline, [ 47 ] , and the high surface tension of water is generally regarded as helpful in controlling bubble size.

[ 40 ] Maintaining proper hydration is recommended.

[ 48 ] There is no convincing evidence that overhydration has any benefits, and it is implicated in immersion pulmonary oedema .

[ 49 ] Patent foramen ovale – a hole between the atrial chambers of the heart in the fetus is normally closed by a flap with the first breaths at birth. In about 20% of adults, the flap does not completely seal, however, allowing blood through the hole when coughing or during activities that raise chest pressure. In diving, this can allow venous blood with microbubbles of inert gas to bypass the lungs, where the bubbles would otherwise be filtered out by the lung capillary system, and return directly to the arterial system (including arteries to the brain, spinal cord and heart).

[ 50 ] In the arterial system, bubbles ( arterial gas embolism ) are far more dangerous because they block circulation and cause infarction (tissue death, due to local loss of blood flow). In the brain, infarction results in stroke , and in the spinal cord it may result in paralysis .

[ 51 ] There are some reports indicating a higher risk of altitude DCS with increasing age.

[ 19 ] [ 40 ] Previous injury – there is some indication that recent joint or limb injuries may predispose individuals to developing decompression-related bubbles.

[ 19 ] [ 52 ] Ambient temperature – there is some evidence suggesting that individual exposure to very cold ambient temperatures may increase the risk of altitude DCS.

[ 19 ] [ 40 ] Decompression sickness risk can be reduced by increased ambient temperature during decompression following dives in cold water, [ 53 ] though risk is also increased by ingassing while the diver is warm and peripherally well-perfused, and decompressing when the diver is cold.

[ 54 ] A person who has a high body fat content is at greater risk of DCS.

[ 19 ] [ 40 ] This is because nitrogen is five times more soluble in fat than in water, leading to greater amounts of total body dissolved nitrogen during time at pressure. Fat represents about 15–25 percent of a healthy adult's body, but stores about half of the total amount of nitrogen (about 1 litre) at normal pressures.

[ 55 ] Alcohol consumption – although alcohol consumption increases dehydration and therefore may increase susceptibility to DCS, [ 40 ] a 2005 study found no evidence that alcohol consumption increases the incidence of DCS.

[ 56 ] "Undeserved" decompression sickness [ edit ] A common misconception or misnomer is "undeserved" decompression sickness, which is more accurately decompression sickness that was not predicted by the algorithm or tables used. The algorithms and tables calculated from them use a simplistic mathematical model to predict decompression sickness which uses the dive profile as input and a mathematical approximation of tissue gas dynamics which omits a number of factors which are known or suspected to exist, but for which there is no known tested and reliable model to take the effects of these factors into account. In several cases, there is also no currently available way to measure the factors in a meaningful way, so they are either simply omitted or an arbitrary manual or programmed input is used to produce a more conservative, therefore "safer" profile, but the reduction in risk is generally unknown. When these necessarily oversimplified models occasionally fail, some divers claim that the decompression symptoms were "undeserved" as they followed the directions of the computed schedule.

[ 57 ] Mechanism [ edit ] See also: Physiology of decompression This surfacing diver must enter a decompression chamber for surface decompression , a standard operating procedure to avoid decompression sickness after long or deep bounce dives.

Depressurisation causes inert gases , which were dissolved under higher pressure , to come out of physical solution and form gas bubbles within the body. These bubbles produce the symptoms of decompression sickness.

[ 19 ] [ 58 ] Bubbles may form whenever the body experiences a reduction in pressure, but not all bubbles result in DCS.

[ 59 ] The amount of gas dissolved in a liquid is described by Henry's Law , which indicates that when the pressure of a gas in contact with a liquid is decreased, the amount of that gas dissolved in the liquid will also decrease proportionately.

[ 60 ] On ascent from a dive, inert gas comes out of solution in a process called " outgassing " or "offgassing". Under normal conditions, most offgassing occurs by gas exchange in the lungs .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] If inert gas comes out of solution too quickly to allow outgassing in the lungs, then bubbles may form in the blood or within the solid tissues of the body. The formation of bubbles in the skin or joints results in milder symptoms, while large numbers of bubbles in the venous blood can cause lung damage.

[ 63 ] The most severe types of DCS interrupt – and ultimately damage – spinal cord function, leading to paralysis , sensory dysfunction, or death. In the presence of a right-to-left shunt of the heart, such as a patent foramen ovale , venous bubbles may enter the arterial system, resulting in an arterial gas embolism .

[ 7 ] [ 64 ] A similar effect, known as ebullism , may occur during explosive decompression , when water vapour forms bubbles in body fluids due to a dramatic reduction in environmental pressure.

[ 65 ] Inert gases [ edit ] The main inert gas in air is nitrogen , but nitrogen is not the only gas that can cause DCS.

Breathing gas mixtures such as trimix and heliox include helium , which can also cause decompression sickness. Helium both enters and leaves the body faster than nitrogen, so different decompression schedules are required, but, since helium does not cause narcosis , it is preferred over nitrogen in gas mixtures for deep diving.

[ 66 ] There is some debate as to the decompression requirements for helium during short-duration dives. Most divers do longer decompressions; however, some groups like the WKPP have been experimenting with the use of shorter decompression times by including deep stops .

[ 67 ] The balance of evidence as of 2020 does not indicate that deep stops increase decompression efficiency.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Any inert gas that is breathed under pressure can form bubbles when the ambient pressure decreases. Very deep dives have been made using hydrogen –oxygen mixtures ( hydrox ), [ 70 ] but controlled decompression is still required to avoid DCS.

[ 71 ] Isobaric counterdiffusion [ edit ] Further information: Isobaric counterdiffusion DCS can also be caused at a constant ambient pressure when switching between gas mixtures containing different proportions of inert gas. This is known as isobaric counterdiffusion , and presents a problem for very deep dives.

[ 72 ] For example, after using a very helium-rich trimix at the deepest part of the dive, a diver will switch to mixtures containing progressively less helium and more oxygen and nitrogen during the ascent. Nitrogen diffuses into tissues 2.65 times slower than helium but is about 4.5 times more soluble. Switching between gas mixtures that have very different fractions of nitrogen and helium can result in "fast" tissues (those tissues that have a good blood supply) actually increasing their total inert gas loading. This is often found to provoke inner ear decompression sickness, as the ear seems particularly sensitive to this effect.

[ 73 ] Bubble formation [ edit ] The location of micronuclei or where bubbles initially form is not known.

[ 74 ] The most likely mechanisms for bubble formation are tribonucleation , when two surfaces make and break contact (such as in joints), and heterogeneous nucleation , where bubbles are created at a site based on a surface in contact with the liquid. Homogeneous nucleation, where bubbles form within the liquid itself, is less likely because it requires much greater pressure differences than experienced in decompression.

[ 74 ] The spontaneous formation of nanobubbles on hydrophobic surfaces is a possible source of micronuclei, but it is not yet clear if these can grow large enough to cause symptoms, as they are very stable.

[ 74 ] Once microbubbles have formed, they can grow by either a reduction in pressure or by diffusion of gas into the gas from its surroundings. In the body, bubbles may be located within tissues or carried along with the bloodstream. The speed of blood flow within a blood vessel and the rate of delivery of blood to capillaries ( perfusion ) are the main factors that determine whether dissolved gas is taken up by tissue bubbles or circulation bubbles for bubble growth.

[ 74 ] Pathophysiology [ edit ] The primary provoking agent in decompression sickness is bubble formation from excess dissolved gases. Various hypotheses have been put forward for the nucleation and growth of bubbles in tissues, and for the level of supersaturation which will support bubble growth. The earliest bubble formation detected is subclinical intravascular bubbles detectable by Doppler ultrasound in the venous systemic circulation. The presence of these "silent" bubbles is no guarantee that they will persist and grow to be symptomatic.

[ 75 ] Vascular bubbles formed in the systemic capillaries may be trapped in the lung capillaries, temporarily blocking them. If this is severe, the symptom called "chokes" may occur.

[ 76 ] If the diver has a patent foramen ovale (or a shunt in the pulmonary circulation), bubbles may pass through it and bypass the pulmonary circulation to enter the arterial blood. If these bubbles are not absorbed in the arterial plasma and lodge in systemic capillaries, they will block the flow of oxygenated blood to the tissues supplied by those capillaries, and those tissues will be starved of oxygen. Moon and Kisslo (1988) concluded that "the evidence suggests that the risk of serious neurological DCI or early onset DCI is increased in divers with a resting right–to-left shunt through a PFO. There is, at present, no evidence that PFO is related to mild or late-onset bends.

[ 77 ] Bubbles form within other tissues as well as the blood vessels.

[ 76 ] Inert gas can diffuse into bubble nuclei between tissues. In this case, the bubbles can distort and permanently damage the tissue.

[ 78 ] As they grow, the bubbles may also compress nerves, causing pain.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Extravascular or autochthonous [ b ] bubbles usually form in slow tissues such as joints, tendons and muscle sheaths. Direct expansion causes tissue damage, with the release of histamines and their associated effects. Biochemical damage may be as important as, or more important than, mechanical effects.

[ 76 ] [ 79 ] [ 81 ] Bubble size and growth may be affected by several factors – gas exchange with adjacent tissues, the presence of surfactants , coalescence and disintegration by collision.

[ 75 ] Vascular bubbles may cause direct blockage, aggregate platelets and red blood cells, and trigger the coagulation process, causing local and downstream clotting.

[ 78 ] Arteries may be blocked by intravascular fat aggregation.

Platelets accumulate in the vicinity of bubbles.

Endothelial damage may be a mechanical effect of bubble pressure on the vessel walls, a toxic effect of stabilised platelet aggregates and possibly toxic effects due to the association of lipids with the air bubbles.

[ 75 ] Protein molecules may be denatured by reorientation of the secondary and tertiary structure when non-polar groups protrude into the bubble gas and hydrophilic groups remain in the surrounding blood, which may generate a cascade of pathophysiological events with consequent production of clinical signs of decompression sickness.

[ 75 ] The physiological effects of a reduction in environmental pressure depend on the rate of bubble growth, the site, and surface activity. A sudden release of sufficient pressure in saturated tissue results in a complete disruption of cellular organelles, while a more gradual reduction in pressure may allow accumulation of a smaller number of larger bubbles, some of which may not produce clinical signs, but still cause physiological effects typical of a blood/gas interface and mechanical effects. Gas is dissolved in all tissues, but decompression sickness is only clinically recognised in the central nervous system, bone, ears, teeth, skin and lungs.

[ 82 ] Necrosis has frequently been reported in the lower cervical, thoracic, and upper lumbar regions of the spinal cord. A catastrophic pressure reduction from saturation produces explosive mechanical disruption of cells by local effervescence, while a more gradual pressure loss tends to produce discrete bubbles accumulated in the white matter, surrounded by a protein layer.

[ 82 ] Typical acute spinal decompression injury occurs in the columns of white matter. Infarcts are characterised by a region of oedema , haemorrhage and early myelin degeneration, and are typically centred on small blood vessels. The lesions are generally discrete. Oedema usually extends to the adjacent grey matter.

Microthrombi are found in the blood vessels associated with the infarcts.

[ 82 ] Following the acute changes, there is an invasion of lipid phagocytes and degeneration of adjacent neural fibres with vascular hyperplasia at the edges of the infarcts. The lipid phagocytes are later replaced by a cellular reaction of astrocytes . Vessels in surrounding areas remain patent but are collagenised .

[ 82 ] Distribution of spinal cord lesions may be related to vascular supply. There is still uncertainty regarding the aetiology of decompression sickness damage to the spinal cord.

[ 82 ] Dysbaric osteonecrosis lesions are typically bilateral and usually occur at both ends of the femur and at the proximal end of the humerus . Symptoms are usually only present when a joint surface is involved, which typically does not occur until a long time after the causative exposure to a hyperbaric environment. The initial damage is attributed to the formation of bubbles, and one episode can be sufficient; however, incidence is sporadic and generally associated with relatively long periods of hyperbaric exposure and aetiology is uncertain. Early identification of lesions by radiography is not possible, but over time, areas of radiographic opacity develop in association with the damaged bone.

[ 83 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] Diagnosis of decompression sickness relies almost entirely on clinical presentation, as there are no laboratory tests that can incontrovertibly confirm or reject the diagnosis. Various blood tests have been proposed, but they are not specific for decompression sickness, they are of uncertain utility and are not in general use.

[ 84 ] Decompression sickness should be suspected if any of the symptoms associated with the condition occur following a drop in pressure, in particular, within 24 hours of diving.

[ 85 ] In 1995, 95% of all cases reported to Divers Alert Network had shown symptoms within 24 hours.

[ 86 ] This window can be extended to 36 hours for ascent to altitude and 48 hours for prolonged exposure to altitude following diving.

[ 11 ] An alternative diagnosis should be suspected if severe symptoms begin more than six hours following decompression without an altitude exposure or if any symptom occurs more than 24 hours after surfacing.

[ 87 ] The diagnosis is confirmed if the symptoms are relieved by recompression.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) can frequently identify bubbles in DCS, they are not as good at determining the diagnosis as a proper history of the event and description of the symptoms.

[ 5 ] Test of pressure [ edit ] There is no gold standard for diagnosis, and DCI experts are rare. Most of the chambers open to treatment of recreational divers and reporting to Diver's Alert Network see fewer than 10 cases per year, making it difficult for the attending doctors to develop experience in diagnosis. A method used by commercial diving supervisors when considering whether to recompress as first aid when they have a chamber on site is known as the test of pressure . The diver is checked for contraindications to recompression, and if none are present, recompressed. If the symptoms resolve or reduce during recompression, it is considered likely that a treatment schedule will be effective. The test is not entirely reliable, and both false positives and false negatives are possible, however in the commercial diving environment it is often considered worth treating when there is doubt, [ 84 ] and very early recompression has a history of very high success rates and reduced number of treatments needed for complete resolution and minimal sequelae.

[ 1 ] [ 89 ] For pain-only symptoms of suspected decompression sickness, a technique using a blood-pressure cuff on the affected limb can give an indication of likely DCS. The cuff is inflated over the painful area, and if the pressure relieves the pain, it is likely decompression sickness. There is a high rate of false negatives, and the method is not considered reliable. A positive test can be considered to confirm a diagnosis of DCS, but a negative test does not rule it out, and the results of a pressure cuff test do predict the rate of resolution of
symptoms during recompression treatment.

[ 90 ] Differential diagnosis [ edit ] See also: Inner ear decompression sickness § Diagnosis Symptoms of DCS and arterial gas embolism can be virtually indistinguishable. The most reliable way to tell the difference is based on the dive profile followed, as the probability of DCS depends on the duration of exposure and the magnitude of pressure, whereas AGE depends entirely on the performance of the ascent. In many cases, it is not possible to distinguish between the two, but as the treatment is the same in such cases, it does not usually matter.

[ 11 ] Other conditions which may be confused include skin symptoms.

Cutis marmorata due to DCS may be confused with skin barotrauma due to dry suit squeeze , for which no treatment is necessary. Dry suit squeeze produces lines of redness with possible bruising where the skin was pinched between folds of the suit, while the mottled effect of cutis marmorata is usually on skin where there is subcutaneous fat, and has no linear pattern.

[ 11 ] Transient episodes of severe neurological incapacitation with rapid spontaneous recovery shortly after a dive may be attributed to hypothermia , but may actually be symptomatic of short-term CNS involvement due to bubbles which form a short-term gas embolism, then resolve, but which may leave residual problems which may cause relapses. These cases are thought to be underdiagnosed.

[ 11 ] Inner ear decompression sickness (IEDCS) can be confused with inner ear barotrauma (IEBt), alternobaric vertigo , caloric vertigo and reverse squeeze . A history of difficulty in equalising the ears during the dive makes ear barotrauma more likely, but does not always eliminate the possibility of inner ear DCS, which is usually associated with deep, mixed gas dives with decompression stops.

[ 11 ] Both conditions may exist concurrently, and it can be difficult to distinguish whether a person has IEDCS, IEBt , or both.

[ 91 ] Numbness and tingling are associated with spinal DCS, but can also be caused by pressure on nerves (compression neurapraxia ). In DCS the numbness or tingling is generally confined to one or a series of dermatomes , while pressure on a nerve tends to produce characteristic areas of numbness associated with the specific nerve on only one side of the body distal to the pressure point.

[ 11 ] A loss of strength or function is likely to be a medical emergency. A loss of feeling that lasts more than a minute or two indicates a need for immediate medical attention. It is only partial sensory changes, or paraesthesias , where this distinction between trivial and more serious injuries applies.

[ 92 ] Large areas of numbness with associated weakness or paralysis, especially if a whole limb is affected, are indicative of probable brain involvement and require urgent medical attention. Paraesthesias or weakness involving a dermatome indicate probable spinal cord or spinal nerve root involvement. Although it is possible that this may have other causes, such as an injured intervertebral disk, these symptoms indicate an urgent need for medical assessment. In combination with weakness, paralysis or loss of bowel or bladder control, they indicate a medical emergency.

[ 92 ] Prevention [ edit ] Underwater diving [ edit ] See also: Decompression practice The display of a basic personal dive computer shows depth, dive time, and decompression information.

Video: Setting the bezel of a diving watch to the start time of the dive at the beginning. Divers used this in conjunction with a depth gauge and a decompression table to calculate the remaining safe dive time during dives. Dive computers rendered this cumbersome procedure unnecessary.

To prevent the excess formation of bubbles that can lead to decompression sickness, divers limit their ascent rate—the recommended ascent rate used by popular decompression models is about 10 metres (33 ft) per minute—and follow a decompression schedule as necessary.

[ 93 ] This schedule may require the diver to ascend to a particular depth, and remain at that depth until sufficient inert gas has been eliminated from the body to allow further ascent.

[ 94 ] Each of these is termed a " decompression stop ", and a schedule for a given bottom time and depth may contain one or more stops, or none at all. Dives that contain no decompression stops are called "no-stop dives", but divers usually schedule a short " safety stop " at 3 to 6 m (10 to 20 ft),  depending on the training agency or dive computer.

[ 93 ] [ c ] The decompression schedule may be derived from decompression tables , decompression software , or from dive computers , and these are generally based upon a mathematical model of the body's uptake and release of inert gas as pressure changes. These models, such as the Bühlmann decompression algorithm , are modified to fit empirical data and provide a decompression schedule for a given depth and dive duration using a specified breathing gas mixture.

[ 95 ] Since divers on the surface after a dive may still have excess inert gas in their bodies, decompression from any subsequent dive before this excess is eliminated needs to modify the schedule to take account of the residual gas load from the previous dive. This will result in a shorter allowable time under water without obligatory decompression stops, or an increased decompression time during the subsequent dive. The total elimination of excess gas may take many hours, and tables will indicate the time at normal pressures that is required, which may be up to 18 hours.

[ 96 ] Decompression time can be significantly shortened by breathing mixtures containing much less inert gas during the decompression phase of the dive (or pure oxygen at stops in 6 metres (20 ft) of water or less). The reason is that the inert gas outgases at a rate proportional to the difference between the partial pressure of inert gas in the diver's body and its partial pressure in the breathing gas; whereas the likelihood of bubble formation depends on the difference between the inert gas partial pressure in the diver's body and the ambient pressure. Reduction in decompression requirements can also be gained by breathing a nitrox mix during the dive, since less nitrogen will be taken into the body than during the same dive done on air.

[ 97 ] Following a decompression schedule does not completely protect against DCS. The algorithms used are designed to reduce the probability of DCS to a very low level, but do not reduce it to zero.

[ 98 ] The mathematical implications of all current decompression models are that provided that no tissue is ingassing, longer decompression stops will decrease decompression risk, or at worst not increase it. Efficient decompression requires the diver to ascend fast enough to establish as high a decompression gradient, in as many tissues, as safely possible, without provoking the development of symptomatic bubbles. This is facilitated by the highest acceptably safe oxygen partial pressure in the breathing gas, and avoiding gas changes that could cause counterdiffusion bubble formation or growth.

[ 99 ] The development of schedules that are both safe and efficient has been complicated by the large number of variables and uncertainties, including personal variation in response under varying environmental conditions and workload, attributed to variations of body type, fitness and other risk factors.

[ 100 ] Exposure to altitude [ edit ] One of the most significant breakthroughs in the prevention of altitude DCS is oxygen pre-breathing. Breathing pure oxygen significantly reduces the nitrogen loads in body tissues by reducing the partial pressure of nitrogen in the lungs, which induces diffusion of nitrogen from the blood into the breathing gas, and this effect eventually lowers the concentration of nitrogen in the other tissues of the body. If continued for long enough, and without interruption, this provides effective protection upon exposure to low-barometric pressure environments.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] However, breathing pure oxygen during flight alone (ascent, en route, descent) does not decrease the risk of altitude DCS as the time required for ascent is generally not sufficient to significantly desaturate the slower tissues.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Pure aviator oxygen, which has moisture removed to prevent freezing of valves at altitude, is readily available and routinely used in general aviation mountain flying and at high altitudes. Most small general aviation aircraft are not pressurized; therefore, oxygen use is an FAA requirement at higher altitudes.

[ 101 ] Although pure oxygen pre-breathing is an effective method to protect against altitude DCS, it is logistically complicated and expensive for the protection of civil aviation flyers, either commercial or private. Therefore, it is currently used only by military flight crews and astronauts for protection during high-altitude and space operations. It is also used by flight test crews involved with certifying aircraft, and may also be used for high-altitude parachute jumps.

[ 102 ] Astronauts aboard the International Space Station preparing for extra-vehicular activity (EVA) "camp out" at low atmospheric pressure, 10.2 psi (0.70 bar), spending eight sleeping hours in the Quest airlock chamber before their spacewalk . During the EVA they breathe 100% oxygen in their spacesuits , which operate at 4.3 psi (0.30 bar), [ 103 ] although research has examined the possibility of using 100% O 2 at 9.5 psi (0.66 bar) in the suits to lessen the pressure reduction, and hence the risk of DCS.

[ 104 ] Treatment [ edit ] Further information: Hyperbaric medicine The recompression chamber at the Neutral Buoyancy Lab .

Hyperbaric oxygen treatment in a monoplace chamber Recompression on air was shown to be an effective treatment for minor DCS symptoms by Keays in 1909.

[ 105 ] Evidence of the effectiveness of recompression therapy utilizing oxygen was first shown by Yarbrough and Behnke , [ 106 ] and has since become the standard of care for treatment of DCS.

[ 107 ] Recompression is normally carried out in a recompression chamber . At a dive site, a riskier alternative is in-water recompression .

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 1 ] Oxygen first aid has been used as an emergency treatment for diving injuries for years.

[ 111 ] Particularly if given within the first four hours of surfacing, it increases the success of recompression therapy as well as decreases the number of recompression treatments required.

[ 112 ] Most fully closed-circuit diving rebreathers can deliver sustained high concentrations of oxygen-rich breathing gas and could be used as a means of supplying oxygen if dedicated equipment is not available.

[ 113 ] It is beneficial to give fluids, as this helps reduce dehydration . It is no longer recommended to administer aspirin, unless advised to do so by medical personnel, as analgesics may mask symptoms. People should be made comfortable and placed in the supine position (horizontal), or the recovery position if vomiting occurs.

[ 85 ] In the past, both the Trendelenburg position and the left lateral decubitus position (Durant's maneuver) have been suggested as beneficial where air emboli are suspected, [ 114 ] but are no longer recommended for extended periods, owing to concerns regarding cerebral edema .

[ 111 ] [ 115 ] First aid [ edit ] All cases of decompression sickness should be treated initially with the highest available concentration of oxygen until hyperbaric oxygen therapy (100% oxygen delivered in a hyperbaric chamber) can be provided.

[ 116 ] Mild cases of the "bends" and some skin symptoms may disappear during descent from high altitude; however, it is recommended that these cases still be evaluated. Neurological symptoms, pulmonary symptoms, and mottled or marbled skin lesions should be treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy if seen within 10 to 14 days of development.

[ 117 ] Early recompression has a history of better outcomes and less treatment being needed.

[ 1 ] Normobaric oxygen administered at as close to 100% as practicable is known to be beneficial based on observed bubble reduction and symptom resolution. For this reason, diver training in oxygen administration, and a system for administering a high percentage of inspired oxygen at quantities sufficient for plausible evacuation scenarios, is desirable. Where oxygenation may be compromised the administration rate should be adjusted to ensure that the best practicable supplementation is maintained until supplies can be replenished.

[ 1 ] A horizontal position is preferable during evacuation if possible, with the recovery position recommended for unconscious divers, as there is evidence that inert gas washout is improved in horizontal subjects, and that large arterial bubbles tend to distribute towards the head in upright positions. A head down position is thought to be harmful in DCS.

[ 1 ] Oral hydration is often used if the person is fully conscious; fluids are typically isotonic , without alcohol, carbonation or caffeine, as diving is known to cause dehydration, and rehydration is known to reduce post-dive venous gas emboli.

[ 1 ] Intravascular rehydration is commonly used if trained medical professionals are present. Glucose-free isotonic crystalloid solutions are preferred. Case evidence shows that aggressive rehydration can be life-saving in severe cases.

[ 1 ] Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), along with hyperbaric oxygen, improves the rate of recovery. The most commonly used NSAIDs are aspirin , ibuprofen , and naproxen ; all available over the counter in most countries.

[ 118 ] Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is generally not considered an NSAID because it has only minor anti-inflammatory activity.

[ 119 ] Corticosteroids , pentoxyphylline , aspirin , lidocaine and nicergoline have been used in early management of DCS, but there is insufficient evidence on their effectiveness.

[ 1 ] Divers are often kept comfortably warm, as warmth can help eliminate gas more quickly, but overheating aggravates neurological injury.

[ 1 ] Delay of recompression [ edit ] Observational evidence shows that outcomes after recompression are likely to be better after immediate recompression, which is only possible when on-site recompression is possible, although the 2004 workshop on decompression came to the conclusion that for cases with mild symptoms, a delay before recompression is unlikely to cause any worsening of long-term outcomes.

[ 1 ] In more serious cases, recompression should be done as soon as safely possible. There is some evidence that delays longer than six hours result in slower or less complete recovery, and the number of treatments required may be increased.

[ 1 ] Transport of a symptomatic diver [ edit ] Exposing a case of decompression sickness to reduced ambient pressure will cause the bubbles to expand if not constrained by a rigid local tissue environment. This can aggravate the symptoms and should be avoided if reasonably practicable. If a diver with DCS is transported by air, cabin pressure should be kept as close to sea level atmospheric pressure as possible, preferably not more than 150 m, either by cabin pressurisation or by remaining at low altitude throughout the flight. The risk of deterioration at higher altitudes must be considered against the risk of deterioration if not transported. Some divers with symptoms or signs of mild decompression sickness may be evacuated by pressurised commercial airliner for further treatment after a surface interval of at least 24 hours. The 2004 workshop considered it unlikely for this to cause a worse outcome. Most experience has been for short flights of less than two hours. There is little known about the effects of longer flights. Where possible, pre-flight and in-flight oxygen breathing at the highest available percentage is considered best practice. Similar precautions apply to surface transport through higher altitudes.

[ 1 ] In-water recompression [ edit ] Main article: In-water recompression Recompression and hyperbaric oxygen administered in a recompression chamber is recognised as the definitive treatment for DCI, but when there is no readily available access to a suitable hyperbaric chamber, and if symptoms are significant or progressing, in-water recompression (IWR) with oxygen is a medically recognised option where a group of divers including the symptomatic diver already have relevant training and equipment that provides a sufficient understanding of the associated risks and allows the involved parties to collectively accept responsibility for a decision to proceed with IWR.

[ 89 ] [ 2 ] In-water recompression (IWR) or underwater oxygen treatment is the emergency treatment of decompression sickness by returning the diver underwater to help the gas bubbles in the tissues, which are causing the symptoms, to resolve. It is a procedure that exposes the diver to significant risk which should be compared with the risk associated with the other available options. Some authorities recommend that it is only to be used when the time to travel to the nearest recompression chamber is too long to save the victim's life; others take a more pragmatic approach, and accept that in some circumstances IWR is the best available option.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] The risks may not be justified for case of mild symptoms likely to resolve spontaneously, or for cases where the diver is likely to be unsafe in the water, but in-water recompression may be justified in cases where severe outcomes are likely, if conducted by a competent and suitably equipped team.

[ 1 ] Carrying out in-water recompression when there is a nearby recompression chamber or without suitable equipment and training is never a desirable option.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] The risk of the procedure is due to the diver suffering from DCS being seriously ill and may become paralysed , unconscious or stop breathing while under water. Any one of these events is likely to result in the diver drowning or asphyxiating or suffering further injury during a subsequent rescue to the surface. This risk can be reduced by improving airway security by using surface supplied gas and a helmet or full-face mask.

[ 1 ] Several schedules have been published for in-water recompression treatment, but little data on their efficacy is available.

[ 1 ] The decision of whether or not to attempt IWR is dependent on identifying the diver whose condition is serious enough to justify the risk, but whose clinical condition does not indicate that the risk is unacceptable. The risk may not be justified for mild DCI, if spontaneous recovery is probable, whether the diver is recompressed or not, and surface oxygen is indicated for these cases. However, in these cases the risk of recompression is also low, and early abandonment is also unlikely to cause further harm.

[ 1 ] Contraindications [ edit ] Some signs of decompression illness, which suggest a risk of permanent injury, are nevertheless considered contraindications for IWR.  Hearing loss and vertigo displayed in isolation with no other symptoms of DCI can have been caused by inner ear barotrauma rather than DCI, and inner ear barotrauma is generally considered a contraindication for recompression. Even when caused by DCI, vertigo can make in-water treatment hazardous if accompanied by nausea and vomiting. A diver with a deteriorating level of consciousness or with a persisting reduced level of consciousness should also not be recompressed in-water, nor should a diver who does not want to go back down, or with a history of oxygen toxicity in the preceding dives, or any physical injury or incapacitation which may make the procedure unsafe.

[ 1 ] Definitive treatment [ edit ] Further information: Hyperbaric treatment schedules The duration of recompression treatment depends on the severity of symptoms, the dive history, the type of recompression therapy used and the patient's response to the treatment. One of the more frequently used treatment schedules is the US Navy Table 6 , which provides hyperbaric oxygen therapy with a maximum pressure equivalent to 60 feet (18 m) of seawater (2.8 bar P O 2 ) for a total time under pressure of 288 minutes, of which 240 minutes are on oxygen and the balance are air breaks to minimise the possibility of oxygen toxicity .

[ 122 ] A multiplace chamber is the preferred facility for treatment of decompression sickness as it allows direct physical access to the patient by medical personnel, but monoplace chambers are more widely available and should be used for treatment if a multiplace chamber is not available or transportation would cause significant delay in treatment, as the interval between onset of symptoms and recompression is important to the quality of recovery.

[ 123 ] It may be necessary to modify the optimum treatment schedule to allow use of a monoplace chamber, but this is usually better than delaying treatment. A US Navy treatment table 5 can be safely performed without air breaks if a built-in breathing system is not available.

[ 123 ] In most cases, the patient can be adequately treated in a monoplace chamber at the receiving hospital.

[ 123 ] Altitude decompression sickness [ edit ] Further information: Hypobaric decompression Treatment and management may vary depending on the grade or form of decompression sickness and the treating facility or organization. First aid at altitude is oxygen at the highest practicable concentration and the earliest and largest practicable reduction in cabin altitude.

[ 36 ] Ground-level 100% oxygen therapy is suggested for 2 hours following type-1 decompression sickness that occurs at altitude, if it resolves upon descent. In more severe cases, hyperbaric oxygen therapy following standard recompression protocols is indicated. Decompression sickness in aviation most commonly follows flights in non-pressurized aircraft, flights with cabin pressure fluctuations, or in individuals who fly after diving. Cases have also been reported after the use of altitude chambers. These are relatively rare clinical events.

[ 124 ] Prognosis [ edit ] Immediate treatment with 100% oxygen, followed by recompression in a hyperbaric chamber, will in most cases result in no long-term effects. However, permanent long-term injury from DCS is possible. Three-month follow-ups on diving accidents reported to DAN in 1987 showed 14.3% of the 268 divers surveyed had ongoing symptoms of Type II DCS, and 7% from Type I DCS.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Long-term follow-ups showed similar results, with 16% having permanent neurological sequelae.

[ 127 ] Hyperbaric oxygen has also had generally successful results in treatment of hypobaric decompression sickness.

[ 128 ] Long-term effects are dependent on both the initial injury and treatment. While almost all cases will resolve more quickly with treatment, milder cases may resolve adequately over time without recompression, where the damage is minor and the damage is not significantly aggravated by lack of treatment. In some cases the cost, inconvenience, and risk to the patient may make it appropriate not to evacuate to a hyperbaric treatment facility. These cases should be assessed by a specialist in diving medicine, which can generally be done remotely by telephone or internet.

[ 11 ] For joint pain, the likely tissues affected depend on the symptoms, and the urgency of hyperbaric treatment will depend largely on the tissues involved.

[ 11 ] Sharp, localised pain that is affected by movement suggests tendon or muscle injury, both of which will usually fully resolve with oxygen and anti-inflammatory medication.

[ 11 ] Sharp, localised pain that is not affected by movement suggests local inflammation, which will also usually fully resolve with oxygen and anti-inflammatory medication.

[ 11 ] Deep, non-localised pain affected by movement suggests joint capsule tension, which is likely to fully resolve with oxygen and anti-inflammatory medication, though recompression will help it to resolve faster.

[ 11 ] [ 11 ] Deep, non-localised pain not affected by movement suggests bone medulla involvement, with ischaemia due to blood vessel blockage and swelling inside the bone, which is mechanistically associated with osteonecrosis, and therefore it has been strongly recommended that these symptoms are treated with hyperbaric oxygen.

[ 11 ] Epidemiology [ edit ] A fundamental difference between DCS caused by decompression from hyperbaric exposure and from hypobaric exposure, is that in the first category the affected person develops symptoms while returning to normal conditions, usually after an exposure which leaves tissues in varying states of supersaturation, and treatment typically requires hypobaric pressures to alleviate symptoms, while the second category is usually decompression from saturation at normal conditions, and the symptoms occur during an upward excursion from those conditions, and a return to normal conditions will of itself provide a certain amount of therapy.

[ 129 ] : 14 [ 130 ] DCS from hyperbaric exposure [ edit ] The incidence of decompression sickness in surface oriented divers is rare, estimated at 2.8 to 4 cases per 10,000 dives, [ 84 ] with the risk 2.6 times greater for males than females.

[ 5 ] DCS affects approximately 1,000 U.S. scuba divers per year.

[ 85 ] In 1999, the Divers Alert Network (DAN) created "Project Dive Exploration" to collect data on dive profiles and incidents. From 1998 to 2002, they recorded 50,150 dives, from which 28 recompressions were required – although these will almost certainly contain incidents of arterial gas embolism (AGE) – a rate of about 0.05%.

[ 4 ] [ 131 ] According to Divers Alert Network the number of recreational divers who experience decompression sickness at some time is less than 1%, and the risk decreases with greater experience, suggesting a greater level of skill is more important than a higher exposure rate and lower physical fitness due to age.

[ 4 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] It is difficult to assess decompression risk in recent saturation decompressions as the data is generally not available; however, it is known to be very uncommon since 2000, with some operators not having any cases in a 10-year period, while in the early days of commercial saturation diving, it was in the order of 1%. Saturation decompression is most likely to produce joint pain symptoms in the late stages of decompression. Venous gas bubbles are generally detected without symptomatic DCS, but this has also become rare.

[ 133 ] Around 2013, Honduras had the highest number of decompression-related deaths and disabilities in the world, caused by unsafe practices in lobster diving among the indigenous Miskito people , who face great economic pressures.

[ 134 ] At that time, it was estimated that in the country over 2000 divers had been injured and 300 others had died since the 1970s.

[ 134 ] DCS from hypobaric exposure [ edit ] Altitude DCS can occur as a consequence of unpressurized aircraft flights, flights experiencing severe cabin pressure fluctuations, flying shortly after diving, and exposure to low pressure in hypobaric chambers.

[ 31 ] Populations at high risk for altitude decompression sickness include : High-altitude high-opening (HAHO) and high-altitude low-opening (HALO) parachutists , [ 135 ] [ 136 ] and parachutist dispatchers .

[ 137 ] High altitude aerial reconnaissance aircrew.

[ 135 ] [ 138 ] Astronauts , [ 139 ] High altitude climbers .

[ 138 ] The most common manifestation of altitude DCS is pain in the shoulders caused by gas bubbles, followed by elbows, knees, and ankles. Joint pain occurs in 60 to 70% of all reported altitude DCS cases.

[ 36 ] Neurological decompression sickness comprises a very low proportion of DCS caused by hypobaric exposure, but it is more likely to involve the brain than the spinal cord. Symptoms may range from slow thought processes to more severe confusion, aphasia, unresponsiveness or permanent cognitive capacity reduction.

[ 138 ] Less than 13% of cases occurred in exposures lower than 25,000 feet. Risk is increased by even mild hyperbaric exposure within the preceding 24 hours, and reduced by oxygen prebreathing before flight. Repetitive exposures, rapid altitude increases, and long exposure times increase risk.

[ 36 ] Sulaiman et al 1997 found a distinct trend toward increased susceptibility to altitude decompression sickness with increasing age, particularly in subjects over 42 years old.

[ 140 ] Simulated EVA exposure tests by NASA showed a strong correlation between detectable precordial bubbles and symptomatic DCS, and between repeated exposures and DCS.

[ 139 ] Exercise, altitude and the ratio of oxygen pre-breathing to exposure time were found to be the most significant risk factors.

[ 141 ] The effects of physiological factors such as age, physique, fitness, presence of PFO, gender, and hydration status in a hypobaric environment on DCS risk remain unknown due to a lack of relevant studies.

[ 138 ] Timeline [ edit ] See also: History of decompression research and development and Dive computer § History The history of decompression sickness originates in the observation that rapid decompression can produce signs and symptoms of characteristic disorders, which are to a significant extent reproducible within a fairly broad range. Once this had been established by observation, the efforts to explain the etiology followed, as did experimental work intended to provide treatment and reduce risk. As the technology of diving developed, greater exposure to decompression risk and symptomatic disorders followed, and as there are strong economic incentives to the use of hyperbaric and hypobaric workplace exposures, concern for the health and safety of persons at risk encouraged further research.

[ 142 ] 1670: Robert Boyle demonstrated that a reduction in ambient pressure could lead to bubble formation in living tissue. This description of a bubble forming in the eye of a viper subjected to a near vacuum was the first recorded description of decompression sickness.

[ 143 ] 1769: Giovanni Morgagni described the post mortem findings of air in cerebral circulation and surmised that this was the cause of death.

[ 144 ] 1840: Charles Pasley , who was involved in the recovery of the sunken warship HMS Royal George , commented that, of those having made frequent dives, "not a man escaped the repeated attacks of rheumatism [ d ] and cold".

[ 145 ] 1841: First documented case of decompression sickness, reported by mining engineer Jacques Triger , who observed pain and muscle cramps among coal miners working in mine shafts air-pressurized to keep water out.

[ 146 ] 1854: Decompression sickness reported and one resulting death of caisson workers on the Royal Albert Bridge .

[ 147 ] 1867: Panamanian pearl divers using the revolutionary Sub Marine Explorer submersible repeatedly experienced "fever" due to rapid ascents. Continued sickness led to the vessel's abandonment in 1869.

[ 148 ] 1870: Louis Bauer published outcomes of 25 paralyzed caisson workers on the Eads Bridge.

[ 149 ] From 1870 to 1910, all prominent features were established. Explanations at the time included: cold or exhaustion causing reflex spinal cord damage; electricity caused by friction on compression; or organ congestion ; and vascular stasis caused by decompression.

[ 144 ] The Eads Bridge where 42 workers were injured by caisson disease 1871: The Eads Bridge in St Louis employed 352 compressed air workers including Alphonse Jaminet as the physician in charge. There were 30 seriously injured and 12 fatalities. Jaminet himself developed decompression sickness and his personal description was the first such recorded.

[ 29 ] According to Divers Alert Network, in its Inert Gas Exchange, Bubbles and Decompression Theory course, this is where "bends" was first used to refer to DCS.

[ 150 ] 1872: The similarity between decompression sickness and iatrogenic air embolism, as well as the relationship between inadequate decompression and decompression sickness, was noted by Friedburg.

[ 144 ] He suggested that intravascular gas was released by rapid decompression and recommended: slow compression and decompression; four-hour working shifts; limit to maximum pressure of 44.1 psig (4 atm ); using only healthy workers; and recompression treatment for severe cases.

[ 144 ] 1873: Andrew Smith first used the term "caisson disease" describing 110 cases of decompression sickness as the physician in charge during construction of the Brooklyn Bridge .

[ 29 ] [ 151 ] The project employed 600 compressed air workers. Recompression treatment was not used. The project chief engineer Washington Roebling had caisson disease, [ 29 ] and endured the after-effects of the disease for the rest of his life. During this project, decompression sickness became known as "The Grecian Bends" or simply "the bends" because affected individuals characteristically bent forward at the hips: this is possibly reminiscent of a then popular women's fashion and dance maneuver known as the Grecian Bend .

[ 29 ] [ 152 ] 1890: During construction of the Hudson River Tunnel contractor's agent Ernest William Moir pioneered the use of an airlock chamber for treatment.

[ 30 ] 1900: Leonard Hill used a frog model to prove that decompression causes bubbles and that recompression resolves them.

[ 144 ] [ 153 ] Hill advocated linear or uniform decompression profiles .

[ 144 ] [ 153 ] This type of decompression is used today by saturation divers . His work was financed by Augustus Siebe and the Siebe Gorman Company .

[ 144 ] 1904: Tunnel building to and from Manhattan Island caused over 3,000 injuries and over 30 deaths, which led to laws requiring PSI limits and decompression rules for "sandhogs" in the United States.

[ 154 ] 1904: Siebe and Gorman, in conjunction with Leonard Hill, developed and produced a closed bell in which a diver can be decompressed at the surface.

[ 155 ] An early recompression chamber (door removed for public safety) 1908: "The Prevention of Compressed Air Illness" was published by JS Haldane , Boycott and Damant recommending staged decompression .

[ 156 ] These tables were accepted for use by the Royal Navy.

[ 144 ] 1914–16: Experimental decompression chambers were in use on land and aboard ship.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] 1924: The US Navy published the first standardized recompression procedure.

[ 160 ] 1930s: Albert R Behnke separated the symptoms of Arterial Gas Embolism (AGE) from those of DCS.

[ 144 ] 1935: Behnke et al. experimented with oxygen for recompression therapy.

[ 144 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] 1937: Behnke introduced the "no-stop" decompression tables.

[ 144 ] 1941: Altitude DCS is treated with hyperbaric oxygen for the first time.

[ 162 ] 1944: US Navy published hyperbaric treatment tables " Long Air Recompression Table with Oxygen " and " Short Oxygen Recompression Table ", both using 100% oxygen at pressures of 60 fsw (18 msw) and less.

[ 163 ] 1945: Field results showed that the 1944 oxygen treatment table was not yet satisfactory, so a series of tests was conducted by staff from the Navy Medical Research Institute and the Navy Experimental Diving Unit using human subjects to verify and modify the treatment tables.

[ 107 ] [ 164 ] Tests were conducted using the 100-foot air-oxygen treatment table and the 100-foot air treatment table, which were found to be satisfactory. Other tables were extended until they produced satisfactory results. The resulting tables were used as the standard treatment for the next 20 years, and these tables and slight modifications were adopted by other navies and industry. Over time, evidence accumulated that the success of these tables for severe decompression sickness was not very good.

[ 107 ] 1957: Robert Workman established a new method for calculation of decompression requirements (M-values).

[ 165 ] 1959: The "SOS Decompression Meter", a submersible mechanical device that simulated nitrogen uptake and release, was introduced.

[ 166 ] 1960: FC Golding et al.

split the classification of DCS into Types 1 and 2.

[ 167 ] 1965: Low success rates of the existing US Navy treatment tables led to the development of the oxygen treatment table by Goodman and Workman in 1965, variations of which are still in general use as the definitive treatment for most cases of decompression sickness.

[ 107 ] 1965: LeMessurier and Hills published a paper on A thermodynamic approach arising from a study on Torres Strait diving techniques which suggests that decompression by conventional models results in bubble formation, which is then eliminated by re-dissolving at the decompression stops.

[ 168 ] 1976: M.P. Spencer showed that the sensitivity of decompression testing is increased by the use of ultrasonic methods, which can detect mobile venous bubbles before symptoms of DCS emerge.

[ 169 ] 1982: Paul K Weathersby, Louis D Homer and Edward T Flynn introduce survival analysis into the study of decompression sickness.

[ 170 ] 1983: Orca produced the " EDGE ", a personal dive computer, using a microprocessor to calculate nitrogen absorption for twelve tissue compartments.

[ 166 ] 1984: Albert A Bühlmann released his book "Decompression–Decompression Sickness", which detailed his deterministic model for calculation of decompression schedules.

[ 171 ] 1989: The advent of dive computers had not been widely accepted, [ 172 ] but after the 1989 AAUS Dive computer workshop published a group consensus list of recommendations for the use of dive computers in scientific diving, most opposition to dive computers dissipated, numerous new models were introduced, the technology dramatically improved and dive computers became standard scuba diving equipment. Over time, some of the recommendations became irrelevant as the technology improved.

[ 173 ] 2000: HydroSpace Engineering developed the HS Explorer, a Trimix computer with optional P O 2 monitoring and twin decompression algorithms, Buhlmann, and the first full real-time RGBM implementation.

[ 174 ] 2001: The US Navy approved the use of Cochran NAVY decompression computer with the VVAL 18 Thalmann algorithm for Special Warfare operations.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] By 2010: The use of dive computers for decompression status tracking was virtually ubiquitous among recreational divers and widespread in scientific diving.

[ 177 ] 2018: A group of diving medical experts issued a consensus guideline on pre-hospital decompression sickness management and concluded that in-water recompression is a valid and effective emergency treatment where a chamber is not available, but is only appropriate in groups that have been trained and are competent in the skills required for IWR and have appropriate equipment.

[ 89 ] 2023: The animal rights group, PETA , says that it has successfully lobbied the US Navy to end a pair of studies that involved subjecting sheep to conditions that simulated surfacing quickly from a great depth, causing them pain and sometimes leaving the animals paralyzed or dead.

[ 178 ] Society and culture [ edit ] Economics [ edit ] In the United States, it is common for medical insurance not to cover treatment for the bends that is the result of recreational diving. This is because scuba diving is considered an elective and "high-risk" activity, and treatment for decompression sickness is expensive. A typical stay in a recompression chamber will easily cost several thousand dollars, even before emergency transportation is included.

[ 179 ] As of September 2023, a number of hyperbaric chambers in the US are turning divers with decompression sickness away, and only treating more profitable scheduled cases. The number of hyperbaric medical facilities in the US is estimated at about 1500, of which 67 are treating diving accidents, according to Divers Alert Network . Many facilities only provide hyperbaric treatment for wound care for economic reasons. Emergency hyperbaric services are more expensive to train and staff, and liability is increased.

[ 180 ] In the United Kingdom, treatment of DCS is provided by the National Health Service. This may occur either at a specialised facility or at a hyperbaric centre based within a general hospital.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] Other animals [ edit ] Animals may also contract DCS, especially those caught in nets and rapidly brought to the surface. It has been documented in loggerhead turtles and likely in prehistoric marine animals as well.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Modern reptiles are susceptible to DCS, and there is some evidence that marine mammals such as cetaceans and seals may also be affected.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] AW Carlsen has suggested that the presence of a right-left shunt in the reptilian heart may account for the predisposition in the same way as a patent foramen ovale does in humans.

[ 184 ] See also [ edit ] Aviation medicine – Medicine for pilots, aircrews, or astronauts Decompression (diving) – Pressure reduction and its effects during ascent from depth Decompression illness – Disorders arising from ambient pressure reduction Decompression theory – Theoretical modelling of decompression physiology Diving disorders – Physiological disorders resulting from underwater diving Diving medicine – Diagnosis, treatment and prevention of disorders caused by underwater diving Hyperbaric medicine – Medical treatment at raised ambient pressure Hyperbaric treatment schedules – Planned hyperbaric exposure using a specified breathing gas as medical treatment Inner ear decompression sickness – Medical condition caused by inert gas bubbles forming out of solution In-water recompression – In-water treatment for decompression sickness Taravana – Decompression sickness caused by breath-hold diving Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ Inner ear counter diffusion is a rare form of DCS sometimes experienced by divers engaged in extreme deep diving , caused by switching from a helium-rich gas to a nitrogen-rich gas at the start of a decompression stop. Although nitrogen diffuses more slowly than helium, nitrogen is much more soluble than helium and the total inert gas load in some tissues can temporarily exceed the critical supersaturation limit, resulting in bubble formation. The inner ear is particularly susceptible to this effect. Two of the best-recorded instances of it both occurred at Boesmansgat , South Africa – once to Nuno Gomes in an early world record attempt, and later to Don Shirley when he tried to rescue David Shaw on his fateful dive trying to recover the body of Deon Dreyer , who had been one of Gomes's support divers.

^ autochthonous: formed or originating in the place where found.

^ Tables based on US Navy tables, such as the NAUI tables have a safety stop at 15 feet (5 m);( Lippmann & Mitchell , p. 219) BSAC tables have a safety stop at 6 metres (20 ft); Bühlmann tables have a safety stop at 3 metres (10 ft).

^ At the time the symptoms of decompression sickness were assumed to be those of rheumatism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Doolette D, Mitchell S (June 2018).

"In-water recompression" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

48 (2): 84– 95.

doi : 10.28920/dhm48.2.84-95 .

PMC 6156824 .

PMID 29888380 .

^ a b Walker JI, Murphy-Lavoie HM (10 May 2022).

Diving In Water Recompression . StatPearls.

PMID 29630272 . Retrieved 26 September 2022 .

^ a b Francis & Mitchell, Manifestations , p. 578.

^ a b c Pulley SA (27 November 2007).

"Decompression Sickness" .

Medscape .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 May 2010 .

^ a b c Marx , p. 1908.

^ Francis & Mitchell, Manifestations , p. 579.

^ a b c Francis TJ, Smith DJ (1991). "Describing Decompression Illness".

42nd Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . 79(DECO)5–15–91.

^ Francis & Mitchell, Manifestations , p. 580.

^ U.S. Navy Supervisor of Diving (2008). "Chapter 20: Diagnosis and Treatment of Decompression Sickness and Arterial Gas Embolism".

U.S. Navy Diving Manual (PDF) . SS521-AG-PRO-010, revision 6. Vol. 5. U.S. Naval Sea Systems Command. p. 37. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 15 May 2010 .

^ Neuman TS (2002).

"Arterial Gas Embolism and Decompression Sickness" .

News Physiol Sci .

17 (2): 77– 81.

doi : 10.1152/nips.01370.2001 .

PMID 11909997 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Frans Cronje (5 August 2014).

All That Tingles Is Not Bends (video). DAN Southern Africa.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Powell , p. 71.

^ a b Francis & Mitchell, Manifestations , pp. 578–584.

^ Doolette DJ, Mitchell SJ (2003). "Biophysical basis for inner ear decompression sickness".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

94 (6): 2145– 50.

doi : 10.1152/japplphysiol.01090.2002 .

PMID 12562679 .

^ Powell , p. 70.

^ U.S. Navy Supervisor of Diving (2008).

U.S. Navy Diving Manual (PDF) . SS521-AG-PRO-010, revision 6. Vol. 5. U.S. Naval Sea Systems Command. pp.

20– 25. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 18 May 2010 .

^ Decompression Procedures Manual (Rev 1c ed.).

TDI . p. 38.

^ Graves DJ, Idicula J, Lambertsen CJ, Quinn JA (February 1973). "Bubble formation in physical and biological systems: a manifestation of counterdiffusion in composite media".

Science .

179 (4073): 582– 584.

Bibcode : 1973Sci...179..582G .

doi : 10.1126/science.179.4073.582 .

PMID 4686464 .

S2CID 46428717 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Vann RD, ed. (1989). "The Physiological Basis of Decompression".

38th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . 75(Phys)6–1–89: 437.

^ Benton BJ (2001). "Acute Decompression Illness (DCI): the Significance of Provocative Dive Profiles".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine Abstract .

28 (Supplement).

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 .

^ Wong RM (1999). "Taravana revisited: Decompression illness after breath-hold diving".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (3).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ "Chapter 1: Introduction to Decompression Sickness" .

dan.org . Retrieved 4 August 2025 .

^ Lippmann & Mitchell , pp. 65–66.

^ Ohta Y, Matsunaga H (February 1974).

"Bone lesions in divers" .

Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery .

56B (1): 3– 15. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 May 2010 .

^ Elliott D (1999). "Early Decompression experience: Compressed air work".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Dehart RL, Davis JR (2002).

Fundamentals of Aerospace Medicine: Translating Research into Clinical Applications (3rd Rev ed.). United States: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 720.

ISBN 978-0-7817-2898-0 .

^ a b c d Pilmanis AA (1990). "The Proceedings of the Hypobaric Decompression Sickness Workshop".

US Air Force Technical Report . AL-SR-1992-0005.

^ Vann RD, Torre-Bueno JR (1984). "A theoretical method for selecting space craft and space suit atmospheres".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

55 (12): 1097– 1102.

ISSN 0095-6562 .

PMID 6151391 .

^ a b c d e Butler WP (2004). "Caisson disease during the construction of the Eads and Brooklyn Bridges: A review".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

31 (4): 445– 59.

PMID 15686275 .

^ a b "Hudson River Tunnel" .

Engineering Timelines .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2015 . Retrieved 4 December 2016 .

^ a b de la Cruz RA, Clemente Fuentes RW, Wonnum SJ, Cooper JS (9 January 2024).

"Aerospace Decompression Illness" .

StatPearls [Internet] . Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing Available.

^ Gerth WA, Vann RD (1995). "Statistical Bubble Dynamics Algorithms for Assessment of Altitude Decompression Sickness Incidence".

US Air Force Technical Report . TR-1995-0037.

^ Robinson RR, Dervay JP, Conkin J.

"An Evidenced-Based Approach for Estimating Decompression Sickness Risk in Aircraft Operations" (PDF) .

NASA STI Report Series . NASA/TM – 1999–209374. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2008 . Retrieved 18 May 2010 .

^ Powell MR (2002). "Decompression limits in commercial aircraft cabins with forced descent".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine . Supplement (abstract).

^ a b Vann RD, Gerth WA, DeNoble PJ, Pieper CF, Thalmann ED (2004). "Experimental trials to assess the risks of decompression sickness in flying after diving".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

31 (4): 431– 44.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 .

PMID 15686274 .

^ a b c d Brown JR, Antuñano MJ (14 July 2005).

"Altitude-Induced Decompression Sickness" (PDF) .

AM-400-95/2 . Federal Aviation Administration.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2012 . Retrieved 27 June 2010 .

^ Pollock NW, Natoli MJ, Gerth WA, Thalmann ED, Vann RD (November 2003).

"Risk of decompression sickness during exposure to high cabin altitude after diving" .

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

74 (11): 1163– 68.

PMID 14620473 . Retrieved 18 May 2010 .

^ "Space Suit and Extravehicular Activities" .

iss.jaxa.jp . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ DeNoble PJ, Vann RD, Pollock NW, Uguccioni DM, Freiberger JJ, Pieper CF (2005). A case-control study of decompression sickness (DCS) and arterial gas embolism (AGE) (Report). Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society.

^ a b c d e f g h Fryer DI (1969).

Subatmospheric decompression sickness in man . England: Technivision Services. p. 343.

ISBN 978-0-85102-023-5 .

^ Lippmann & Mitchell , p. 232.

^ a b Bassett BE (1982). "Decompression Procedures for Flying After Diving, and Diving at Altitudes above Sea Level".

US Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine Technical Report . SAM-TR-82-47.

^ Sheffield PJ, Vann RD (2002).

Flying After Diving Workshop. Proceedings of the DAN 2002 Workshop . United States: Divers Alert Network. p. 127.

ISBN 978-0-9673066-4-3 .

^ Vann RD, Pollock NW, Freiberger JJ, Natoli MJ, Denoble PJ, Pieper CF (2007). "Influence of bottom time on preflight surface intervals before flying after diving".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

34 (3): 211– 20.

PMID 17672177 .

^ Lippmann & Mitchell , p. 79.

^ Egi SM, Brubakk AO (1995). "Diving at altitude: a review of decompression strategies".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

22 (3): 281– 300.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 .

PMID 7580768 .

^ Walder DN (1945). "The Surface Tension of the Blood Serum in 'Bends' ".

Royal Air Force Technical Report .

^ Lippmann & Mitchell , p. 71.

^ "Immersion Pulmonary Oedema" .

www.ukdmc.org .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 June 2022 .

^ Moon RE, Kisslo J (1998). "PFO and decompression illness: An update".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

28 (3).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Lippmann & Mitchell , p. 70.

^ Karlsson L, Linnarson D, Gennser M, Blogg SL, Lindholm P (2007). "A case of high doppler scores during altitude decompression in a subject with a fractured arm".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

34 (Supplement).

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 .

^ Gerth WA, Ruterbusch VL, Long ET (2007). "The Influence of Thermal Exposure on Diver Susceptibility to Decompression Sickness".

United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report . NEDU-TR-06-07.

^ Pollock N (20–22 April 2023).

Thermal Management . Rebreather Forum 4.

gue.tv . Valletta, Malta.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2024 . Retrieved 30 April 2024 .

^ Boycott A, Damant G (1908).

"Experiments on the influence of fatness on susceptibility to caisson disease" .

Journal of Hygiene .

8 (4): 445– 56.

doi : 10.1017/S0022172400015862 .

PMC 2167151 .

PMID 20474366 .

^ Leigh BC, Dunford RG (2005).

"Alcohol use in scuba divers treated for diving injuries: A comparison of decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism" (PDF) .

Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research .

29 (Supplement s1): 157A.

doi : 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2005.tb03524.x . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 December 2013.

Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Research Society on Alcoholism, Santa Barbara, California, June 2005.

^ Pollock NW (31 May 2023).

"What is Undeserved in "Undeserved Decompression Sickness"?" .

InDepth . GUE.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2025 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ Ackles K (1973). "Blood-Bubble Interaction in Decompression Sickness".

Defence R&D Canada (DRDC) Technical Report .

DCIEM-73 – CP-960 .

^ Nishi Brubakk & Eftedal , p. 501.

^ Henry W (1803).

"Experiments on the quantity of gases absorbed by water, at different temperatures, and under different pressures" .

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond .

93 : 29– 43.

doi : 10.1098/rstl.1803.0004 .

^ Kindwall EP, Baz A, Lightfoot EN, Lanphier EH, Seireg A (1975). "Nitrogen elimination in man during decompression".

Undersea Biomedical Research .

2 (4): 285– 297.

ISSN 0093-5387 .

OCLC 2068005 .

PMID 1226586 .

^ Kindwall EP (1975). "Measurement of helium elimination from man during decompression breathing air or oxygen".

Undersea Biomedical Research .

2 (4): 277– 284.

ISSN 0093-5387 .

OCLC 2068005 .

PMID 1226585 .

^ Francis & Mitchell, Manifestations , pp. 583–584.

^ Francis & Mitchell, Pathophysiology , pp. 530–541.

^ Landis GA (19 March 2009).

"Explosive Decompression and Vacuum Exposure" . Archived from the original on 21 July 2009.

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , p. 475.

^ Wienke BR, O'Leary TR (10 October 2002).

"Deep stops and deep helium" (PDF) .

RGBM Technical Series 9 . Tampa, Florida: NAUI Technical Diving Operations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2011 . Retrieved 27 June 2010 .

^ Gerth W, Gault K, Doolette D (2007). Empirical evaluation of the efficacy of deep stops in air decompression dives.

Abstract of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc. Annual Scientific Meeting held June 14–16, 2007. Ritz-Carlton Kapalua Maui, Hawaii (Report). Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc.

^ Mitchell S (16 May 2020).

"What is optimal decompression?" .

www.youtube.com . #NurkowiePomagajmySobie . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

^ Fife WP (1979). "The use of Non-Explosive mixtures of hydrogen and oxygen for diving".

Texas A&M University Sea Grant . TAMU-SG-79-201.

^ Brauer RW, ed. (1985). "Hydrogen as a Diving Gas".

33rd Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop (UHMS Publication Number 69(WS–HYD)3–1–87).

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , p. 477.

^ Burton S (December 2004).

"Isobaric Counter Diffusion" . ScubaEngineer.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 January 2010 .

^ a b c d Papadopoulou V, Eckersley RJ, Balestra C, Karapantsios TD, Tang MX (2013). "A critical review of physiological bubble formation in hyperbaric decompression".

Advances in Colloid and Interface Science .

191– 192 ( 191– 192): 22– 30.

doi : 10.1016/j.cis.2013.02.002 .

hdl : 10044/1/31585 .

PMID 23523006 .

S2CID 34264173 .

^ a b c d Calder 1986 , pp. 241–245.

^ a b c Vann R, ed. (1989).

The Physiological basis of decompression: an overview .

Proceedings of the thirty-eighth undersea and hyperbaric medical society workshop . Bethesda, Maryland: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. pp.

1– 10.

^ Moon RE, Kisslo J (1998). "PFO and decompression illness: An update".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

28 (3).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ a b Spira A (1999).

"Diving and Marine Medicine Review. Part II: Diving Diseases" .

Journal of Travel Medicine .

6 (3): 180– 98.

doi : 10.1111/j.1708-8305.1999.tb00857.x .

PMID 10467155 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Stephenson J (2016).

"Pathophysiology, treatment and aeromedical retrieval of SCUBA – related DCI" .

Journal of Military and Veterans' Health .

17 (3).

ISSN 1839-2733 . Archived from the original on 23 December 2017.

^ Staff (May 2014).

"Pathophysiology" .

Medscape Drugs & Diseases . Medscape: Organ involvement associated with decompression sickness.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 January 2018 .

^ Kitano M (January 1995). "Pathological Aspects of Decompression Sickness".

Kagoshima University Research Center South Pacific, Occasional Papers . No. 25. pp.

47– 59.

hdl : 10232/16803 .

^ a b c d e Calder 1986 , pp. 246–254.

^ Calder 1986 , pp. 254–258.

^ a b c Freiberger JJ, Lyman SJ, Denoble PJ, Pieper CF, Vann RD (January 2005).

"Consensus Factors Used By Experts in the Diagnosis of Decompression Illness" .

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

75 (12): 1023– 8.

PMID 15619855 .

^ a b c Thalmann ED (March–April 2004).

"Decompression Illness: What Is It and What Is The Treatment?" . Divers Alert Network. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010.

^ Divers Alert Network (1997). Report on Diving Accidents and Fatalities in 1995 (Report). Divers Alert Network.

^ a b Moon RE (1998). "Assessment of patients with decompression illness".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

28 (1).

^ Moon RE, Sheffield PJ, eds. (1996). "Treatment of Decompression Illness. 45th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop".

UHMS Publication Number WD712 : 426.

^ a b c Mitchell S, Bennett M, Bryson P, Butler F, Doolette D, Holm J, Kot J, Lafère P (31 March 2018).

"Pre-hospital management of decompression illness: expert review of key principles and controversies" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

48 (1): 45– 55.

doi : 10.28920/dhm48.1.45-55 .

PMC 6467826 .

PMID 29557102 .

^ Rudge F, Stone J (1991).

"The use of the pressure cuff test in the diagnosis of decompression sickness" .

Aviat. Space Environ. Med .

62 : 266– 7.

PMID 2012577 – via asma.kglmeridian.com.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Wong R, Walker M (March 2004).

"Diagnostic dilemmas in inner ear decompression sickness" (PDF) .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Journal .

34 (1).

^ a b Cronje F (Spring 2009).

"All That Tingles Is Not Bends" (PDF) .

Alert Diver .

1 (2). DAN Southern Africa: 20– 24.

ISSN 2071-7628 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

^ a b Hamilton & Thalmann , p. 471.

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , p. 455.

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , pp. 456–457.

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , pp. 471–473.

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , pp. 474–475.

^ Hamilton & Thalmann , p. 456.

^ Doolette D (29 May 2019).

"Gradient Factors in a Post-Deep Stops World" .

indepthmag.com . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ "Chapter 5: Factors Contributing to Decompression Stress" .

dan.org . Retrieved 31 July 2025 .

^ "Oxygen basics for pilots" .

flighttrainingcentral.com . 22 November 2024 . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ "Altitude-induced Decompression Sickness" (PDF) .

www.faa.gov . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ Nevills A (2006).

"Preflight Interview: Joe Tanner" . NASA. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2010 .

^ Webb JT, Olson RM, Krutz RW, Dixon G, Barnicott PT (1989). "Human tolerance to 100% oxygen at 9.5 psia during five daily simulated 8-hour EVA exposures".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

60 (5): 415– 21.

doi : 10.4271/881071 .

PMID 2730484 .

^ Keays FJ (1909). "Compressed air illness, with a report of 3,692 cases".

Department of Medicine Publications of Cornell University Medical College .

2 : 1– 55.

^ Yarbrough OD, Behnke AR (1939). "The treatment of compressed air illness using oxygen".

Journal of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology .

21 : 213– 18.

ISSN 0095-9030 .

^ a b c d Berghage TE, Vorosmarti J Jr, Barnard E (1978). "Recompression treatment tables used throughout the world by government and industry".

US Naval Medical Research Center Technical Report . NMRI-78-16.

^ Edmonds C (1998). "Underwater oxygen for treatment of decompression sickness: A review".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

25 (3).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Pyle RL, Youngblood DA (1995). "In-water Recompression as an emergency field treatment of decompression illness".

AquaCorp .

11 .

^ Kay E, Spencer MP (1999).

In water recompression. 48th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . United States: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. p. 108.

^ a b Moon & Gorman , p. 616.

^ Longphre JM, DeNoble PJ, Moon RE, Vann RD, Freiberger JJ (2007). "First aid normobaric oxygen for the treatment of recreational diving injuries".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

34 (1): 43– 49.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 .

PMID 17393938 .

^ Goble S (2003). "Rebreathers".

Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society .

33 (2): 98– 102.

^ O'Dowd LC, Kelley MA (October 2000).

"Air embolism" .

Chinese Medical Biotechnology Information Network . Peking University. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011.

^ Bove AA (April 2009).

"Arterial Gas Embolism: Injury During Diving or Work in Compressed Air" .

Merck Manual Professional . Merk Sharp and Dohme . Retrieved 8 August 2010 .

^ Marx , p. 1912.

^ Marx , p. 1813.

^ Warden SJ (April 2010). "Prophylactic use of NSAIDs by athletes: a risk / benefit assessment".

The Physician and Sportsmedicine .

38 (1): 132– 8.

doi : 10.3810/psm.2010.04.1770 .

PMID 20424410 .

S2CID 44567896 .

^ Hinz B, Cheremina O, Brune K (February 2008).

"Acetaminophen (paracetamol) is a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in man" .

FASEB Journal .

22 (2): 383– 90.

doi : 10.1096/fj.07-8506com .

PMID 17884974 .

S2CID 9633350 .

^ a b Kay E, Spencer M (1999).

In water recompression .

48th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . Vol. UHMS Publication Number RC103.C3. United States: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. p. 108.

^ a b Pyle R, Youngblood D (1995). "In-water Recompression as an emergency field treatment of decompression illness".

AquaCorp .

11 .

^ U.S. Navy Supervisor of Diving (2008). "Chapter 20: Diagnosis and Treatment of Decompression Sickness and Arterial Gas Embolism".

U.S. Navy Diving Manual (PDF) . SS521-AG-PRO-010, revision 6. Vol. 5. U.S. Naval Sea Systems Command. p. 41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 15 May 2010 .

^ a b c Kindwall EP, Goldmann RW, Thombs PA (1988). "Use of the Monoplace vs. Multiplace Chamber in the Treatment of Diving Diseases".

Journal of Hyperbaric Medicine; 3(1) . Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc.: 5– 10.

^ de la Cruz RA, Clemente Fuentes RW, Wonnum SJ, Cooper JS (27 June 2022).

"Aerospace Decompression Illness" . National Library of Medicine.

PMID 28846248 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ Bennett PB , Dovenbarger JA, Corson K (1991). Nashimoto I, Lanphier EH (eds.). "Epidemiology of Bends - What is Bends?".

43rd Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . 80(BENDS)6–1–91: 13– 20.

^ Dovenbarger JA (1988). Report on Decompression Illness and Diving Fatalities (1988) (Report).

Divers Alert Network .

^ Desola J (1989). "Epidemiological review of 276 dysbaric diving accidents".

Proceedings XV Meeting European Undersea Biomedical Society : 209.

^ Pilmanis AA, ed. (June 1992).

The Proceedings of the 1990 Hypobaric Decompression Sickness Workshop (PDF) (Report). Brooks Air Force Base, Texas: AirForce Systems Command.

^ Conkin J, Abercromby AF, Dervay JP, Feiveson AH, Gernhardt ML, Norcross JR, Ploutz-Snyder R, Wessel JH 3rd (November 2014).

Probabilistic Assessment of Treatment Success for Hypobaric Decompression Sickness (PDF) .

NASA/TP-2014-218561 (Report).

^ Foster PP, Butler BD (1 February 2009). "Decompression to altitude: assumptions, experimental evidence, and future directions".

Journal of Applied Physiology . The Physiology and Pathophysiology of the Hyperbaric and Diving Environments: 678– 690.

doi : 10.1152/japplphysiol.91099.2008 .

^ a b "Project Dive Exploration: Project Overview" . Divers Alert Network. 2010. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010.

^ Pulley SA (5 March 2019).

"Decompression Sickness" .

Medscape . Retrieved 5 August 2025 .

^ Imbert JP, Matity L, Massimelli JY, Bryson P (31 March 2024).

"Review of saturation decompression procedures used in commercial diving" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

54 (1): 23– 38.

doi : 10.28920/dhm54.1.23-38 .

PMC 11065503 .

PMID 38507907 .

^ a b Best B (September–October 2013).

"Lobsters, Reefs and Livelihoods" .

FrontLines .

U.S. Agency for International Development . Archived from the original on 22 April 2018.

^ a b Dalebozik J (25 February 2021).

"Addressing the risk of decompression sickness caused by high altitude airdrop missions: Military standards move towards mandatory requirements for portable hyperbaric chambers" .

www.defenceiq.com . Retrieved 4 August 2025 .

^ Ånell R, Grönkvist M, Gennser M, Eiken O (2021).

"High-altitude decompression strain can be reduced by an early excursion to moderate altitude while breathing oxygen" .

Eur J Appl Physiol .

121 : 3225– 3232.

doi : 10.1007/s00421-021-04794-2 .

PMC 8505281 .

^ Connolly D, D'Oyly T, Harridge S, Smith T, Lee V (2023). "Decompression Sickness Risk in Parachutist Dispatchers Exposed Repeatedly to High Altitude".

Aerospace medicine and human performance .

94 : 666– 677.

doi : 10.3357/AMHP.6231.2023 .

^ a b c d Sherman P, Sladky J (30 May 2018). "Acute and Chronic Effects of Hypobaric Exposure upon the Brain [Internet].".

Into Space - A Journey of How Humans Adapt and Live in Microgravity . InTech.

doi : 10.5772/intechopen.74231 .

^ a b Kumar K, Waligora J, Powell M (November 1993). "Epidemiology of decompression sickness under simulated space extravehicular activities".

Aviat Space Environ Med .

64 (11): 1032– 9.

PMID 8280036 .

^ Sulaiman Z, Pilmanis A, O'Connor R (1997).

"Relationship between age and susceptibility to altitude decompression sickness" .

Aviat Space Environ Med .

68 (8): 695– 8.

PMID 9262810 .

^ Kannan N, Raychaudhuri A, Pilmanis A (1998).

"A loglogistic model for altitude decompression sickness" .

Aviat Space Environ Med .

69 (10): 965– 70.

PMID 9773897 .

^ Ninokawa S, Nordham K (1 September 2021).

"Discovery of caisson disease: a dive into the history of decompression sickness" .

Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent) .

35 (1): 129– 132.

doi : 10.1080/08998280.2021.1967021 .

PMC 8682815 .

PMID 34970062 .

^ Acott C (1999). "The diving "Law-ers": A brief resume of their lives".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Acott C (1999). "A brief history of diving and decompression illness".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (2).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Marx , p. 1903.

^ Acott C (1999). "A brief history of diving and decompression illness".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (2).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Buxton-Smith TR (27 April 2007).

"Brunel's Royal Albert Bridge, The Tamar Rail River Crossing" (PDF) .

Proceedings of Bridge Engineering 2 Conference 2007 . University of Bath. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2016.

^ Delgado J (2012).

Misadventures of a Civil War Submarine: Iron, Guns, and Pearls . Texas A&M University Press. p. 100.

ISBN 978-1-60344-472-9 .

^ Bauer L (1870).

"pathological effects upon the brain and spinal cord of men exposed to the action of a largely increased atmospheric pressure" .

St. Louis Medical and Surgical Journal : 234– 245 . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ "Inert Gas Exchange, Bubbles, and Decompression Theory" .

dan.diverelearning.com . Retrieved 5 April 2021 .

^ Smith AH (1886).

The Physiological, Pathological and Therapeutical Effects of Compressed Air . George S. Davis . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

Diving.

^ McCullough D (June 2001).

The Great Bridge: The Epic Story of the Building of the Brooklyn Bridge . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-7432-1737-8 .

^ a b Hill LE (1912).

Caisson sickness, and the physiology of work in compressed air . London: Arnold . Retrieved 30 May 2010 – via Internet Archive.

^ Phillips JL (1998).

The bends: compressed air in the history of science, diving, and engineering . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp.

95– 97.

ISBN 978-0-300-07125-2 .

^ Staff (25 July 1904).

"Ocean Treasure" .

Daily News . Daily News, Perth, WA. p. 6.

^ Boycott A, Damant G, Haldane JS (1908).

"Prevention of compressed air illness" .

Journal of Hygiene .

8 (3): 342– 443.

doi : 10.1017/S0022172400003399 .

PMC 2167126 .

PMID 20474365 .

^ Jones N (28 February 2015).

"Pearling industry marks 100 years of treating the bends" .

ABC News .

^ Scott D (1931).

Seventy fathoms deep with the divers of the salvage ship Artiglio . London: Faber & Faber.

^ Scott D (1932).

The Egypt's Gold . London: Faber & Faber.

^ a b Thalmann ED (1990). Bennett PB, Moon RE (eds.). "Principles of U.S Navy recompression treatments for decompression sickness - Diving Accident Management".

41st Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . 78(DIVACC)12–1–90.

^ Behnke AR, Shaw LA, Messer AC, Thomson RM, Motley EP (31 January 1936).

"The circulatory and respiratory disturbances of acute compressed-air illness and the administration of oxygen as a therapeutic measure" .

American Journal of Physiology .

114 (3): 526– 533.

doi : 10.1152/ajplegacy.1936.114.3.526 . Archived from the original on 8 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ Davis JC, Sheffield PJ, Schuknecht L, Heimbach R, Dunn J, Douglas G, Anderson G (August 1977). "Altitude decompression sickness: hyperbaric therapy results in 145 cases".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

48 (8): 722– 30.

PMID 889546 .

^ "Treatment of decompression sickness".

BUMED News Letter .

3 (10): 5– 6. 12 May 1944.

^ Van der Aue O, White W Jr, Hayter R, Brinton E, Kellar R, Behnke A (26 April 1945). Physiological factors underlying the prevention and treatment of decompression sickness.

Project X-443, Report no.1 (Report). Bethesda, Md: U.S. Naval Medical Research Institute.

^ Workman RD (1957). "Calculation of air saturation decompression tables".

Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report . NEDU-RR-11-57.

^ a b Carson D.

"Dive Computer Evolution" . Skin-Diver.com. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ Golding FC, Griffiths P, Hempleman HV, Paton W, Walder DN (July 1960).

"Decompression sickness during construction of the Dartford Tunnel" .

British Journal of Industrial Medicine .

17 (3): 167– 80.

doi : 10.1136/oem.17.3.167 .

PMC 1038052 .

PMID 13850667 .

^ LeMessurier DH, Hills BA (1965). "Decompression Sickness. A thermodynamic approach arising from a study on Torres Strait diving techniques".

Hvalradets Skrifter (48): 54– 84.

^ Spencer M (February 1976). "Decompression limits for compressed air determined by ultrasonically detected blood bubbles".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

40 (2): 229– 35.

doi : 10.1152/jappl.1976.40.2.229 .

PMID 1249001 .

^ Weathersby PK, Homer LD, Flynn ET (September 1984). "On the likelihood of decompression sickness".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

57 (3): 815– 25.

doi : 10.1152/jappl.1984.57.3.815 .

PMID 6490468 .

^ Bühlmann AA (1984).

Decompression–Decompression Sickness . Berlin New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 978-0-387-13308-9 .

^ Lang M, Hamilton R Jr (1989).

Proceedings of the AAUS Dive Computer Workshop . United States: USC Catalina Marine Science Center. p. 231.

^ Wagner M, Stieber A, Jöbstl E, Azzopardi E, Stoianova M, Sayer M (2013). Dive computers: the need for validation and standards (Report).

^ "HS Explorer Dive Computer Owner's Manual" .

hs-eng.com . St. Augustine, Florida: HydroSpace Engineering, Inc. 2003. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2017 .

^ Butler FK, Southerland D (2001). "The U.S. Navy decompression computer".

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

28 (4): 213– 28.

PMID 12153150 .

^ Butler FK (2001).

"The U.S. Navy Decompression Computer" .

Undersea & Hyperbaric Medicine .

28 (4): 213– 228.

PMID 12153150 . Archived from the original on 7 July 2006 . Retrieved 29 September 2022 .

^ Azzopardi E, Sayer M (2010).

"A review of the technical specifications of 47 models of diving decompression computer" .

International Journal of the Society for Underwater Technology .

29 (2). Society for Underwater Technology: 63– 70.

doi : 10.3723/ut.29.063 .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 September 2022 .

^ Toropin K (1 February 2023).

"Navy Ends 'Gruesome' Testing on Sheep After PETA Protests" .

Military.com . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .

^ "DAN Insurance" . Divers Alert Network. 2003. Archived from the original on 26 July 2010.

^ Stewart A (6 September 2023).

"Hyperbaric Chambers Are Turning Away Divers. Will There Be One Nearby When You Need It?" .

gue.com . Retrieved 7 October 2023 .

^ "NHS Funded Treatment" .

Divers Emergency Service UK & Hyperbaric Services | LHM healthcare . London Hyperbaric Ltd. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 August 2011 .

^ Wilson CM, Sayer MD (2011). "Transportation of divers with decompression illness on the west coast of Scotland".

Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine .

41 (2): 64– 9.

PMID 21848109 .

^ Gabbitiss J (4 October 2017).

"Even Sea Monsters Got the Bends" .

Hakai Magazine . Archived from the original on 7 October 2017 . Retrieved 6 October 2017 .

^ a b Carlsen AW (August 2017). "Frequency of decompression illness among recent and extinct mammals and "reptiles": a review".

The Science of Nature .

104 ( 7– 8) 56.

Bibcode : 2017SciNa.104...56C .

doi : 10.1007/s00114-017-1477-1 .

PMID 28656350 .

S2CID 23194069 .

^ Piantadosi CA, Thalmann ED (15 April 2004). "Pathology: whales, sonar and decompression sickness".

Nature .

428 (6984): 716.

doi : 10.1038/nature02527a .

PMID 15085881 .

S2CID 4391838 .

^ "Why Do Whales Get the Bends?" .

www.sciencemag.org . American Association for the Advancement of Science. 14 December 2007.

^ Becker RA (19 August 2015).

"Do Whales Get the Bends?" .

news.nationalgeographic.com . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 22 August 2015.

Sources [ edit ] Calder IM (1986). "Dysbarism. A Review".

Forensic Science International .

30 (4): 237– 266.

doi : 10.1016/0379-0738(86)90133-7 .

PMID 3519392 .

Francis TJ, Mitchell SJ (2003). "10.4: Pathophysiology of Decompression Sickness". In Brubakk AO , Neuman TS (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

530– 556.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

Francis TJ, Mitchell SJ (2003). "10.6: Manifestations of Decompression Disorders". In Brubakk AO, Neuman TS (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

578– 599.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

Hamilton RW , Thalmann ED (2003). "10.2: Decompression Practice". In Brubakk AO, Neuman TS (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

455– 500.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

Lippmann J, Mitchell S (2005).

Deeper into Diving (2nd ed.). Melbourne, Australia: J L Publications.

ISBN 978-0-9752290-1-9 .

Marx J (2010).

Rosen's emergency medicine: concepts and clinical practice (7th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Mosby/Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-323-05472-0 .

Moon RE, Gorman DF (2003). "10.7: Treatment of the Decompression Disorders". In Brubakk AO, Neuman TS (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

600– 650.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

Nishi RY, Brubakk AO, Eftedal OS (2003). "10.3: Bubble Detection". In Brubakk AO, Neuman TS (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders. p. 501.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

Powell M (2008).

Deco for Divers . Southend-on-Sea: Aquapress.

ISBN 978-1-905492-07-7 .

External links [ edit ] Look up decompression sickness in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Divers Alert Network: diving medicine articles Archived 8 December 2005 at the Wayback Machine Dive Tables from the NOAA CDC – Decompression Sickness and Tunnel Workers – NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic Pathophysiology of decompression and acute dysbaric disorders "Decompression Sickness" on Medscape Norwegian Diving- and Treatment Tables. Tables and guidelines for surface orientated diving on air and nitrox. Tables and guidelines for treatment of decompression illness. Jan Risberg • Andreas Møllerløkken • Olav Sande Eftedal. 12.8.2019 Classification D ICD - 10 : T70.3 ICD - 9-CM : 993.3 MeSH : D003665 DiseasesDB : 3491 External resources eMedicine : emerg/121 v t e Consequences of external causes Temperature Elevated Burn Hyperthermia Heat syncope Reduced Hypothermia Immersion foot syndromes Trench foot Tropical immersion foot Warm water immersion foot Non-freezing cold injury Chilblains Frostbite Aerosol burn Cold intolerance Acrocyanosis Erythrocyanosis crurum Radiation Chronic radiation keratosis Eosinophilic, polymorphic, and pruritic eruption associated with radiotherapy Radiation acne Radiation burn Radiation-induced cancer Radiation-induced erythema multiforme Radiation-induced hypertrophic scar Radiation-induced keloid Radiation-induced morphea Radiation poisoning Radiation recall reaction Sunburn Oxygen Hypoxia / Asphyxia Oxygen toxicity Pressure Barotrauma Arterial gas embolism Aerosinusitis Middle ear barotrauma Pneumothorax Decompression sickness Inner ear decompression sickness High altitude Altitude sickness Chronic mountain sickness Death zone High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE) Food Starvation Maltreatment Physical abuse Sexual abuse Psychological abuse Travel Motion sickness Seasickness Airsickness Space adaptation syndrome Adverse effect Hypersensitivity Anaphylaxis Angioedema Allergy Arthus reaction Adverse drug reaction Other Electrical injury Lightning injuries Drowning Ungrouped skin conditions resulting from physical factors Dermatosis neglecta Pinch mark Pseudoverrucous papules and nodules Sclerosing lymphangitis Tropical anhidrotic asthenia UV-sensitive syndrome environmental skin conditions Electrical burn frictional/traumatic/sports Black heel and palm Equestrian perniosis Fissure of the nipple Pulling boat hands Runner's rump Surfer's knots Tennis toe Vibration white finger Weathering nodule of ear Wrestler's ear Coral cut Painful fat herniation Uranium dermatosis iv use Skin pop scar Skin track Slap mark Pseudoacanthosis nigricans Narcotic dermopathy Category Commons Glossary Outline Portal v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐w22nk
Cached time: 20250818090336
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.761 seconds
Real time usage: 3.064 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 57352/1000000
Revision size: 152166/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 897121/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19345/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 676678/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.474/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19885004/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2491.095      1 -total
 43.91% 1093.961      2 Template:Reflist
 22.81%  568.339     88 Template:Cite_journal
 16.72%  416.403    133 Template:R
 15.70%  391.070    181 Template:R/ref
  7.23%  180.193     38 Template:Navbox
  6.85%  170.676     43 Template:Sfn
  6.56%  163.533     27 Template:Cite_book
  6.44%  160.438     35 Template:Cite_web
  6.01%  149.638     11 Template:Annotated_link Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:61048:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818090336 and revision id 1306541164. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decompression_sickness&oldid=1306541164 " Categories : Decompression sickness Aviation medicine Effects of external causes Medical emergencies Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from August 2020 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decompression sickness 43 languages Add topic

