Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 2.1 England and Wales 2.2 Scotland 2.3 United States 3 History 4 Social effects 5 Economic effects 6 Environmental effects 7 Road traffic safety 8 Statistics 9 Bus lane Toggle Bus lane subsection 9.1 South Korea 9.2 Hong Kong 9.3 Philippines 10 Gallery 11 Highways by country 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Highway 45 languages Ænglisc العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Монгол नेपाली Nouormand Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português Русский Shqip Simple English Soomaaliga کوردی Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public road or other public way on land This article is about public roads. For other uses of highway, see Highway (disambiguation) . For high-speed freeways, see Controlled-access highway .

A highway in Istanbul , Turkey An aerial view of the Lakalaiva interchange in the Tampere Ring Road between the Highway 3 ( E12 ) and Highway 9 ( E63 ) near city of Tampere A highway is any public or private road or other public way on land. It includes not just major roads, but also other public roads and rights of way . In the United States, it is also used as an equivalent term to controlled-access highway , or a translation for motorway , Autobahn , autostrada , autoroute , etc.

[ 1 ] According to Merriam-Webster , the use of the term predates the 12th century. According to Etymonline , "high" is in the sense of "main".

In North American and Australian English , major roads such as controlled-access highways or arterial roads are often state highways (Canada: provincial highways ). Other roads may be designated " county highways " in the US and Ontario . These classifications refer to the level of government (state, provincial, county) that maintains the roadway. In British English , "highway" is primarily a legal term. Everyday use normally implies roads, while the legal use covers any route or path with a public right of access, including footpaths etc.

The term has led to several related derived terms, including highway system , highway code , highway patrol and highwayman .

Overview [ edit ] Raccordo autostradale RA3 In Italy , which connects the Tuscan cities of Florence and Siena Major highways are often named and numbered by the governments that typically develop and maintain them. Australia's Highway 1 is the longest national highway in the world at over  14,500 kilometres (9,000 mi) and runs almost the entire way around the continent. China has the world's largest network of highways, followed closely by the United States. Some highways, like the Pan-American Highway or the European routes , span multiple countries. Some major highway routes include ferry services, such as US Route 10 , which crosses Lake Michigan .

Traditionally highways were used by people on foot or on horses . Later they also accommodated carriages , bicycles and eventually motor cars , facilitated by advancements in road construction . In the 1920s and 1930s, many nations began investing heavily in highway systems in an effort to spur commerce and bolster national defence.

Major highways that connect cities in populous developed and developing countries usually incorporate features intended to enhance the road's capacity, efficiency, and safety to various degrees. Such features include a reduction in the number of locations for user access , the use of dual carriageways with two or more lanes on each carriageway, and grade-separated junctions with other roads and modes of transport. These features are typically present on highways built as motorways ( freeways ).

Terminology [ edit ] England and Wales [ edit ] The general legal definition deals with right of use, not the form of construction; this is distinct from e.g. the popular use of the word in the US. A highway is defined in English common law by a number of similarly worded definitions such as "a way over which all members of the public have the right to pass and repass without hindrance" [ 2 ] usually accompanied by "at all times"; ownership of the ground is for most purposes irrelevant, thus the term encompasses all such ways from the widest trunk roads in public ownership to the narrowest footpath providing unlimited pedestrian access over private land.

A highway might be open to all forms of lawful land traffic (e.g. vehicular, horse, pedestrian) or limited to specific modes of traffic; usually a highway available to vehicles is also available to foot or horse traffic, a highway available to horse traffic is available to cyclists and pedestrians; but there are exceptional cases in which a highway is only available to vehicles, or is subdivided into dedicated parallel sections for different users.

A highway can share ground with a private right of way for which full use is not available to the general public: for example farm roads which the owner may use for any purpose but for which the general public only has a right of use on foot or horseback. The status of highway on most older roads has been gained by established public use, while newer roads are typically dedicated as highways from the time they are adopted (taken into the care and control of a council or other public authority). In England and Wales, a public highway is also known as " The King's Highway ".

[ 3 ] The core definition of a highway is modified in various legislation for a number of purposes but only for the specific matters dealt with in each such piece of legislation. This is typically in the case of bridges, tunnels and other structures whose ownership, mode of use or availability would otherwise exclude them from the general definition of a highway. Recent examples include toll bridges and tunnels which have the definition of highway imposed upon them (in a legal order applying only to the individual structure) to allow application of most traffic laws to those using them but without causing all of the general obligations or rights of use otherwise applicable to a highway.

Limited access highways for vehicles, with their own traffic rules, are called "motorways" in the UK.

[ 4 ] Scotland [ edit ] Scots law is similar to English law with regard to highways but with differing terminology and legislation. What is defined in England as a highway will often in Scotland be what is defined by s.151 Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 (but only "in this act" although other legislation could imitate) simply as a road , that is: "any way (other than a waterway) over which there is a public right of passage (by whatever means [and whether subject to a toll or not]) and includes the road’s verge, and any bridge (whether permanent or temporary) over which, or tunnel through which, the road passes; and any reference to a road includes a part thereof" The word highway is itself no longer a statutory expression in Scots law [ 5 ] but remains in common law.

United States [ edit ] The I-75 / I-85 Downtown Connector in Atlanta , Georgia, in the United States In American law, the word "highway" is sometimes used to denote any public way used for travel, whether a "road, street, and parkway"; [ 6 ] however, in practical and useful meaning, a "highway" is a major and significant, well-constructed road that is capable of carrying reasonably heavy to extremely heavy traffic.

[ 7 ] Highways generally have a route number designated by the state and federal departments of transportation.

[ clarification needed ] California Vehicle Code, Sections 360, 590, define a "highway" as only a way open for use by motor vehicles, but the California Supreme Court has held that "the definition of 'highway' in the Vehicle Code is used for special purposes of that act" and that canals of the Los Angeles neighborhood of Venice are "highways" that are entitled to be maintained with state highway funds.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] See also: Road and History of road transport The Italian Autostrada dei Laghi ("Lakes Highway" in the 1950s; now parts of the Autostrada A8 and the Autostrada A9 ), the first controlled-access highway ever built in the world [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Large scale highway systems developed in the 20th century as automobile usage increased. The first United States limited-access road was constructed on Long Island, New York, and known as the Long Island Motor Parkway or the Vanderbilt Motor Parkway. It was completed in 1911.

[ 11 ] It included many modern features, including banked turns , guard rails and reinforced concrete tarmac .

[ 12 ] Traffic could turn left between the parkway and connectors, crossing oncoming traffic, so it was not a controlled-access highway (or "freeway" as later defined by the federal government's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices ).

Italy was the first country in the world to build controlled-access highways reserved for fast traffic and for motor vehicles only.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The Autostrada dei Laghi ("Lakes Highway"), the first built in the world, connecting Milan to Lake Como and Lake Maggiore , and now parts of the A8 and A9 highways, was devised by Piero Puricelli and was inaugurated in 1924.

[ 10 ] This highway, called autostrada , contained only one lane in each direction and no interchanges.

The Southern State Parkway opened in 1927, while the Long Island Motor Parkway was closed in 1937 and replaced by the Northern State Parkway (opened 1931) and the contiguous Grand Central Parkway (opened 1936). In Germany, construction of the Bonn-Cologne Autobahn began in 1929 and was opened in 1932 by Konrad Adenauer , then the mayor of Cologne .

[ 13 ] Soon the Autobahn was the first limited-access, high-speed road network in the world, with the first section from Frankfurt am Main to Darmstadt opening in 1935.

[ 14 ] In the US, the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 (Phipps Act) enacted a fund to create an extensive highway system. In 1922, the first blueprint for a national highway system (the Pershing Map ) was published. The Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 allocated $25 billion for the construction of the 66,000-kilometre-long (41,000 mi) Interstate Highway System over a 20-year period.

[ 15 ] In Great Britain , the Special Roads Act 1949 provided the legislative basis for roads for restricted classes of vehicles and non-standard or no speed limits applied (later mostly termed motorways but now with speed limits not exceeding 70 mph); [ 16 ] in terms of general road law this legislation overturned the usual principle that a road available to vehicular traffic was also available to horse or pedestrian traffic as is usually the only practical change when non-motorways are reclassified as special roads . The first section of motorway in the UK opened in 1958 (part of the M6 motorway) and then in 1959 the first section of the M1 motorway .

[ 17 ] Social effects [ edit ] The construction of Harbor Freeway , and its subsequent displacement of homes in Los Angeles, California.

[ citation needed ] Often reducing travel times relative to city or town streets, highways with limited access and grade separation can create increased opportunities for people to travel for business, trade or pleasure and also provide trade routes for goods. Highways can reduce commute and other travel time but additional road capacity can also release latent traffic demand . If not accurately predicted at the planning stage, this extra traffic may lead to the new road becoming congested sooner than would otherwise be anticipated by considering increases in vehicle ownership. More roads allow drivers to use their cars when otherwise alternatives may have been sought, or the journey may not have been made, which can mean that a new road brings only short-term mitigation of traffic congestion.

The use of " Redlining " often would dictate where in cities highways would go through.

[ 18 ] Where highways are created through existing communities, there can be reduced community cohesion and more difficult local access. Consequently, property values have decreased in many cutoff neighborhoods, leading to decreased housing quality over time. Mostly in the U.S., many of these effects are from racist planning practices from before the advent of civil rights . This would result in the vast majority of displacement and social effects mostly going to people like African Americans.

[ 19 ] In recent times, the use of freeway removal or the public policy of urban planning to demolish freeways and create mixed-use urban areas, parks, residential, commercial, or other land uses is being popular in many cities to combat most of the social problems caused from highways.

[ 20 ] Economic effects [ edit ] Main article: Transport economics In transport, demand can be measured in numbers of journeys made or in total distance travelled across all journeys (e.g.

passenger-kilometres for public transport or vehicle-kilometres of travel (VKT) for private transport ).

Supply is considered to be a measure of capacity. The price of the good (travel) is measured using the generalised cost of travel, which includes both money and time expenditure.

A taxiway crossing the Autobahn , near Leipzig The effect of increases in supply (capacity) are of particular interest in transport economics (see induced demand ), as the potential environmental consequences are significant (see externalities below).

In addition to providing benefits to their users, transport networks impose both positive and negative externalities on non-users. The consideration of these externalities—particularly the negative ones—is a part of transport economics. Positive externalities of transport networks may include the ability to provide emergency services , increases in land value and agglomeration benefits . Negative externalities are wide-ranging and may include local air pollution , noise pollution , light pollution , safety hazards , community severance and congestion . The contribution of transport systems to potentially hazardous climate change is a significant negative externality which is difficult to evaluate quantitatively, making it difficult (but not impossible) to include in transport economics-based research and analysis. Congestion is considered a negative externality by economists.

[ 21 ] A 2016 study found that for the United States, "a 10% increase in a region's stock of highways causes a 1.7% increase in regional patenting over a five-year period." [ 22 ] A 2021 study found that areas that obtained access to a new highway experienced a substantial increase in top-income taxpayers and a decline in low-income taxpayers. Highways also contributed to job and residential urban sprawl.

[ 23 ] Environmental effects [ edit ] Noise, light and air pollution are negative environmental effects highways can have on their surroundings.

Main article: Environmental impacts of roads Highways are extended linear sources of pollution .

Roadway noise increases with operating speed so major highways generate more noise than arterial streets. Therefore, considerable noise health effects are expected from highway systems.

Noise mitigation strategies exist to reduce sound levels at nearby sensitive receptors . The idea that highway design could be influenced by acoustical engineering considerations first arose about 1973.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Air quality issues: Highways may contribute fewer emissions than arterials carrying the same vehicle volumes. This is because high, constant-speed operation creates an emissions reduction compared to vehicular flows with stops and starts. However, concentrations of air pollutants near highways may be higher due to increased traffic volumes. Therefore, the risk of exposure to elevated levels of air pollutants from a highway may be considerable, and further magnified when highways have traffic congestion .

New highways can also cause habitat fragmentation , encourage urban sprawl and allow human intrusion into previously untouched areas, as well as (counterintuitively) increasing congestion, by increasing the number of intersections.

They can also reduce the use of public transport , indirectly leading to greater pollution.

High-occupancy vehicle lanes are being added to some newer/reconstructed highways in the United States and other countries around the world to encourage carpooling and mass transit. These lanes help reduce the number of cars on the highway and thus reduces pollution and traffic congestion by promoting the use of carpooling in order to be able to use these lanes. However, they tend to require dedicated lanes on a highway, which makes them difficult to construct in dense urban areas where they are the most effective.

To address habitat fragmentation, wildlife crossings have become increasingly popular in many countries. Wildlife crossings allow animals to safely cross human-made barriers like highways.

[ 26 ] Highways may have some positive impact on nature only in the distant future: They can prevent the spread of forest and steppe fires ; High-speed roads contribute to urbanization , in which millions of people move to richer large cities , and thousands of abandoned small impoverished settlements gradually disappear and become overgrown with dense forests; [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Thanks to expressways, not only the material well-being of the population of poorly developed countries is improving, but even its traditional culture is changing. Freed from age-old prejudices, highly educated and independent women in these countries tend not to burden themselves with heavy family responsibilities and rarely give birth to children , which is why the demography of the Earth may decrease, which will ease the burden on the ecology .

Road traffic safety [ edit ] Main article: Road traffic safety Road traffic safety describes the safety performance of roads and streets, and methods used to reduce the harm (deaths, injuries, and property damage) on the highway system from traffic collisions . It includes the design, construction and regulation of the roads , the vehicles used on them and the training of drivers and other road-users.

A report published by the World Health Organization in 2004 estimated that some 1.2 million people were killed and 50 million injured on the roads around the world each year [ 29 ] and was the leading cause of death among children 10–19 years of age.

The report also noted that the problem was most severe in developing countries and that simple prevention measures could halve the number of deaths.

[ 30 ] For reasons of clear data collection, only harm involving a road vehicle is included.

[ 31 ] A person tripping with fatal consequences or dying for some unrelated reason on a public road is not included in the relevant statistics.

Statistics [ edit ] International sign used widely in Europe denoting the start of special restrictions for a section of highway classed as a motorway Russian Federal M8 highway sign The Cross Bronx Expressway in New York, United States uses asphalt and concrete pavement, both of which are popular road surfaces on highways.

The United States has the world's largest network of highways, including both the Interstate Highway System and the United States Numbered Highway System . At least one of these networks is present in every state and they interconnect most major cities. It is also the world's most expensive mega-project, [ 32 ] as the entirety of the Interstate Highway System was estimated to cost $27 billion in 1955 (equivalent to $240 billion in 2023 [ 33 ] ).

[ 34 ] China's highway network is the second most extensive in the world, with a total length of about 3,573,000 kilometres (2,220,000 mi).

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] China's expressway network is the longest Expressway system in the world, and it is quickly expanding, stretching some 85,000 kilometres (53,000 mi) at the end of 2011.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In 2008 alone, 6,433 kilometres (3,997 mi) expressways were added to the network.

[ 42 ] Longest international highway The Pan-American Highway , which connects many countries in the Americas , is nearly 25,000 kilometres (15,500 mi) long as of 2005 [update] .

[ citation needed ] The Pan-American Highway is discontinuous because there is a significant gap in it in southeastern Panama , where the rainfall is immense and the terrain is entirely unsuitable for highway construction.

Longest national highway (point to point) The Trans-Canada Highway has one main route, a northern route through the western provinces , and several branches in the central and eastern provinces . The main route is 7,821 kilometres (4,860 mi) long as of 2006 [update] alone, and the entire system is over 10,700 kilometres (6,600 mi) long. The TCH runs east–west across southern Canada, the populated portion of the country, and it connects many of the major urban centres along its route crossing all provinces, and reaching nearly all of their capital cities.

[ 43 ] The TCH begins on the east coast in Newfoundland , traverses that island, and crosses to the mainland by ferry. It crosses the Maritime Provinces of eastern Canada with a branch route serving the province of Prince Edward Island via a ferry and bridge. After crossing the remainder of the country's mainland, the highway reaches Vancouver , British Columbia on the Pacific coast , where a ferry continues it to Vancouver Island and the provincial capital of Victoria . Numeric designation is the responsibility of the provinces, and there is no single route number across the country.

Longest national highway (circuit) Australia's Highway 1 at over 14,500 kilometres (9,000 mi).

[ citation needed ] It runs almost the entire way around the country's coastline. With the exception of the Federal Capital of Canberra , which is far inland, Highway 1 links all of Australia's capital cities, although Brisbane and Darwin are not directly connected, but rather are bypassed short distances away. Also, there is a ferry connection to the island state of Tasmania , and then a stretch of Highway 1 that links the major towns and cities of Tasmania, including Launceston and Hobart (this state's capital city).

Largest national highway system The United States of America has approximately 6.43 million kilometres (4,000,000 mi) of highway within its borders as of 2008 [update] .

[ 44 ] Busiest highway Highway 401 in Ontario , Canada, has volumes surpassing an average of 500,000 vehicles per day in some sections of Toronto as of 2006 [update] .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Widest highway (maximum number of lanes) The Katy Freeway (part of Interstate 10 ) in Houston , Texas , has a total of 26 lanes in some sections as of 2007 [update] .

[ citation needed ] [ 47 ] However, they are divided up into general use/ frontage roads / HOV lanes , restricting the traverse traffic flow.

Widest highway (maximum number of through lanes) Interstate 5 along a 3.2-kilometre-long (2 mi) section between Interstate 805 and California State Route 56 in San Diego, California , which was completed in April 2007, is 22 lanes wide.

[ 48 ] Highest international highway The Karakoram Highway , between Pakistan and China, is at an altitude of 4,693 metres (15,397 ft).

[ citation needed ] Highest national highway National Highway 5 , in India, connecting Amritsar in Punjab with Manali in Himachal Pradesh & Leh in Ladakh , reaches an approximate altitude of 4,900 metres (16,100 ft).

[ citation needed ] The highest motorable road passes through Umling La at an altitude of 5,883 metres (19,301 ft) falls under the branch highway connecting National Highway 5 in India.

[ citation needed ] Bus lane [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Highway bus lane on Gyeongbu Expressway in South Korea Examples of highways with bus lanes Country Highway Bus lanes (km) Section Notes Australia M2 Hills Motorway 21.4 Abbott Road–Beecroft Road ( Sydney ) Australia Eastern Freeway 11 Hoddle Street – Doncaster Park & Ride ( Melbourne ) Under construction, to be finished 2027-2028 Canada Don Valley Parkway 0.458 Shoulder converted as bypass lane from Lawrence Avenue East to York Mills Road Canada Ontario Highway 417 7 Eagleson Road–Ontario Highway 417 ( Ottawa ) Canada Ontario Highway 403 6 Mavis Road–Winston Churchill Boulevard ( Mississauga ) Hong Kong Tuen Mun Road 19.4 India National Highway (India) 19 30 lanes Road, ( Mumbai ) Netherlands A1 motorway (Netherlands) 119 End of A6-Vechtbrug ( Muiden ) South Korea Gyeongbu Expressway 137.4 Hannam IC ( Seoul ) ~ Sintanjin IC ( Daejeon ) United States El Monte Busway 19 Shared use Busway between Interstate 10 between Los Angeles Union Station and El Monte station ( Los Angeles ) [ 49 ] South Korea [ edit ] In South Korea , in February 1995 a bus lane (essentially an HOV -9) was established between the northern terminus and Sintanjin for important holidays and on 1 July 2008 bus lane enforcement between Seoul and Osan (Sintanjin on weekends) became daily between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. On 1 October this was adjusted to 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. weekdays, and 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. weekends.

On the dotted line, vehicles except buses can make a right turn and temporarily pass for joining. However, when the lanes are not open, it is treated as white dotted lines.

On the double-dotted line, bus-only is implemented even during hours other than commuting. Vehicles except for buses can temporarily pass for right turns and joining. However, when the dedicated vehicle is not operating hours, it is treated as a white dotted line.

On the solid line, vehicles except buses are prohibited from driving, but it is operated flexibly according to the time and day of the week. When it is not operating hours for exclusive vehicles, it is treated as a white solid line.

On the double line, buses will be operated even during hours other than commuting hours. However, if the cars are not operated, it will be treated as solid white lines.

Hong Kong [ edit ] In Hong Kong , some highways are set up with bus lanes to solve the traffic congestion.

District Highway Section Tuen Mun Tuen Mun Road So Kwun Wat to Sham Tseng Sha Tin Lion Rock Tunnel The entry of the tunnel Philippines [ edit ] Traffic congestion was a principal problem in major roads and highways in the Philippines , especially in Metro Manila and other major cities. The government decided to set up some bus lanes in Metro Manila like in the Epifanio delos Santos Avenue .

Gallery [ edit ] Gravelly Hill Interchange in Birmingham , England Autostrada A1 runs through Italy linking some of the largest cities of the country : Milan , Bologna , Florence , Rome and Naples A Polish expressway in Bielsko-Biała National road 5 in Kuopio , Finland E4 motorway with rest area outside Nyköping , Sweden Multi-lane Autobahn 9 in Munich , Germany Autostrada A22 runs through Po Valley and Alps linking Modena , Italy , to Brenner Pass , a mountain pass which forms the border between Italy and Austria The Pan-American Highway where it serves as the main street in Máncora , Peru A typical expressway in China An expressway exit in Guizhou , China North Lantau Highway in Hong Kong 32-lane toll plaza at Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway in Gurgaon , India Chennai - Bangalore Highway in India Mumbai Pune Expressway , India A highway interchange in Tehran , Iran The Metropolitan Expressway in Tokyo , Japan A highway in Kuwait City , Kuwait Namhae Expressway in Jinju , South Korea Ja-Ela Interchange in the Airport Expressway(E03) in Ja-Ela , Sri Lanka Autostrada A5 connects Turin and the Aosta Valley ( Italy ) to France through the Mont Blanc Tunnel 3/4 highway interchange in Dubai , United Arab Emirates Highways by country [ edit ] The following is a list of highways by country in alphabetical order.

National highways of India Autostrade (highways) of Italy Algeria East–West Highway Autobahns of Austria Autoput and Autocesta ( Bosnia and Herzegovina ) Rodovia ( Brazil ) Avtomagistrala ( Bulgaria , Ukraine ) Highways in Canada Expressway ( China ) Autocesta ( Croatia ) Dálnice ( Czech Republic ) Autostrada ( Egypt , Poland , Romania ) Autoroute ( France ) Autobahns of Germany Aftokinitodromos ( Greece ) Autópálya ( Hungary ) National Highways and Expressways ( India ) Motorway ( Ireland ) List of highways in Israel Autostrade of Italy ( Italy ) Kōsokudōro ( Japan ) Lebuhraya ( Malaysia ) Autopista de Carretera Federal ( Mexico ) Autoroute ( Morocco ) Avtopat ( North Macedonia ) Motorvei ( Norway ) Motorways and National Highways of Pakistan Philippine highway network Autoestrada [ 50 ] ( Portugal ) Russian federal highways ( Russia ) Autoput ( Serbia ) Avtocesta ( Slovenia ) Expressways in South Korea Autopista ( Spain ) Motorväg ( Sweden ) Autobahns of Switzerland Freeways in Taiwan Thai highway network ( Thailand ) State Highways (Ukraine) ( Ukraine ) Highways in the United Kingdom Autofamba ( Zimbabwe ) See also [ edit ] Bypass route Controlled-access highway Divided highway (dual carriageway) Freeway Highway systems by country Highwayman Infrastructure Limited-access road List of roads and highways Motorway Parkway Passing lane Ring road Road Road junction Road safety Road transport Roadway air dispersion modeling Roadway noise Toll road Undivided highway (single carriageway) References [ edit ] ^ "What is the Freeway? - Definition & Meaning" .

Auto News Eye . 3 February 2021. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 February 2021 .

^ Diplock LJ, Suffolk County Council v. Mason [1979] AC 705 ^ "Queen's highway" .

Oxford Dictionaries .

Oxford University Press . 2013. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013.

^ Defining Safe Automated Driving Insurer Requirements for Highway Automation Thatcham Research 2019.

^ Faulds, Ann; Craggs, Trudi & Saunders, John (31 January 2008).

"Chapter 4: The Definition of a Road?" .

Scottish Roads Law (2nd ed.). Practical Law Company . Retrieved 21 March 2014 .

^ "23 US Code § 101" .

^ "Definition of HIGHWAY" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 9 March 2020 .

^ "City of Long Beach v. Payne" .

Justia Law . Retrieved 14 February 2017 .

^ a b Lenarduzzi, Thea (30 January 2016).

"The motorway that built Italy: Piero Puricelli's masterpiece" .

The Independent . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ a b c "The "Milano-Laghi" by Piero Puricelli, the first motorway in the world" . Retrieved 10 May 2022 .

^ "An Autobahn Timeline" . About.com. Archived from the original on 23 June 2006 . Retrieved 10 April 2010 .

^ Patton, Phil (9 October 2008). "A 100-Year-Old Dream: A Road Just for Cars".

The New York Times .

^ "German Myth 8: Hitler and the Autobahn" .

German.about.com . Archived from the original on 8 May 2006.

^ "The German autobahn | Driving in Germany" .

^ "History of the Interstate Highway System" . Federal Highway Administration . Retrieved 10 April 2010 .

^ "Special Roads Act 1949" (PDF) .

Office of Public Sector Information .

^ "M1 London: Yorkshire Motorway, M10 and M45" .

Motorway Archives . Archived from the original on 16 April 2010 . Retrieved 10 April 2010 .

^ "Five Ways Urban Planners Are Addressing a Legacy of Inequity" . Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. 15 May 2023.

^ King, Noel.

"A Brief History Of How Racism Shaped Interstate Highways" .

NPR .

^ "How Urban Highway Removal Is Changing Our Cities" . Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. 14 April 2020.

^ Small, Kenneth A. & Gomez-Ibañez, José A. (1998).

Road Pricing for Congestion Management: The Transition from Theory to Policy . The University of California Transportation Center, University of California at Berkeley. p. 213.

^ Agrawal, Ajay; Galasso, Alberto; Oettl, Alexander (2017). "Roads and Innovation".

The Review of Economics and Statistics .

99 (3): 417– 434.

doi : 10.1162/REST_a_00619 .

S2CID 7268833 .

^ Fretz, Stephan; Parchet, Raphaël; Robert-Nicoud, Frédéric (2021).

"Highways, Market Access, and Spatial Sorting*" .

The Economic Journal .

132 (643): 1011– 1036.

doi : 10.1093/ej/ueab070 .

hdl : 10419/173046 .

ISSN 0013-0133 .

^ Shadely, John (1973).

Acoustical analysis of the New Jersey Turnpike widening project between Raritan and East Brunswick . Bolt Beranek and Newman.

^ Hogan, Michael (17–18 April 1973).

Highway Noise . 3rd Environmental Pollution Symposium, sponsored by AIAA, ACS, ASME, SAE. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International .

^ Zimmerman, Jess (9 July 2012).

"These beautiful bridges are just for animals" .

^ Adventure awaits in Dubbo and the Great Western Plains ^ Сплошные плюсы. Развитие трасс разгрузит города и улучшит экологию | Аргументы и Факты ^ "World report on road traffic injury prevention" .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 14 April 2010 .

^ "UN raises child accidents alarm" .

BBC News . 10 December 2008.

^ "National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation Survey" (PDF) . United States Department of Transportation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

^ "Top 10 most expensive construction projects in the world" .

^ Johnston, Louis; Williamson, Samuel H. (2023).

"What Was the U.S. GDP Then?" .

MeasuringWorth . Retrieved 30 November 2023 .

United States Gross Domestic Product deflator figures follow the MeasuringWorth series.

^ Weingroff, Richard.

"Target: $27 Billion - The 1955 Estimate" .

Highway History . Federal Highway Administration.

^ Graham-Harrison, Emma (16 November 2007).

"China says needs extra million km of roads by 2020" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 30 July 2012.

^ "15-3 Length of Transport Routes at Year-end by Region" . China National Bureau of Statististcs. 2007 . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ "China Has 3.48 Mln Km of Highways in Operation" . Chinagate.cn. 6 March 2007. Archived from the original on 10 August 2013 . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ "National highway target set for year" . Chinadaily.com.cn. 7 January 2008 . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ "China Road Construction Report, 2007–2008" . Okokok.com.cn. 22 December 2008. Archived from the original on 9 August 2013 . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ Staff (10 February 2011).

"China Expressway System to Exceed US Interstates" .

New Geography . Retrieved 21 March 2014 .

^ "中国高速公路总里程达8.5万公里 今年新增1.1万 – 沈阳广播电视台官方网站 – 沈阳电视台 – 资讯潮流 趣味生活 尽在沈视网！" . Csytv.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013 . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ Xin Dingding (16 January 2009).

"More rural roads planned this year" .

China Daily . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ "Trans-Canada Highway: Bridging the Distance" .

CBC Digital Archives . Retrieved 20 December 2006 .

^ Central Intelligence Agency.

"Transportation: Roadways" .

CIA World Factbook .

^ Ministry of Transportation (Ontario) (6 August 2002).

"Ontario government investing $401 million to upgrade Highway 401" . Archived from the original on 14 September 2007 . Retrieved 20 December 2006 .

^ Gray, Brian (10 April 2004).

"GTA Economy Dinged by Every Crash on the 401: North America's Busiest Freeway" .

Toronto Sun . Retrieved 18 March 2007 – via Urban Planet.

The 'phenomenal' number of vehicles on Hwy. 401 as it cuts through Toronto makes it the busiest freeway in North America...

^ "List of World record highways" . Inautonews.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 March 2014 .

^ Schmidt, Steve (28 March 2007).

"Four new southbound lanes at I-5/805 merge set to open" .

San Diego Union-Tribune . Archived from the original on 18 July 2011.

^ "El Monte Busway" .

The Source . 30 October 2020.

^ Notable for the introduction of the world's first electronic toll collection system, the Via Verde .

External links [ edit ] Look up highway in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Highway .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Highways .

Full list of Euroroutes with distances The Greenroads Rating System Archived 21 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Legal opinion, Kansas, US Proposed Trans-Global Highway Ontario Super Highway Program (June 19, 2011) Video of Highway 401 through Greater Toronto Highways and Highway Transportation by George R. Chatburn (1863-1940) v t e Road hierarchy Types of road Limited-access Bicycle highway Freeway / Motorway Dual carriageway / Divided highway / Expressway Elevated highway By country Australia Belgium Brazil Canada China Croatia Czech Republic Germany Greece Hong Kong India Ireland Italy Nepal Pakistan Poland Portugal Spain Taiwan United Kingdom United States Main roads Arterial road Collector road County highway Express–collector setup Farm-to-market road Highway Link road Two-lane expressway 2+1 road 2+2 road Parkway Ring road Trunk road Highway systems by country Local roads Alley Avenue Back road Bicycle boulevard Boulevard Country lane Dead end Driveway Frontage road Green lane Main street Primitive road Side road Single carriageway Single-track road Sunken lane Other terms Concurrency Detour Road hierarchy Private highway Route number special route business route Street hierarchy Stravenue Stroad Toll road Winter road Road junctions Interchanges ( grade-separated ) Cloverleaf Diamond Free-flow Directional T Diverging diamond Parclo Raindrop Roundabout Single-point urban (SPUI) Stack Three-level diamond Trumpet Intersections (at-grade) 3-way junction Bowtie Box junction Channelization Continuous flow Hook turn Jughandle Michigan left Offset T-intersection Protected intersection Quadrant roadway Right-in/right-out (RIRO) Roundabout Seagull intersection Split intersection Superstreet Texas U-turn Turnaround Surfaces Asphalt concrete Bioasphalt Chipseal Cobblestone Concrete Reinforced concrete Corduroy Crocodile cracking Crushed stone Diamond grinding of pavement Dirt Full depth recycling Glassphalt Gravel Ice Macadam Pavement milling Permeable Plank Plastic Rubberized asphalt Sealcoat Sett Stamped asphalt Tarmac Texture Road safety factors Road and environment Aquaplaning Avalanche Black ice Bleeding Crosswind Dead Man's Curve Expansion joint Fog Ford Hairpin turn Level crossing Manhole cover Oil spill Oversize load Pothole Road debris Road slipperiness Road train Roadkill Rockfall Rut Snow squall Speed bump Storm drain Traffic light Traffic sign Washboarding Washout Whiteout Human factors Driver's education Driving under the influence Drowsy driving Road rage Single-vehicle crash Vehicles Airbag Automotive safety Crumple zone Seat belt Risk compensation (road transport) Underride guard Space and time allocation Barrier transfer machine Bike lane Climbing lane Complete streets Contraflow lane Contraflow lane reversal High-occupancy toll lane High-occupancy vehicle lane Living street Managed lane Median / Central reservation Motorcycle lane Passing lane Pedestrian crossing Pedestrian zone Refuge island Reversible lane Road diet Road verge Runaway truck ramp Shared space Sidewalk / Pavement Shoulder Street-running railway Traffic calming Traffic directionality Traffic island Traffic lanes Traffic signal preemption Truck bypass Unused highway Wide outside lane Woonerf Demarcation Bollard Botts' dots Cable barrier Cat's eye (road) Concrete step barrier Constant-slope barrier F-shape barrier Guard rail Jersey barrier Kassel kerb Noise barrier Raised pavement marker Road surface marking Rumble strip Traffic barrier Traffic cone Structures Causeway Overpass / Flyover Underpass / Tunnel Performance indicators Pavement condition index International roughness index Present serviceability index Pavement performance modeling Granular base equivalency Glossary of road transport terms Road types by features Template:Traffic signs Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐69545448d6‐dzn76
Cached time: 20250813012410
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.867 seconds
Real time usage: 1.067 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8012/1000000
Revision size: 49343/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 168957/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12339/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 199010/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.464/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8862348/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  872.833      1 -total
 26.03%  227.161      1 Template:Reflist
 21.73%  189.672     30 Template:Cite_web
  9.64%   84.113      4 Template:Navbox
  8.81%   76.909      1 Template:Inflation-fn
  8.80%   76.800      1 Template:Road_types
  8.06%   70.354      1 Template:Short_description
  5.09%   44.462      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.72%   41.170      3 Template:Sister_project
  4.53%   39.579      3 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48519:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813012410 and revision id 1303283280. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Highway&oldid=1303283280 " Categories : Highways Road infrastructure Types of roads Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 02:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Highway 45 languages Add topic

