Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Technology 2 Other types of wall painting 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Egypt and ancient Near East 3.2 Aegean civilizations 3.3 Classical antiquity 3.4 India 3.5 Sri Lanka 3.6 Middle Ages 3.7 Early modern Europe 3.8 Mexican muralism 3.9 Contemporary 4 Selected examples of frescoes Toggle Selected examples of frescoes subsection 4.1 Ancient and Early Medieval 4.2 North Macedonia 4.3 Bulgaria 4.4 Colombia 4.5 Czechia 4.6 France 4.7 Italy 4.7.1 Late Medieval-Quattrocento 4.7.2 High Renaissance 4.8 Mexico 4.9 The Netherlands 4.10 Serbian Medieval 4.11 United States 5 Conservation of frescoes 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Fresco 75 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Papiamentu Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mural painting upon freshly laid lime plaster For other uses, see Fresco (disambiguation) .

The Creation of Adam , a detail of the fresco Sistine Chapel ceiling by Michelangelo Fresco ( pl.

frescos or frescoes ) is a technique of mural painting executed upon freshly laid ("wet") lime plaster .

Water is used as the vehicle for the dry-powder pigment to merge with the plaster, and with the setting of the plaster, the painting becomes an integral part of the wall. The word fresco ( Italian : affresco ) is derived from the Italian adjective fresco meaning "fresh", and may thus be contrasted with fresco-secco or secco mural painting techniques, which are applied to dried plaster, to supplement painting in fresco. The fresco technique has been employed since antiquity and is closely associated with Italian Renaissance painting .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The word fresco is commonly and inaccurately used in English to refer to any wall painting regardless of the plaster technology or binding medium. This, in part, contributes to a misconception that the most geographically and temporally common wall painting technology was the painting into wet lime plaster. Even in apparently buon fresco technology, the use of supplementary organic materials was widespread, if underrecognized.

[ 3 ] Technology [ edit ] Etruscan fresco . Detail of two dancers from the Tomb of the Triclinium in the Necropolis of Monterozzi 470 BC, Tarquinia , Lazio , Italy Buon fresco pigment is mixed with room temperature water and is used on a thin layer of wet, fresh plaster , called the intonaco (after the Italian word for plaster).  Because of the chemical makeup of the plaster, a binder is not required, as the pigment mixed solely with the water will sink into the intonaco , which itself becomes the medium holding the pigment. The pigment is absorbed by the wet plaster; after a number of hours, the plaster dries in reaction to air: it is this chemical reaction which fixes the pigment particles in the plaster.
The chemical processes are as follows: [ 4 ] calcination of limestone in a lime kiln : CaCO 3 → CaO + CO 2 slaking of quicklime : CaO + H 2 O → Ca(OH) 2 setting [ broken anchor ] of the lime plaster : Ca(OH) 2 + CO 2 → CaCO 3 + H 2 O A Roman fresco of a young man from the Villa di Arianna, Stabiae , 1st century AD In painting buon fresco , a rough underlayer called the arriccio is added to the whole area to be painted and allowed to dry for some days. Many artists sketched their compositions on this underlayer, which would never be seen, in a red pigment called sinopia , a name also used to refer to these under-paintings.  Later, [ when?

] new techniques for transferring paper drawings to the wall were developed.  The main lines of a drawing made on paper were pricked over with a point, the paper held against the wall, and a bag of soot ( spolvero ) banged on them to produce black dots along the lines. If the painting was to be done over an existing fresco, the surface would be roughened to provide better adhesion.  On the day of painting, the intonaco, a thinner, smooth layer of fine plaster was added to the amount of wall that was expected to be completed that day, sometimes matching the contours of the figures or the landscape, but more often just starting from the top of the composition.  This area is called the giornata ("day's work"), and the different day stages can usually be seen in a large fresco, by a faint seam that separates one from the next.

Buon frescoes are difficult to create because of the deadline associated with the drying plaster.  Generally, a layer of plaster will require ten to twelve hours to dry; ideally, an artist would begin to paint after one hour and continue until two hours before the drying time—giving seven to nine hours' working time.  Once a giornata is dried, no more buon fresco can be done, and the unpainted intonaco must be removed with a tool before starting again the next day.  If mistakes have been made, it may also be necessary to remove the whole intonaco for that area—or to change them later, a secco .
An indispensable component of this process is the carbonatation of the lime, which fixes the colour in the plaster ensuring durability of the fresco for future generations.

[ 5 ] A technique used in the popular frescoes of Michelangelo and Raphael was to scrape indentations into certain areas of the plaster while still wet to increase the illusion of depth and to accent certain areas over others. The eyes of the people of the School of Athens are sunken-in using this technique which causes the eyes to seem deeper and more pensive. Michelangelo used this technique as part of his trademark 'outlining' of his central figures within his frescoes.

In a wall-sized fresco, there may be ten to twenty or even more giornate , or separate areas of plaster.  After five centuries, the giornate , which were originally nearly invisible, have sometimes become visible, and in many large-scale frescoes, these divisions may be seen from the ground.  Additionally, the border between giornate was often covered by an a secco painting, which has since fallen off.

One of the first painters in the post-classical period to use this technique was the Isaac Master (or Master of the Isaac fresco, and thus a name used to refer to the unknown master of a particular painting) in the Upper Basilica of Saint Francis in Assisi . A person who creates fresco is called a frescoist.

Other types of wall painting [ edit ] Fresco by Giotto , Scrovegni Chapel in Padua. Sky and blue mantle of Maria were painted a secco , and large part of the painting is now lost A secco or fresco-secco painting is done on dry plaster ( secco meaning "dry" in Italian).  The pigments thus require a binding medium, such as egg ( tempera ), glue or oil to attach the pigment to the wall.  It is important to distinguish between a secco work done on top of buon fresco , which according to most authorities was in fact standard from the Middle Ages onwards, and work done entirely a secco on a blank wall.  Generally, buon fresco works are more durable than any a secco work added on top of them, because a secco work lasts better with a roughened plaster surface, whilst true fresco should have a smooth one.  The additional a secco work would be done to make changes, and sometimes to add small details, but also because not all colours can be achieved in true fresco, because only some pigments work chemically in the very alkaline environment of fresh lime-based plaster.  Blue was a particular problem, and skies and blue robes were often added a secco , because neither azurite blue nor lapis lazuli , the only two blue pigments then available, works well in wet fresco.

[ 6 ] It has also become increasingly clear, thanks to modern analytical techniques, that even in the early Italian Renaissance painters quite frequently employed a secco techniques so as to allow the use of a broader range of pigments.  In most early examples this work has now entirely vanished, but a whole painting done a secco on a surface roughened to give a key for the paint may survive very well, although damp is more threatening to it than to buon fresco .

A third type called a mezzo-fresco is painted on nearly dry intonaco—firm enough not to take a thumb-print, says the sixteenth-century author Ignazio Pozzo—so that the pigment only penetrates slightly into the plaster. By the end of the sixteenth century this had largely displaced buon fresco , and was used by painters such as Giovanni Battista Tiepolo or Michelangelo .  This technique had, in reduced form, the advantages of a secco work.

The three key advantages of work done entirely a secco were that it was quicker, mistakes could be corrected, and the colours varied less from when applied to when fully dry—in wet fresco there was a considerable change.

For wholly a secco work, the intonaco is laid with a rougher finish, allowed to dry completely and then usually given a key by rubbing with sand. The painter then proceeds much as he or she would on a canvas or wood panel.

History [ edit ] Reproduction of the earliest known fresco, Tomb 100, Hierakonpolis , Naqada II culture, Egypt ( c.

3500–3200 BCE ) Investiture of Zimri-Lim , Syria, fresco painted c.

1770 BCE The Fisherman , Minoan Bronze Age fresco from Akrotiri , on the Aegean island of Santorini (classically Thera), dated to the Neo-Palatial period ( c.

1640–1600 BC ). The settlement of Akrotiri was buried in volcanic ash (dated by radiocarbon dating to c.

1627 BC ) by the Minoan eruption on the island, which preserved many Minoan frescoes like this Etruscan fresco of Velia Velcha from the Tomb of Orcus , Tarquinia Egypt and ancient Near East [ edit ] The first known Egyptian fresco was found in Tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis , and dated to c.

3500–3200 BC . Several of the themes and designs visible in the fresco are otherwise known from other Naqada II objects, such as the Gebel el-Arak Knife . It shows the scene of a " Master of Animals ", a man fighting against two lions, individual fighting scenes, and Egyptian and foreign boats.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Ancient Egyptians painted many tombs and houses, but those wall paintings are not frescoes.

[ 12 ] An old fresco from Mesopotamia is the Investiture of Zimri-Lim (modern Syria ), dating from the early 18th century BC.

Aegean civilizations [ edit ] The oldest frescoes done in the buon fresco method date from the first half of the second millennium BCE during the Bronze Age and are to be found among Aegean civilizations , more precisely Minoan art from the island of Crete and other islands of the Aegean Sea . The most famous of these [ citation needed ] , the Bull-Leaping Fresco , depicts a sacred ceremony in which individuals jump over the backs of large bulls. The oldest surviving Minoan frescoes are found on the island of Santorini (classically known as Thera), dated to the Neo-Palatial period ( c.

1640–1600 BC ).

[ citation needed ] While some similar frescoes have been found in other locations around the Mediterranean basin, particularly in Egypt and Morocco, their origins are subject to speculation. Some art historians believe that fresco artists from Crete may have been sent to various locations as part of a trade exchange, a possibility which raises to the fore the importance of this art form within the society of the times. The most common form of fresco was Egyptian wall paintings in tombs , usually using the a secco technique.

[ citation needed ] Classical antiquity [ edit ] Fresco of " Sappho " from Pompeii , c.

50 CE Frescoes were also painted in ancient Greece , but few of these works have survived. In southern Italy, at Paestum , which was a Greek colony of the Magna Graecia , a tomb containing frescoes dating back to 470 BC, the so-called Tomb of the Diver , was discovered in June 1968. These frescoes depict scenes of the life and society of ancient Greece, and constitute valuable historical testimonials. One shows a group of men reclining at a symposium , while another shows a young man diving into the sea.

Etruscan frescoes, dating from the 4th century BC, have been found in the Tomb of Orcus near Veii , Italy.

Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak frescoes, 4th century BC The richly decorated Thracian frescoes of the Tomb of Kazanlak are dating back to 4th century BC, making it a UNESCO protected World Heritage Site .

View of a woman's face in the central chamber of the Ostrusha mound built in the 4th century BC in Bulgaria Roman wall paintings, such as those at the magnificent Villa dei Misteri (1st century BC) in the ruins of Pompeii , and others at Herculaneum , were completed in buon fresco.

Roman (Christian) frescoes from the 1st to 2nd centuries AD were found in catacombs beneath Rome, and Byzantine icons were also found in Cyprus , Crete , Ephesus , Cappadocia , and Antioch . Roman frescoes were done by the artist painting the artwork on the still damp plaster of the wall, so that the painting is part of the wall, actually colored plaster.

Also a historical collection of Ancient Christian frescoes can be found in the Churches of Göreme .

India [ edit ] Fresco from the Ajanta Caves built and painted during the Gupta Empire in the 6th century AD Thanks to large number of ancient rock-cut cave temples, valuable ancient and early medieval frescoes have been preserved in more than 20 locations of India.

[ 13 ] The frescoes on the ceilings and walls of the Ajanta Caves were painted between c.

200 BC and 600 and are the oldest known frescoes in India. They depict the Jataka tales that are stories of the Buddha 's life in former existences as Bodhisattva . The narrative episodes are depicted one after another although not in a linear order. Their identification has been a core area of research on the subject since the time of the site's rediscovery in 1819. Other locations with valuable preserved ancient and early medieval frescoes include Bagh Caves , Ellora Caves , Sittanavasal , Armamalai Cave , Badami Cave Temples and other locations. Frescoes have been made in several techniques, including tempera technique.

The later Chola paintings were discovered in 1931 within the circumambulatory passage of the Brihadisvara Temple in India and are the first Chola specimens discovered.

Researchers have discovered the technique used in these frescos. A smooth batter of limestone mixture was applied over the stones, which took two to three days to set. Within that short span, such large paintings were painted with natural organic pigments.

During the Nayak period, the Chola paintings were painted over. The Chola frescos lying underneath have an ardent spirit of saivism expressed in them. They probably synchronised with the completion of the temple by Rajaraja Cholan the Great.

The frescoes in Dogra / Pahari style paintings exist in their unique form at Sheesh Mahal of Ramnagar (105 km from Jammu and 35 km west of Udhampur). Scenes from epics of Mahabharat and Ramayan along with portraits of local lords form the subject matter of these wall paintings.

Rang Mahal of Chamba ( Himachal Pradesh ) is another site of historic Dogri fresco with wall paintings depicting scenes of Draupti Cheer Haran , and Radha- Krishna Leela . This can be seen preserved at National Museum at New Delhi in a chamber called Chamba Rang Mahal .

During the Mughal Era, frescos were used for making interior design on walls and inside the ceilings of domes.

[ 14 ] The ceiling of Begum Shahi mosque in Lahore with Mughal style frescos Sri Lanka [ edit ] Sigiriya Fresco, Sri Lanka.

c.

477 – 495 AD Frescos in the Monastery of Saint Moses the Abyssinian , Syria The Sigiriya Frescoes are found in Sigiriya in Sri Lanka . Painted during the reign of King Kashyapa I (ruled 477 – 495 AD). The generally accepted view is that they are portrayals of women of the royal court of the king depicted as celestial nymphs showering flowers upon the humans below. They bear some resemblance to the Gupta style of painting found in the Ajanta Caves in India . They are, however, far more enlivened and colorful and uniquely Sri Lankan in character. While some scholars contend that these frescos are the only surviving secular art from antiquity found in Sri Lanka today, others argue that they are Buddhist in nature (potentially representing goddesses from Tusita heaven) [ 15 ] The painting technique used on the Sigiriya paintings is "fresco lustro". It varies slightly from the pure fresco technique in that it also contains a mild binding agent or glue. This gives the painting added durability, as clearly demonstrated by the fact that they have survived, exposed to the elements, for over 1,500 years.

[ 16 ] Located in a small sheltered depression a hundred meters above ground only 19 survive today. Ancient references, however, refer to the existence of as many as five hundred of these frescoes.

Middle Ages [ edit ] Interior view with the frescoes dating back to 1259, Boyana Church in Sofia , UNESCO World Heritage List landmark.

Christ Pantocrator from Sant Climent de Taüll , in MNAC Barcelona Myrrhbearers on Christ's Grave, c 1235 AD, Mileševa monastery in Serbian The late Medieval period and the Renaissance saw the most prominent use of fresco, particularly in Italy, where most churches and many government buildings still feature fresco decoration. This change coincided with the reevaluation of murals in the liturgy .

[ 17 ] Romanesque churches in Catalonia were richly painted in 12th and 13th century, with both decorative and educational—for the illiterate faithfuls—roles, as can be seen in the MNAC in Barcelona , where is kept a large collection of Catalan romanesque art.

[ 18 ] In Denmark too, church wall paintings or kalkmalerier were widely used in the Middle Ages (first Romanesque, then Gothic) and can be seen in some 600 Danish churches as well as in churches in the south of Sweden, which was Danish at the time.

[ 19 ] One of the rare examples of Islamic fresco painting can be seen in Qasr Amra , the desert palace of the Umayyads in the 8th century Magotez.

Early modern Europe [ edit ] Fragment of a 13th-century fresco with Armenian inscribed text in Dadivank Monastery , a masterpiece of medieval culture of Artsakh .

Fresco painting continued into the Baroque in southern Europe, for churches and especially palaces.

Gianbattista Tiepolo was arguably the last major exponent of this tradition, with huge schemes for palaces in Madrid and Würzburg in Germany.

Northern Romania (historical region of Moldavia ) boasts about a dozen painted monasteries , completely covered with frescos inside and out, that date from the last quarter of the 15th century to the second quarter of the 16th century. The most remarkable are the monastic foundations at Voroneţ (1487), Arbore (1503), Humor (1530), and Moldoviţa (1532).

Suceviţa , dating from 1600, represents a late return to the style developed some 70 years earlier. The tradition of painted churches continued into the 19th century in other parts of Romania, although never to the same extent.

[ 20 ] Henri Clément Serveau produced several frescos including a three by six meter painting for the Lycée de Meaux , where he was once a student. He directed the École de fresques at l' École nationale supérieure des beaux-arts , and decorated the Pavillon du Tourisme at the 1937 Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne (Paris), Pavillon de la Ville de Paris ; now at Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris .

[ 21 ] In 1954 he realized a fresco for the Cité Ouvrière du Laboratoire Débat, Garches.

[ 22 ] He also executed mural decorations for the Plan des anciennes enceintes de Paris in the Musée Carnavalet .

[ 23 ] The Foujita chapel in Reims completed in 1966, is an example of modern frescos, the interior being painted with religious scenes by the School of Paris painter Tsuguharu Foujita . In 1996, it was designated an historic monument by the French government.

Mexican muralism [ edit ] José Clemente Orozco , Fernando Leal , David Siqueiros and Diego Rivera the famous Mexican artists, renewed the art of fresco painting in the 20th century.  Orozco, Siqueiros, Rivera and his wife Frida Kahlo contributed more to the history of Mexican fine arts and to the reputation of Mexican art in general than anybody else. Channeling pre-Columbian Mexican artworks including the true frescoes at Teotihuacan, Orozco, Siqueiros, River and Fernando Leal established the art movement known as Mexican Muralism .

[ 24 ] Contemporary [ edit ] There have been comparatively few frescoes created since the 1960s but there are some significant exceptions.

The American artist, Brice Marden's monochrome works first shown in 1966 at Bykert Gallery, New York were inspired by frescos and "watching masons plastering stucco walls." [ 25 ] While Marden employed the imagistic effects of fresco, David Novros was developing a 50-year practice around the technique. David Novros is an American painter and a muralist of geometric abstraction. In 1968 Donald Judd commissioned Novros to create a work at 101 Spring Street, New York, NY soon after he had purchased the building.

[ 26 ] Novros used medieval techniques to create the mural by "first preparing a full-scale cartoon, which he transferred to the wet plaster using the traditional pouncing technique," the act of passing powdered pigment onto the plaster through tiny perforations in a cartoon.

[ 27 ] The surface unity of the fresco was important to Novros in that the pigment he used bonded with the drying plaster, becoming part of the wall rather than a surface coating. This site-specific work was Novros's first true fresco, which was restored by the artist in 2013.

The American painter, James Hyde first presented frescoes in New York at the Esther Rand Gallery, Thompkins Square Park in 1985. At that time Hyde was using true fresco technique on small panels made of cast concrete arranged on the wall. Throughout the next decade Hyde experimented with multiple rigid supports for the fresco plaster including composite board and plate glass. In 1991 at John Good Gallery in New York City, Hyde debuted true fresco applied on an enormous block of Styrofoam. Holland Cotter of the New York Times described the work as "objectifying some of the individual elements that have made modern paintings paintings." [ 28 ] While Hyde's work "ranges from paintings on photographic prints to large-scale installations, photography, and abstract furniture design" his frescoes on Styrofoam have been a significant form of his work since the 1980s.

[ 29 ] The frescoes have been shown throughout Europe and the United States. In ArtForum David Pagel wrote, "like ruins from some future archaeological dig, Hyde's nonrepresentational frescoes on large chunks of Styrofoam give suggestive shape to the fleeting landscape of the present." [ 30 ] Over its long history, practitioners of frescoes always took a careful methodological approach. Hyde's frescoes are done improvisationally. The contemporary disposability of the Styrofoam structure contrast the permanence of the classical fresco technique. In 1993, Hyde mounted four automobile sized frescoes on Styrofoam suspended from a brick wall. Progressive Insurance commissioned this site-specific work for the monumental 80- foot atrium in their headquarters in Cleveland, Ohio.

[ 31 ] Selected examples of frescoes [ edit ] Virgin and Unicorn ( A Virgin with a Unicorn ) , Palazzo Farnese by Domenichino c.

1602 The Wounded Angel , Tampere Cathedral by Hugo Simberg (1873–1917) Fernando Leal , Miracles of the Virgin of Guadalupe , Fresco Mexico City Prometheus , Pomona College by José Clemente Orozco 1930 Ancient and Early Medieval [ edit ] Ancient Aegean frescoes Etruscan tomb frescoes Frescoes of Pompeii Frescoes from the Roman catacombs (see also Early Christian art and architecture ) Castelseprio North Macedonia [ edit ] Church of Saint Panteleimon , Gorno Nerezi Church of Theotokos Peribleptos, Ohrid Church of St. George, Staro Nagoričane Bulgaria [ edit ] Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Sofia Bachkovo Monastery Boyana Church Church of St. George, Sofia Rila Monastery Rock-hewn Churches of Ivanovo Roman Tomb (Silistra) Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak Thracian tomb of Aleksandrovo Transfiguration Monastery Colombia [ edit ] Santiago Martinez Delgado frescoed a mural in the Colombian Congress Building, and also in the Colombian National Building.

Czechia [ edit ] Rotunda of Saint Catherine in Znojmo France [ edit ] Saint-Esprit, Paris Palais des Papes , Avignon , 14th-century frescoes by Matteo Giovanetti Abbey Church of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe , Romanesque frescoes Albi cathedral , Renaissance frescoes Val-de-Grâce, Paris , Baroque fresco by Pierre Mignard on the cupola Italy [ edit ] Late Medieval-Quattrocento [ edit ] Panels (including Giotto(?), Lorenzetti, Martini and others) in upper and lower Basilica of San Francesco d'Assisi Giotto , Cappella degli Scrovegni (Arena Chapel), Padua Camposanto , Pisa Masaccio , Brancacci Chapel , Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence Ambrogio Lorenzetti , Palazzo Pubblico , Siena Piero della Francesca , Chiesa di San Francesco, Arezzo Ghirlandaio , Cappella Tornabuoni , Santa Maria Novella , Florence The Last Supper , Leonardo da Vinci , Milan (technically a tempera on plaster and stone, not a true fresco [ 32 ] ) Sistine Chapel Wall series: Botticelli , Perugino , Rossellini , Signorelli , and Ghirlandaio Luca Signorelli , Chapel of San Brizio, Duomo, Orvieto High Renaissance [ edit ] See also: High Renaissance Michelangelo , Sistine Chapel ceiling Raphael , Raphael Rooms Raphael , Villa Farnesina Giulio Romano 's Palazzo del Tè , Mantua Mantegna , Camera degli Sposi , Palazzo Ducale , Mantua The dome of the Florence Cathedral The Loves of the Gods , Annibale Carracci , Palazzo Farnese , Rome Allegory of Divine Providence and Barberini Power , Pietro da Cortona , Palazzo Barberini Ceilings, Giovanni Battista Tiepolo , (New Residenz) Würzburg, (Royal Palace) Madrid, (Villa Pisani) Stra, and others; Wall scenes (Villa Valmarana and Palazzo Labia) Nave ceiling, Andrea Pozzo , Sant'Ignazio, Rome Mexico [ edit ] Fresco Cycle of The Miracles of the Virgin of Guadalupe by Fernando Leal, at Basilica of Guadalupe , Mexico City Fresco Cycle of Bolivar's Epic by Fernando Leal, at Colegio de San Ildefonso , Mexico City Note : Fresco cycle, a series of frescos done about a particular subject The Netherlands [ edit ] Inside the church of Château St. Gerlach , Valkenburg aan de Geul , The Netherlands Château St. Gerlach Serbian Medieval [ edit ] Visoki Dečani Gračanica monastery Studenica monastery Mileševa monastery United States [ edit ] Prometheus in Pomona College 's Frary Dining Hall. Painted in 1930 by José Clemente Orozco , it is the first example of a modern, Mexican fresco mural in the U.S.

[ 33 ] St. Ann Arts and Cultural Center in Woonsocket, RI. Home of the largest collection of fresco paintings in North America.

Conservation of frescoes [ edit ] Main article: Conservation and restoration of frescos The climate and environment of Venice has proved to be a problem for frescoes and other works of art in the city for centuries. The city is built on a lagoon in northern Italy. The humidity and the rise of water over the centuries have created a phenomenon known as rising damp. As the lagoon water rises and seeps into the foundation of a building, the water is absorbed and rises up through the walls often causing damage to frescoes. Venetians have become quite adept in the conservation methods of frescoes. The mold aspergillus versicolor can grow after flooding, to consume nutrients from frescoes.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The following is the process that was used when rescuing frescoes in La Fenice , a Venetian opera house, but the same process can be used for similarly damaged frescoes. First, a protection and support bandage of cotton gauze and polyvinyl alcohol is applied. Difficult sections are removed with soft brushes and localized vacuuming. The other areas that are easier to remove (because they had been damaged by less water) are removed with a paper pulp compress saturated with bicarbonate of ammonia solutions and removed with deionized water. These sections are strengthened and reattached then cleansed with base exchange resin compresses and the wall and pictorial layer were strengthened with barium hydrate. The cracks and detachments are stopped with lime putty and injected with an epoxy resin loaded with micronized silica.

[ 36 ] Gallery [ edit ] Frescos Chola Fresco of Dancing girls.

Brihadisvara Temple c. 1100 18th-century BC fresco of the Investiture of Zimrilim , Royal Palace of ancient Mari, Syria On the left, Anthony the Great, crucifixion with the Virgin and Saint John, on the right, the Archangel Michael. Abbey church of Saint-Antoine l'Abbaye, France "Good-natured giant Saint Christopher carrying the child Jesus." Abbey church of Saint-Antoine l'Abbaye, France Chapel of the Holy Cross in Wawel Cathedral in Kraków Fresco by Dionisius representing Saint Nicholas in Ferapontov Monastery Dante in Domenico di Michelino 's Divine Comedy , Florence Cathedral Byzantine and Bulgarian, Dome of the Church of St. George, Sofia Villa of Livia, Rome See also [ edit ] Visual arts portal Church frescos in Denmark Church frescos in Sweden Gambier Parry process Haveli Kandyan period frescoes References [ edit ] ^ Mora, Paolo; Mora, Laura; Philippot, Paul (1984).

Conservation of Wall Paintings .

Butterworths . pp.

34– 54.

ISBN 0-408-10812-6 .

^ Ward, Gerald W. R., ed. (2008).

The GroveEncyclopedia of Materials and Techniques in Art .

Oxford University Press . pp.

223– 5.

ISBN 978-0-19-531391-8 .

^ Piqué, Francesca (2015).

Organic materials in wall paintings : project report . Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute.

ISBN 978-1-937433-29-1 .

OCLC 944038739 .

^ Mora, Paolo; Mora, Laura; Philippot, Paul (1984).

Conservation of Wall Paintings .

Butterworths . pp.

47– 54.

ISBN 0-408-10812-6 .

^ How is a fresco made? - Fresco Blog Archived 18 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine by Italian Fresco Blog.

^ All this section - Ugo Procacci, in Frescoes from Florence , pp. 15–25 1969, Arts Council, London.

^ Case, Humphrey; Payne, Joan Crowfoot (1962). "Tomb 100: The Decorated Tomb at Hierakonpolis".

The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology .

48 : 17.

doi : 10.2307/3855778 .

ISSN 0307-5133 .

JSTOR 3855778 .

^ Shaw, Ian (2019).

Ancient Egyptian Warfare: Tactics, Weaponry and Ideology of the Pharaohs . Open Road Media. p. 22.

ISBN 978-1-5040-6059-2 .

^ Kemp, Barry J. (2007).

Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilisation . Routledge. p. 94.

ISBN 978-1-134-56389-0 .

^ Bestock, Laurel (2017).

Violence and Power in Ancient Egypt: Image and Ideology before the New Kingdom . Routledge. p. 94.

ISBN 978-1-134-85626-8 .

^ Hartwig, Melinda K. (2014).

A Companion to Ancient Egyptian Art . John Wiley & Sons. p. 424.

ISBN 978-1-118-32509-4 .

^ Nina M. Davies: Ancient Egyptian paintings, Vol. III , Chicago, 1963, p. xxxi online Archived 10 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ancient and medieval Indian cave paintings - Internet encyclopedia Archived 24 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Wondermondo. Retrieved 4 June 2010.

^ "Lahore Its History, Architectural Remains and Antiquities" . 1892.

^ Somathilake, Mahinda (2013).

"The Origins of Murals in the Buddhist World" (PDF) .

Modern Sri Lanka Studies .

IV (2): 71– 72 . Retrieved 17 January 2025 .

^ Ponnamperuma, Senani (2013).

Story of Sigiriya . Melbourne: Panique Pty Ltd.

ISBN 9780987345110 .

^ Bokody, Peter (January 2014).

"Péter Bokody, Mural Painting as a Medium: Technique, Representation and Liturgy , Image and Christianity: Visual Media in the Middle Ages, Pannonhalma Abbey, 2014, 136-151" .

Péter Bokody (Ed.). Image and Christianity: Visual Media in the Middle Ages. Exhibition Catalog. Pannonhalma: Pannonhalma Abbey, 2014 .

^ Español, Francesca; Yarza, Joaquín (2007).

El romànic català (in Catalan). Fotografies de Ramon Manent, Pere Pascual i Rosina Ramírez (1. ed.). Barcelona: Angle Editorial.

ISBN 9788496970090 .

^ Kirsten Trampedach, "Introduction to Danish wall paintings - Conservation ethics and methods of treatment from the National Museum of Denmark" Archived 24 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 2 March 2010.

^ Anca Vasiliu, "Monastères de Moldavie (XIVème-XVIème siècles)", Paris Mediterranée, 1998 ^ "Ministère de la Culture (France) - Médiathèque de l'architecture et du patrimoine, Exposition internationale des arts et techniques de 1937" .

^ Base Mérimée : Cité ouvrière du Laboratoire Débat , Ministère français de la Culture.

(in French) ^ "Waterhouse & Dodd Fine Art 1850-2000" . Archived from the original on 11 July 2012 . Retrieved 15 December 2012 .

^ Sophie Friedman.

"Mexican Muralism | Modern Latin America" .

Brown University Library .

^ Brooklyn Rail Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine "Brice Marden with Jeffrey Weiss", October 2006.

^ Judd Foundation Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine "Index of works- David Novros", 2013.

^ Matthew L. Levy, "David Novro's Painted Places", in David Novros, exh. Cat. (Bielefeld: Kerber, 2014),50.

^ Holland Cotter,New York Times Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine "Art in Review", March 1993.

^ Guggenheim, John Simon Memorial Foundation Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Awarded Fellows , 2008.

^ David Pagel, "James Hyde, Angles Gallery" Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Art Forum , December 1993.

^ Progressive Insurance, "Installations- James Hyde" Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Progressive Insurance , 1993.

^ "Restoration of the Last Supper 1498 - Leonardo da Vinci 1452-1519 - The Last Supper St. Apostle John Comparison" . Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 29 October 2021 .

^ Scott, David W. (1957). "Orozco's Prometheus: Summation, Transition, Innovation".

College Art Journal .

17 (1): 2– 18.

doi : 10.2307/773653 .

ISSN 1543-6322 .

JSTOR 773653 .

^ Bennett JW (2010).

"An Overview of the Genus Aspergillus " (PDF) .

Aspergillus : Molecular Biology and Genomics . Caister Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-904455-53-0 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 April 2011.

^ Orio Ciferri (March 1999).

"Microbial Degradation of Paintings" .

Applied and Environmental Microbiology .

65 (3): 879– 885.

Bibcode : 1999ApEnM..65..879C .

doi : 10.1128/AEM.65.3.879-885.1999 .

PMC 91117 .

PMID 10049836 .

^ Ciacci, Leonardo., ed, La Fenice Reconstructed 1996–2003: a building site in the city,
(Venezia: Marsilio, 2003),118.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Frescos .

Museum of Ancient Inventions: Roman-Style Fresco, Italy, 50 AD Sigiriya Frescoes, The Mary B. Wheeler Collection, University of Pennsylvania Library Archived 26 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7qtwr
Cached time: 20250814215035
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.620 seconds
Real time usage: 0.782 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3873/1000000
Revision size: 44189/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87051/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5133/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 109991/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.367/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15154894/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  619.265      1 -total
 33.00%  204.376      1 Template:Reflist
 18.09%  112.055     11 Template:Cite_book
 11.94%   73.954      1 Template:Langx
  9.92%   61.406      1 Template:Art_world
  9.64%   59.723      1 Template:Navbox
  8.22%   50.924      1 Template:Short_description
  7.42%   45.921      5 Template:Fix
  6.70%   41.521      1 Template:Commons_category
  6.44%   39.908      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11144:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215035 and revision id 1304446809. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fresco&oldid=1304446809 " Categories : Fresco painting Painting materials Painting techniques Plastering Wallcoverings Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with broken anchors All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles containing French-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 03:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fresco 75 languages Add topic

