Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and development 2 Connection to "The Eight" 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ashcan School 23 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ashcan school ) American art movement John French Sloan , Self-portrait , 1890, oil on window shade, 14 × 11 + 7 ⁄ 8 inches, Delaware Art Museum , gift of Helen Farr Sloan, 1970. John Sloan was a leading member of the Ashcan School.

The Ashcan School , also called the Ash Can School , was an artistic movement in the United States during the late 19th-early 20th century [ 1 ] that produced works portraying scenes of daily life in New York , often in the city's poorer neighborhoods.

The artists working in this style included Robert Henri (1865–1929), George Luks (1867–1933), William Glackens (1870–1938), John Sloan (1871–1951), and Everett Shinn (1876–1953). Some of them met studying together under the realist Thomas Anshutz at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts ; others met in the newspaper offices of Philadelphia where they worked as illustrators.

Theresa Bernstein , who studied at the Philadelphia School of Design for Women , was also a part of the Ashcan School. She was friends with many of its better-known members, including Sloan with whom she co-founded the Society of Independent Artists .

The movement, which took some inspiration from Walt Whitman 's epic poem Leaves of Grass , has been seen as emblematic of the spirit of political rebellion of the period.

[ 2 ] Origin and development [ edit ] Ashcan School artists and friends at John French Sloan's Philadelphia Studio, 1898 The Ashcan School was not an organized movement. The artists who worked in this style did not issue manifestos or even see themselves as a unified group with identical intentions or career goals. Some of the artists were politically minded, and others were apolitical. Their unity consisted of a desire to tell certain truths about the city and modern life they felt had been ignored by the suffocating influence of the Genteel Tradition in the visual arts.

Robert Henri , in some ways the spiritual father of this school, "wanted art to be akin to journalism... he wanted paint to be as real as mud, as the clods of horse-shit and snow, that froze on Broadway in the winter." [ 3 ] He urged his younger friends and students to paint in the robust, unfettered, ungenteel spirit of his favorite poet, Walt Whitman , and to be unafraid of offending contemporary taste. He believed that working-class and middle-class urban settings would provide better material for modern painters than drawing rooms and salons. Having been to Paris and admired the works of Édouard Manet , Henri also urged his students to ‘’paint the everyday world in America just as it had been done in France.’’ [ 4 ] By 1904, all of the artists relocated to New York.

[ 5 ] The name "Ashcan school" is a tongue-in-cheek reference to other "schools of art". (For examples of other "schools of art" see Category:Italian art movements e.g.

Lucchese School and for instance School of Paris .) Its origin is in a complaint found in a radical socialist publication called The Masses in March 1916 by the cartoonist Art Young, alleging that there were too many "pictures of ashcans and girls hitching up their skirts on Horatio Street." That particular reference was published in The Masses at a point at which the artists had already been working together for several years. They were amused by the reference and the name soon lost its negative connotations.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The Ashcan School of artists had also been known as "The Apostles of Ugliness".

[ 9 ] The term Ashcan School was originally applied in derision. The school is not so much known for innovations in technique but more for its subject matter. Common subjects were prostitutes and street urchins. The work of the Ashcan painters links them to such documentary photographers as Jacob Riis and Lewis W. Hine . Several Ashcan School painters derived from the area of print publication at a time before photography replaced hand-drawn illustrations in newspapers. They were involved in journalistic pictorial reportage before concentrating their energies on painting.

George Luks once proclaimed "I can paint with a shoestring dipped in pitch and lard." In the mid-1890s Robert Henri returned to Philadelphia from Paris very unimpressed by the work of the late Impressionists and with a determination to create a type of art that engaged with life.

[ 9 ] He attempted to imbue several other artists with this passion. The school has even been referred to as "the revolutionary black gang", a reference to the artists' dark palette . The group was subject to attacks in the press and one of their earliest exhibitions, in 1908 at New York's Macbeth Gallery , was a success.

[ 9 ] Since then to 1913, they would go on to participate in several key exhibitions of progressive art in New York.

[ 7 ] Many of the most famous Ashcan works were painted in the first decade of the century at the same time in which the realist fiction of Stephen Crane , Theodore Dreiser , and Frank Norris was finding its audience and the muckraking journalists were calling attention to slum conditions.

[ 10 ] The first known use of the term "ash can art" is credited to artist Art Young in 1916.

[ 11 ] The term by that time was applied to a large number of painters beyond the original "Philadelphia Five," including George Bellows , Glenn O. Coleman, Jerome Myers , Gifford Beal , Eugene Higgins, Carl Sprinchorn and Edward Hopper . (Despite his inclusion in the group by some critics, Hopper rejected their focus and never embraced the label; his depictions of city streets were painted in a different spirit, "with not a single incidental ashcan in sight.") [ 12 ] Photographers like Jacob Riis and Lewis Hine were also discussed as Ashcan artists. Like many art-historical terms, "Ashcan art" has sometimes been applied to so many different artists that its meaning has become diluted.

The artists of the Ashcan School rebelled against both American Impressionism and academic realism, the two most respected and commercially successful styles in the US at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century. In contrast to the highly polished work of artists like John Singer Sargent , William Merritt Chase , Kenyon Cox , Thomas Wilmer Dewing , and Abbott Thayer , Ashcan works were generally darker in tone and more roughly painted. Many captured the harsher moments of modern life, portraying street kids (e.g., Henri's Willie Gee and Bellows' Paddy Flannagan ), prostitutes (e.g., Sloan's The Haymarket and Three A.M.

), alcoholics (e.g., Luks' The Old Duchess ), indecorous animals (e.g., Luks' Feeding the Pigs and Woman with Goose ), subways (e.g., Shinn's Sixth Avenue Elevated After Midnight ), crowded tenements (e.g., Bellows' Cliff Dwellers ), washing hung out to dry (Shinn's The Laundress and Sloan's A Woman's Work ), boisterous theaters (e.g., Glackens' Hammerstein's Roof Garden and Shinn's London Hippodrome ), bloodied boxers (e.g., Bellows' Both Members of This Club ), and wrestlers on the mat (e.g., Luks' The Wrestlers ). It was their frequent, although not exclusive, focus upon poverty and the gritty realities of urban life that prompted some critics and curators to consider them too unsettling for mainstream audiences and collections.

The advent of modernism in the United States spelled the end of the Ashcan school's provocative reputation. With the Armory Show of 1913 and the opening of more galleries in the 1910s promoting the work of Cubists , Fauves , and Expressionists , Henri and his circle began to appear tame to a younger generation. Their rebellion was over not long after it began. It was the fate of the Ashcan realists to be seen by many art lovers as too radical in 1910 and, by many more, as old-fashioned by 1920.

Connection to "The Eight" [ edit ] See also: Robert Henri § The Eight The Ashcan school is sometimes linked to the group known as "The Eight", though in fact only five members of that group (Henri, Sloan, Glackens, Luks, and Shinn) were Ashcan artists.

[ 13 ] The other three – Arthur B. Davies , Ernest Lawson , and Maurice Prendergast – painted in a very different style, and the exhibition that brought "The Eight" to national attention took place in 1908, several years after the beginning of the Ashcan style. However, the attention accorded the group's well-publicized exhibition at the Macbeth Galleries in New York 1908 was such that Ashcan art gained wider exposure and greater sales and critical attention than it had known before.

The Macbeth Galleries exhibition was held to protest the restrictive exhibition policies of the powerful, conservative National Academy of Design and to broadcast the need for wider opportunities to display new art of a more diverse, adventurous quality than the Academy generally permitted. When the exhibition closed in New York, where it attracted considerable attention, it toured Chicago, Toledo, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Pittsburgh, Bridgeport, and Newark in a traveling show organized by John Sloan.

[ 14 ] Reviews were mixed, but interest was high. ("Big Sensation at the Art Museum, Visitors Join Throng Museum and Join Hot Discussion," one Ohio newspaper noted.) [ 15 ] As art historian Judith Zilczer summarized the venture, "In taking their art directly to the American public, The Eight demonstrated that cultural provincialism in the United States was less pervasive than contemporary and subsequent accounts of the period had inferred." [ 16 ] Sales and exhibition opportunities for these painters increased significantly in the ensuing years.

Gallery [ edit ] Ashcan School artists, c. 1896, left to right, Everett Shinn , Robert Henri , John French Sloan Thomas Pollock Anshutz , The Farmer and His Son at Harvesting , 1879. Five members of the Ashcan School studied with him, but went on to create quite different styles.

Robert Henri , Snow in New York , 1902, National Gallery of Art , Washington, DC George Luks , Street Scene , 1905, Brooklyn Museum Everett Shinn , Cross Streets of New York , 1899, Corcoran Gallery of Art , Washington, DC.

William Glackens , Italo-American Celebration, Washington Square , 1912, Boston Museum of Fine Arts John French Sloan , McSorley's Bar , 1912, Detroit Institute of Arts George Luks , Houston Street , 1917, oil on canvas, Saint Louis Art Museum George Bellows , Cliff Dwellers , 1913, oil on canvas.

Los Angeles County Museum of Art George Bellows , Both Members of This Club , 1909, National Gallery of Art . Bellows was a close associate of the Ashcan school and had studied under Robert Henri.

Jacob Riis , Bandit's Roost , 1888, (photo), considered the most crime-ridden, dangerous part of New York City.

Arthur B. Davies , Elysian Fields, oil on canvas, The Phillips Collection Washington, DC.

Maurice Prendergast , Central Park , New York , 1901, Whitney Museum of American Art George Bellows , Men of the Docks , 1912, National Gallery, London Pennsylvania Station Excavation by George Bellows , c. 1907–08, Brooklyn Museum Edward Hopper , New York Interior , c. 1921, Whitney Museum of American Art See also [ edit ] American realism Realism (visual arts) Notes [ edit ] ^ "Ashcan School Exhibition" . First Art Museum. 13 July 2007. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020.

^ Glen Jeansonne (9 June 1997).

Women of the Far Right: The Mothers' Movement and World War II .

University of Chicago Press . p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-226-39589-0 .

^ Robert Hughes, American Visions BBC-TV series (ep.5 - "The Wave From The Atlantic") ^ "Art From the Alleys" .

The Attic . Retrieved 19 March 2019 .

^ Sylvia Yount (2015-05-26).

"The Aschcan School, The Eight, and the New York Art World" .

Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2024-04-05 .

^ Khalid, Farisa.

"The Ashcan School, an introduction" . Khan Academy.

^ a b Ken Johnson (2007-12-28).

"Ashcan Views of New Yorkers, Warts, High Spirits and All" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2024-04-05 .

^ Kennet T. Jackson (1995).

The Encyclopedia of New York City . Yale University. p. 60.

ISBN 0 300 05536 6 .

^ a b c Art in the modern era: A guide to styles, schools, & movements , Amy Dempsey , Abrams, 2002. (U.S. edition of Styles, Schools and Movements ) ISBN 978-0810941724 ^ Sam Hunter , Modern American Painting and Sculpture (New York: Dell, 1959), 28–40.

^ John Loughery, John Sloan: Painter and Rebel (New York: Henry Holt, 1997), pp. 218–219 ^ Wells, Walter, Silent Theater: The Art of Edward Hopper (London/New York: Phaidon, 2007).

^ Yount, Sylvia (26 May 2015).

"The Ashcan School, The Eight, and the New York Art World" . The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

^ Loughery, p. 127, 134–140.

^ Loughery, p. 135.

^ Judith Zilczer, "The Eight on Tour," American Art Journal, 16, no. 3 (Summer 1984), p. 38.

Sources [ edit ] Brown, Milton.

American Painting from the Armory Show to the Depression.

Princeton: Princeton University Press , 1955.

Brooks, Van Wyck.

John Sloan: A Painter's Life.

New York: Dutton, 1955.

Doezema, Marianne.

George Bellows and Urban America.

New Haven: Yale University Press , 1992.

Glackens, Ira.

William Glackens and the Ashcan School: The Emergence of Realism in American Art.

New York: Crown, 1957.

Homer, William Innes.

Robert Henri and His Circle.

Ithaca: Cornell University Press , 1969.

Hughes, Robert.

American Visions: The Epic Story of Art in America.

New York: Knopf, 1997.

Hunter, Sam.

Modern American Painting and Sculpture.

New York: Dell, 1959.

Kennedy, Elizabeth (ed.).

The Eight and American Modernisms.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Loughery, John.

John Sloan: Painter and Rebel . New York: Henry Holt, 1997.

ISBN 0-8050-5221-6 Perlman, Bennard (ed.), introduction by Mrs. John Sloan.

Revolutionaries of Realism: The Letters of John Sloan and Robert Henri.

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ashcan School .

Documenting the Gilded Age: New York City Exhibitions at the Turn of the 20th Century A New York Art Resources Consortium project. Exhibition catalogs, checklists, and photoarchive material.

Collection: "Ashcan School" from the University of Michigan Museum of Art v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Portals : Society United States Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashcan_School&oldid=1266555648 " Categories : Ashcan School American art movements Cultural history of the United States Modern art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 January 2025, at 04:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ashcan School 23 languages Add topic

