Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Worldwide activism 2 Early texts 3 Gendering nature 4 Conceptual approaches Toggle Conceptual approaches subsection 4.1 Materialist ecofeminism 4.2 Spiritual and cultural ecofeminism 4.3 Ecofeminism in Latin America 4.3.1 Cuerpo Territorio 4.3.1.1 Body Mapping 4.3.2 Agua Territorio 5 Common misconceptions Toggle Common misconceptions subsection 5.1 Essentialism debate 5.2 Miscellaneous criticisms 6 Theorists 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Key works 9.2 Anthologies 9.3 Journal articles 9.4 Fiction 9.5 Poetry 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecofeminism 45 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Македонски मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский سرائیکی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Eco-feminist ) Approach to feminism influenced by ecologist movement French writer Françoise d'Eaubonne coined the term in a 1974 book .

Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Ecofeminism integrates feminism and political ecology . Ecofeminist thinkers draw on the concept of gender to analyze relationships between humans and the natural world.

[ 1 ] The term was coined by the French writer Françoise d'Eaubonne in her 1974 book Le Féminisme ou la Mort .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Ecofeminist theory introduces a feminist perspective to Green politics and calls for an egalitarian , collaborative society in which there is no one dominant group.

[ 5 ] Today, there are several branches of ecofeminism, with varying approaches and analyses, including liberal ecofeminism, spiritual/cultural ecofeminism, and social/socialist ecofeminism (or materialist ecofeminism).

[ 5 ] Interpretations of ecofeminism and how it might be applied to social thought include ecofeminist art , social justice and political philosophy , religion, economics, contemporary feminism, and literature.

Ecofeminist analyses address the political effects of culturally constructed parallels between the oppression of nature and the oppression of women. These parallels include, but are not limited to, seeing women and nature as property, seeing men as the curators of culture and women as the curators of nature, and how men dominate women and humans dominate nature. Ecofeminism emphasizes that both women and nature must be respected.

[ 6 ] Worldwide activism [ edit ] Professors of sociology, Maria Mies, Ariel Salleh and Susan Mann all associate the beginning of ecofeminism not with feminists but with women of many historically different backgrounds who have perceived connections between gender, race, class, and environmental issues. The ideal of intersectionality is upheld through the notion that in activist and theory circles marginalized groups must be included in the discussion. However, in early North American environmentalism, the issues of race and class were sometimes separated.

[ 7 ] Women have long worked to protect wildlife , food, air and water.

[ 8 ] These efforts coincided with new developments in environmental theory from writers such as Henry David Thoreau , Aldo Leopold , John Muir , and Rachel Carson .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Parallel examples from women environmental ethicists were the books Silent Spring by Rachel Carson and Refuge by Terry Tempest Williams .

Ecofeminist Karen Warren lists Aldo Leopold's essay " Land Ethic " (1949) as fundamental to her own ecofeminist philosophy, as Leopold was the first to pen an ethic for the land which understands all non-human parts of that community (animals, plants, land, air, water) as equal to and in a relationship with humans. That inclusive understanding of the environment helped launch the modern preservation movement showing how environmental issues can be viewed through a framework of caring.

[ 11 ] In India , in the state of Uttarakhand in 1973, women took part in the Chipko movement to protect forests from deforestation . Many men during this time were moving to cities in search of work, and women that stayed in the rural parts of India were reliant on the forests for subsistence.

[ 12 ] As documented by Vandana Shiva , Non-violent protest tactics were used to occupy trees so that loggers could not cut them down.

[ 11 ] Wangari Maathai In Kenya in 1977, the Green Belt Movement was initiated by environmental and political activist Professor Wangari Maathai . It is a rural tree planting program led by women, which Maathai designed to help prevent desertification in the area. The program created a ' green belt ' of at least 1,000 trees around villages, and gave participants the ability to take charge in their communities. In later years, the Green Belt Movement was an advocate for informing and empowering citizens through seminars for civic and environmental education, as well as holding national leaders accountable for their actions and instilling agency in citizens.

[ 13 ] The work of the Green Belt Movement continues today.

In 1978 in New York , mother and environmentalist Lois Gibbs led her community in protest after discovering that their entire neighborhood, Love Canal , was built on top of a toxic dump site . The toxins in the ground were causing illness among children and reproductive issues among women, as well as birth defects in babies born to pregnant women exposed to the toxins. The Love Canal movement eventually led to the evacuation and relocation of nearly 800 families by the federal government .

[ 14 ] In 1980 and 1981, women like ecofeminist Ynestra King organized a peaceful protest at the Pentagon . Women stood, hand in hand, demanding equal rights (including social, economic, and reproductive rights ) as well as an end to militaristic actions taken by the government and exploitation of the community (people and the environment). This movement is known as the Women's Pentagon Actions.

[ 15 ] In 1985, the Akwesasne Mother's Milk Project was launched by Katsi Cook . This study was funded by the government, and investigated how the higher level of contaminants in water near the Mohawk reservation impacted babies. It revealed that through breast milk , Mohawk children were being exposed to 200% more toxins than children not on the reservation. Toxins contaminate water all over the world, but due to environmental racism , certain marginalized groups are exposed to a much higher amount.

[ 16 ] The Greening of Harlem Coalition is another example of an ecofeminist movement. In 1989, Bernadette Cozart founded the coalition, which is responsible for many urban gardens around Harlem . Cozart's goal is to turn vacant lots into community gardens .

[ 17 ] This is economically beneficial, and also provides a way for very urban communities to be in touch with nature and each other. The majority of people interested in this project (as noted in 1990) were women. Through these gardens, they were able to participate in and become leaders of their communities.

Urban greening exists in other places as well. Beginning in 1994, a group of African-American women in Detroit have developed city gardens, and call themselves the Gardening Angels. Similar garden movements have occurred globally.

[ 18 ] The development of vegetarian ecofeminism can be traced to the mid-80s and 90s, where it first appeared in writing. However, the roots of a vegetarian ecofeminist view can be traced back further by looking at sympathy for non-humans and counterculture movements of the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 19 ] At the culmination of the decade, ecofeminism had spread to both USA coasts and articulated an intersectional analysis of women and the environment. Eventually, challenging ideas of environmental classism and racism, resisting toxic dumping and other threats to the impoverished.

[ 20 ] Vegetarian ecofeminists assert that "omitting the oppression of animals from feminist and ecofeminist analyses … is inconsistent with the activist and philosophical foundations of both feminism (as a "movement to end all forms of oppression") and ecofeminism." [ 19 ] Here, " the personal is political ", as many ecofeminists believe that "meat-eating is a form of patriarchal violence." [ 19 ] During a 1995 interview with On the Issues , Carol Adams stated, "Manhood is constructed in our culture in part by access to meat-eating and control of other bodies, whether it's women or animals".

[ 21 ] According to Adams, "We cannot work for justice and challenge the oppression of nature without understanding that the most frequent way we interact with nature is by eating animals".

[ 21 ] Vegetarian ecofeminism is a clearly committed system of ethics and action.

[ 19 ] Laura Wright would propose Vegan Studies as an academic discipline.

In terms of the international movement, Ariel Salleh 's book Ecofeminism as Politics (last reprinted in 2017) contains a detailed account of women's ecofeminist actions from Japan and the Pacific to Scandinavia .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Early texts [ edit ] Though the scope of ecofeminist analysis is dynamic and diverse ecofeminist perspectives have emerged from women activists and thinkers all over the world, academic studies of ecofeminism have been dominated by North American universities. Thus, Charlene Spretnak described ecofeminist work developing: 1) through the study of political theory as well as history; 2) through belief and study of nature-based religions ; and 3) through environmentalism .

[ 24 ] In a 1993 essay entitled "Ecofeminism: Toward Global Justice and Planetary Health", authors Greta Gaard and Lori Gruen defined what they call the "ecofeminist framework". The essay provides a wealth of data and statistics in addition to outlining the theoretical aspects of the ecofeminist critique. The framework was intended to establish ways of viewing and understanding the current global crisis so as to better understand how we arrived at this point and what may be done to ameliorate it.

Building on the work of Rosemary Ruether and Carolyn Merchant , Gaard and Gruen argued that there are four forces behind this political framework: The rise of patriarchal religions and their establishment of gender hierarchies along with their denial of immanent divinity.

The mechanistic materialist model of the universe that resulted from the scientific revolution and the subsequent reduction of all things into mere resources to be optimized, dead inert matter to be used.

Traditional cultural dualisms based on masculinity v femininity, self v other, humanity v nature, and the inherent power and domination ethic these entail.

Capitalism and its intrinsic need for the instrumental exploitation of animals, earth and people for the sole purpose of creating wealth .

These four factors have brought Western cultures to what ecofeminists see as a "separation between nature and culture" that is the root source of our planetary ills.

[ 25 ] Some ecofeminist approaches developed out of anarcha-feminist concerns to abolish all forms of domination, including the oppressive character of humanity's relationship to the natural world.

[ 26 ] According to d'Eaubonne's book Le Féminisme ou la Mort , ecofeminism relates the oppression of all marginalized groups (women, people of color, children, the poor) to the oppression and domination of nature (animals, land, water, air, etc.). She argued that domination, exploitation, and colonization under Western patriarchal society has directly caused irreversible environmental damage. An activist and organizer, d'Eaubonne worked for the eradication of all social injustice, not just injustice against women and the environment .

[ 11 ] Influential early texts included: Women and Nature ( Susan Griffin 1978), The Death of Nature ( Carolyn Merchant 1980) and Gyn/Ecology ( Mary Daly 1978), which helped propel the association between domination by men of women and the domination of culture over nature. Meanwhile feminist activism of the 1980s included grass-roots movements such as the National Toxics Campaign, Mothers of East Los Angeles (MELA), and Native Americans for a Clean Environment (NACE) led by women devoted to issues of human health and environmental justice.

[ 27 ] Writing from this circle discussed ecofeminism drawing from Green Party politics, peace movements , and direct action movements.

[ 15 ] A key figure at this time was Petra Kelly , a founder of the German Green Party .

Gendering nature [ edit ] Petra Kelly A reoccurring claim within ecofeminist literature is that masculinist structures justify their dominance through binary oppositions, these include but are not limited to: heaven /earth, mind/body, male / female , human/animal, spirit/matter, culture/nature, white /non-white , and abled/disabled. Oppression is reinforced by applying these binaries in social judgements of value/non-value.

[ 28 ] Ecofeminist theory asserts that capitalism is built on paternalist and masculinist values, such that the effects of capitalism can not benefit women.

[ 29 ] Ecofeminist scholars emphasized that it is not because women are female or "feminine" that they are sensitive to nature, but because they experience oppression by the same masculinist forces. This marginalization is evident in the standard gendered language used to describe nature, such as "Mother Earth" or "Mother Nature", and the animalized language used to describe women in derogatory terms.

[ 30 ] By contrast, other ecofeminists prefer to emphasise the value of women's skills learned from the traditional social role as ' caregiver '.

[ 31 ] The Indian ecofeminist and activist Vandana Shiva wrote that women farmers have a special connection to the environment through daily experience and that this has been underestimated. According to Shiva's book Staying Alive (1989), women in subsistence economies who produce "wealth in partnership with nature, have been experts in ecological knowledge of nature's processes". She makes the point that "these alternative modes of knowing, which are oriented to the social benefits and sustenance needs are not recognized by the reductionist capitalist paradigm, because it fails to perceive the interconnectedness of nature, or the connection of women's lives, work and knowledge with the creation of wealth".

[ 22 ] Shiva attributes this failure to the global domination of Western perceptions of development and progress. According to Shiva, patriarchy has left women, nature, and many other groups outside of the economy, labelling them "unproductive".

[ 32 ] Similarly, Ariel Salleh deepens this materialist ecofeminist approach in a critical dialogue with green politics and ecosocialism .

[ 23 ] Conceptual approaches [ edit ] Materialist ecofeminism [ edit ] In the book Ecofeminism (1993), Vandana Shiva and Maria Mies interrogate modern science and its acceptance as a universal and value-free system. They view the dominant stream of science not as objective but rather as a projection of Western patriarchal instrumentalism .

[ 33 ] The determination of what is considered scientific knowledge and its usage has been largely restricted to men. Examples include the medicalization of childbirth and the industrialization of plant reproduction .

The key activist-scholars developing a materialist ecofeminism are Maria Mies and Veronika Bennholdt-Thomsen in Germany; Vandana Shiva in India; Ariel Salleh in Australia; Mary Mellor in the UK; and Ana Isla in Peru . Materialist ecofeminism is not widely known in North America aside from the journal collective at Capitalism Nature Socialism . A materialist analysis studies economic institutions such as labor, power, and property as a critical mechanism for control over women and nature. The contrast is between production , which is valued, versus reproduction of living relations, which is not.

[ 34 ] This ecofeminism is referred to variously as "social feminism", "socialist ecofeminism", or "Marxist ecofeminism". According to Carolyn Merchant, "Social ecofeminism advocates the liberation of women through overturning economic and social hierarchies that turn all aspects of life into a market society that today even invades the womb".

[ 5 ] Ecofeminism in this sense seeks to eliminate social hierarchies which favor the production of commodities for profit over biological and social reproduction traditionally seen as the sphere of women's work.

Spiritual and cultural ecofeminism [ edit ] Spiritual ecofeminism is an approach popular among North American authors such as Starhawk , Riane Eisler , Carol Christ and Carol Adams . Starhawk calls for an earth-based spirituality , which recognizes that the Earth is alive , and that we are all interconnected.

[ 35 ] Spiritual ecofeminism is not linked to any specific religion, but is centered around values of caring, compassion , and non-violence .

[ 36 ] Often, ecofeminists refer to ancient traditions, such as the worship of Gaia , the Goddess of nature and spirituality (also known as Mother Earth).

[ 36 ] Wicca and Paganism are particularly influential in spiritual ecofeminism. Wicca, in particular Dianic Wicca , traditionally demonstrates a deep respect for nature, a feminine outlook, and an aim to establish strong community values.

[ 37 ] In her book Radical Ecology, Carolyn Merchant refers to spiritual ecofeminism as "cultural ecofeminism". According to Merchant, cultural ecofeminism "celebrates the relationship between women and nature through the revival of ancient rituals centered on goddess worship, the moon, animals, and the female reproductive system ." [ 5 ] Cultural ecofeminist practice intuition and an ethic of care in human-nature interrelationships.

[ 5 ] Ecofeminism in Latin America [ edit ] Latin American ecofeminism emerged as a distinct strand within the broader ecofeminist movement. While early ecofeminist frameworks were primarily shaped in the Global North, the publication of Staying Alive by Vandana Shiva in the mid-1980s marked a turning point.

[ 38 ] This work introduced the foundations for a postcolonial ecofeminism that would inspire and inform debates and reformulations in the Global South, including Latin America.

Latin America also had an early ecofeminist trajectory, although with less dissemination and influence in the global feminist theory. However, some scholars would agree that there is still a long way to go in the construction of a Latin American ecofeminism, [ 39 ] which considers the leading role in the social and political struggles of rural women in the Global South committed to the sustainability of their practices of food production, the livelihood of their families, solidarity community relations, an inclusive economy and the support of human and non-human life.

From a Feminist Political Ecology perspective, there are new emphases through the cross-cutting influence of posthumanist thought, as well as postcolonial and decolonial ideas.

[ 40 ] These new emphases allow for a renewed engagement with Latin American and Global South ecofeminisms, while also opening up space for the inclusion of conceptual frameworks, lived experiences, and research contributions from both Latin American academia and activism.

It is also worth highlighting the role of the rural space  as a place for deep structural violence against women, [ 39 ] which constantly erases the stories, knowledge and experiences of many people, who are not allowed to speak and transmit valid knowledge about themselves and about the relationships of care, existence and life support that they build with nature, contemplating environmental preservation and sustainability.

Cuerpo Territorio [ edit ] The concept of " Cuerpo-Territorio " - Body-Territory is a pivotal idea within Latin American ecofeminism, emerging from the struggles of indigenous communities against intertwined forms of oppression: patriarchy, colonialism, and extractivism. It serves both as a theoretical framework and a practical method of resistance, linking women's bodies as territories to be defended and the Earth as an entity endowed with rights against exploitation. It is said to have emerged as a concept and method from a political group of Maya-Xinka indigenous women in Guatemala and is central to the political project of community feminists.

[ 41 ] Historically, colonialism involved the conquest and exploitation of territories, which also entailed the domination of bodies, particularly female bodies. During the Spanish colonization of the Americas, women were subjected to exploitation, including commodification, mass rape, and mutilation. Thus, the conquest of land became intertwined with the exploitation of women's bodies, making their bodies territories to be defended.

The emergence of the cuerpo-territorio concept within indigenous communities is no coincidence. These territories are systematically targeted by extractivism and colonization. Women in these communities are affected in their bodies but also use their bodies to resist and fight. The concept is constructed and utilized in opposition to the hierarchical dichotomy between body and nature, interior and exterior, which supposedly legitimizes the exploitation of nature by bodies.

The concept of cuerpo territorio asserts the body as a continuum of the land, seeing “the body as territory, and the territory as a body [ 42 ] ”. It frames the body as “ones most intimate and immediate geography [ 42 ] ,” and affirms a worldview in which bodies are part of the wider network of all life.

[ 42 ] As Lorena Cabnal of the Indigenous Women’s Association of Santa María Xalapán explains, " territorio cuerpo-tierra is a motto to be recuperated and defended and implemented as a political banner in the defense of the land. It is a framework of struggle against sexual violence and mining. It is a political category of indigenous community feminism, a way to suggest and feel the body as territory alive and historical. It alludes to a cosmological interpretation and a politic that acknowledges how bodies have a relation and being in the network of all life. Concurrently, it pushes us to rethink how bodies have been constructed by multiple oppressions, the historical structure of patriarchy, colonialism, racism, and neoliberal capitalism, which have led to exploitation via different agreements and policies".

[ 43 ] Body Mapping [ edit ] Body mapping is a methodological approach grounded in the theory of cuerpo-territorio. Its methods center the body as a source of information.

[ 43 ] It is held as a decolonial methodology as it seeks to counter traditional Euro-centric research methods that heavily rely on written language via interviews, focus groups, and survey responses. In contrast to these Western methods, body mapping provides a safe, trauma informed way to feel and communicate the emotions and sensations related to bodily experiences.

[ 43 ] It has been framed by decolonial feminist scholars as a tool for self-empowerment and collective meaning making.

Body mapping creates a physical representation through drawing of the body and the violences it has suffered. This mapping overlays territorial conflicts onto the body to understand them from a corporeal and subjective perspective. Researcher Delmy Tania Cruz Hernández provides a concrete example in her book, recounting the story of a survivor of the Acteal massacre who, after the tragedy, drew a red cross over the heart in her mapping, leaving the rest of the body blank due to trauma. Thus, mapping becomes a form of resistance, concretizing the repercussions of territorial exploitation on bodies.

Body mapping methods often include some variation of the following steps: Collectively creating a shared space of safety and support. This step often is used to build trust between participants and between participants and the researchers. For some projects, this includes crafting an ethics protocol together that outlines how they want to engage with each other, the space, and the final research output.

[ 44 ] Perform a sensory group exercise to ground into the body and recognize them as full of life, feelings, memories and emotions.

[ 44 ] An explanation of cuerpo territorio.

Participants help each other trace an outline of their silhouette on a body-sized piece of paper.

Participants then reflect on a series of questions asked by the researchers related to the topic, while participants answer them via writing, drawing, and creating in whatever form they like on the drawing of their body as a response. Each person then has their own unique body territory map.

[ 41 ] Participants then may be asked to describe the meaning of their finished map.

Many projects emphasize that while maps are individual reflections of experience, a key aspect of the methodology is the sharing of their stories in community. Correlations, compassion, and larger shared themes are revealed, creating a process of collective meaning making.

[ 41 ] Agua Territorio [ edit ] The concept of " Agua Territorio" - Water-Body-Territory is used to describe the material and symbolic link between natural resources, women's bodies and land, deriving from the rural communities in Latin America, especially in the Andes, both in Chile and in Argentina, where water has been the blood of their territories.

[ 45 ] It is a concept that is used in decolonial ecofeminisim, political ecology and critical geographies. Latin American decolonial thinking in critical geography and political ecology serves to think of the embodiment of collective death and further debates on collective bodily autonomy.

[ 46 ] Lobos Castro argues that the historical and structural dispossession of water in Chile - accelerated by Chile’s Water Code of 1981 with water as a common good began to fade - has produced an ecological and personal harm. This includes contamination, reduced access to water for subsistence agriculture, and exposure to toxic agrochemicals. Despite these challenges women in Chile developed "re-existences": practices of resistance and resilience that include reclaiming ancestral knowledge, cultivating communal solidarity, and defending local ecosystems. These actions reassert their connection to the land and their agency over environmental and social conditions.

[ 47 ] The concept of agua terrritorio emphasizes the gendered nature of environmental conflicts and the importance of integrating women's voices and experiences in struggles for ecological justice and territorial autonomy.

[ 47 ] Common misconceptions [ edit ] Vandana Shiva Essentialism debate [ edit ] In the 1980s and 1990s, critics challenged the political radicalism of ecofeminism by claiming it was ' essentialist '. Ecofeminists were seen to be reinforcing patriarchal norms of domination by emphasising links between women and nature.

Poststructuralist and some Third wave feminists in particular, saw essentialism as grouping all women under one inferior category, so enforcing the very societal norms that feminism tries to break from. For the problem is that traditionally, just as 'feminine' qualities are seen as less worthy, nature and the animal world is also judged of 'lesser value' than what masculinist patriarchal cultures define as 'humanity proper'.

Meanwhile, ecofeminists were opposing liberal or 'equality' feminisms on the basis that mainstream political institutions are unconsciously masculinist - both sex/gender exclusionary and destructive of the environment.  In an interview, ecofeminist Noel Sturgeon pointed out that what the anti-essentialists failed to recognise is a political strategy used to mobilize large and diverse groups of women, theorists and activists alike.

[ 48 ] Additionally, Charlene Spretnak characterized ecofeminism as concerned with a wide agenda, including reproductive technology , equal pay and equal rights, toxic pollution, Third World development , and more.

[ 24 ] Norie Ross Singer emphasized that ecofeminism should be understood as advancing multiple axes of identity such as gender, race, and class as inter-meshed in human-nonhuman relationships.

[ 49 ] A. E. Kings identified this analysis as fundamentally ' intersectional '.

[ 50 ] Vegetarian ecofeminists have contributed to intersectional analysis as well, by joining a political focus on animal rights with activism for all oppressed life forms, including laboring men.

While the theologian Rosemary Radford Ruether rejected mysticism , she argued that spirituality and activism can combine effectively in ecofeminism.

[ 51 ] On the other hand, social ecologist Janet Biehl criticized ecofeminism for what she saw as a mystical reading of women and nature with not enough attention to the actual conditions of women’s lives. Biehl judged ecofeminism an anti-progressive movement for women.

[ 52 ] In the 21st century, some ecofeminists aware of these criticisms began renaming their work under other labels - like 'queer ecologies', 'global feminist environmental justice ', or ' gender and the environment'.

Today the majority of ecofeminist thinkers and activists recognize both culturally constructed and embodied sex/gender differences. Moreover, socialist ecofeminists have always situated gender roles in a political economic framework, arguing for a radical materialist politics.

[ 53 ] Socialist feminists show clearly that women’s supposed intrinsic connection with nature is a socially constructed ideology. As Ariel Salleh has pointed out, the anxiety over essentialism was mostly found among North American liberal and postmodern feminist academics. In Europe and the global South, the interplay of class, race, gender and species dominations and exploitations is grounded in a materialist analysis of socio-economic relations.

[ 54 ] Miscellaneous criticisms [ edit ] Environmental justice and feminist care ethics have pushed for participation of all marginalized groups, working against racism , ageism , ableism . Andrew Charles points out that people with disabilities still face issues of access and representation in policy making.

[ 55 ] He suggests that the nurturing aspect of ecofeminism might be patronizing to marginalized groups. Likewise, a radical white savior complex could disrupt the self-advocacy of racially marginalized peoples around the world.

[ 56 ] Catia Faria argues against the ecofeminist view that the main harm to non-human animals in the wild comes from patriarchal culture. It follows, she argues, that it is mistaken to argue that the conservation of nature is the best solution here. Instead, she contends, natural processes themselves are a source of immense suffering for wild animals and that we should work towards alleviating the harms they experience, as well as eliminating patriarchal sources of harm, such as hunting .

[ 57 ] Theorists [ edit ] Judi Bari – Bari was a principal organizer of the Earth First!

movement and experienced sexist hostility.

Françoise d'Eaubonne – Called upon women to lead an ecological revolution in order to save the planet. This entailed revolutionizing gender relations and human relations with the natural world.

[ 3 ] Greta Gaard – Gaard is an American ecofeminist scholar and activist. Her major contributions to the field connect ideas of queer theory , vegetarianism, and animal liberation. Her major theories include ecocriticism which works to include literary criticism and composition to inform ecofeminism and other feminist theories to address a wider range of social issues within ecofeminism. She is an ecological activist and leader in the U.S. Green Party , and the Green Movement.

[ 58 ] Susan Griffin - A radical feminist philosopher, essayist and playwright particularly known for her innovative, hybrid-form ecofeminist works. A Californian, she taught as an adjunct professor at UC Berkeley as well as at Stanford University and California Institute of Integral Studies .

Ana Isla – Sociologist from Peru, member of Capitalism Nature Socialism ecofeminist editorial collective.

[ 59 ] Vanessa Lemgruber – Lemgruber is a Brazilian lawyer, writer, [ 60 ] activist, and ecofeminist.

[ 61 ] She defends [ 62 ] the Doce river in Brazil and advocates for water quality and zero waste movements.

[ 63 ] Sallie McFague – A prominent ecofeminist theologian , McFague uses the metaphor of God's body to represent the universe at large. This metaphor values inclusive, mutualistic and interdependent relations amongst all things.

[ 64 ] Carolyn Merchant – Historian of science who taught at University of California, Berkeley for many years. Her book The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology and the Scientific Revolution is a classic ecofeminist text.

Mary Mellor – UK sociologist who moved to ecofeminist ideas from an interest in cooperatives . Her books Breaking the Boundaries and her later book Feminism and Ecology are grounded in a materialist analysis.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Maria Mies – Mies is a German social critic who has been involved in feminist work throughout Europe and India . She works particularly on the intersections of patriarchy, poverty , and the environment on a local and global scale.

[ 51 ] Adrian Parr – A cultural and environmental theorist. She has published eight books and numerous articles on environmental activism , feminist new materialism , and imagination. Most notable is her trilogy Hijacking Sustainability .

[ 67 ] See also: The Wrath of Capital , and Birth of a New Earth .

Val Plumwood – Val Plumwood, formerly Val Routley, was an Australian ecofeminist intellectual and activist, who was prominent in the development of radical ecosophy from the early 1970s through the remainder of the 20th century. In her work Feminism and the Mastery of Nature she describes the relationship of mankind and the environment relating to an eco-feminist ideology.

[ 68 ] Alicia Puleo – The author of several books and articles on ecofeminism and gender inequality, Alicia Puleo has been characterized as "arguably Spain's most prominent explicator-philosopher of the worldwide movement or theoretical orientation known as ecofeminism." [ 69 ] Rosemary Radford Ruether – Has written 36 books and over 600 articles exploring the intersections of feminism, theology, and creation care .

[ 70 ] Ruether was the first person to connect the domination of the earth with the oppression of women.

[ 71 ] [ page needed ] Ariel Salleh – Australian ecofeminist with a global perspective; a founding editor of the journal Capitalism Nature Socialism ; author of four books and some 300 articles examining ecofeminist links with deep and social ecology , green politics and eco-socialism , digitalisation and decoloniality .

Vandana Shiva – Shiva is a scientist by training, prolific author and Indian ecofeminist activist.

[ 72 ] She was a participant in the Chipko movement of the 1970s, which used non-violent activism to protest and prevent deforestation in the Garhwal Himalayas of Uttarakhand , India, then in Uttar Pradesh . Her fight against genetically modified organisms (GMOs) (together with the fights led by Rachel Carson against DDT and Erin Brockovich against hexavalent chromium ) has been described as an example of ecofeminist position.

[ 73 ] Charlene Spretnak – Spretnak is an American writer largely known for her writing on ecology, politics and spirituality. Through these writings Spretnak has become a prominent ecofeminist. She has written many books which discuss ecological issues in terms of effects with social criticisms, including feminism. Spretnak's works had a major influence in the development of the Green Party . She has also won awards based on her visions on ecology and social issues as well as feminist thinking.

[ 74 ] Starhawk – An American writer and activist, Starhawk is known for her work in spiritualism and ecofeminism. She advocates for social justice in issues surrounding nature and spirit. These social justice issues fall under the scope of feminism and ecofeminism. She believes in fighting oppression through intersectionality and the importance of spirituality, eco consciousness and sexual and gender liberation.

[ 75 ] [ circular reference ] Douglas Vakoch – An American ecocritic whose edited volumes include Ecofeminism and Rhetoric: Critical Perspectives on Sex, Technology, and Discourse (2011), [ 76 ] Feminist Ecocriticism: Environment, Women, and Literature (2012), [ 77 ] Dystopias and Utopias on Earth and Beyond: Feminist Ecocriticism of Science Fiction (2021), [ 78 ] Ecofeminist Science Fiction: International Perspectives on Gender, Ecology, and Literature (2021), [ 79 ] The Routledge Handbook of Ecofeminism and Literature (2023), [ 80 ] (with Nicole Anae) Indian Feminist Ecocriticism (2022), [ 81 ] and (with Sam Mickey) Ecofeminism in Dialogue (2018), [ 82 ] Literature and Ecofeminism: Intersectional and International Voices (2018), [ 83 ] and Women and Nature?: Beyond Dualism in Gender, Body, and Environment (2018).

[ 84 ] Karen J. Warren – Warren received her B.A. in philosophy from the University of Minnesota (1970) and her Ph.D. from the University of Massachusetts-Amherst in 1978. Before her long tenure at Macalester College , which began in 1985, Warren was Professor of Philosophy at St. Olaf College in the early 1980s. Warren was the Ecofeminist-Scholar-in-Residence at Murdoch University in Australia.

[ 1 ] In 2003, she served as an Oxford University Round Table Scholar and as Women's Chair in Humanistic Studies at Marquette University in 2004. She has spoken widely on environmental issues, feminism, critical thinking and peace studies in many international locations including Buenos Aires , Gothenburg , Helsinki , Oslo , Manitoba , Melbourne , Moscow , Perth , the U.N. Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro (1992), and San Jose .

See also [ edit ] Climate change and gender Cottagecore Critical animal studies Cultural feminism Deep ecology Deep Green Resistance Ecofeminist art Green syndicalism List of ecofeminist authors Queer ecology Romanticism Sexecology Social ecology Women and the environment through history Posthumanism References [ edit ] ^ a b MacGregor, Sherilyn (2006).

Beyond mothering earth: ecological citizenship and the politics of care . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press . p. 286.

ISBN 978-0-7748-1201-6 .

^ d'Eaubonne, Françoise (1974).

Le Féminisme ou la Mort . Paris: Horay.

^ a b Merchant, Carolyn (1992). "Chapter 8".

Radical ecology: the search for a livable world . New York: Routledge . p. 184.

^ Glazebrook, Trish (September 2002). "Karen Warren's Ecofeminism".

Ethics & the Environment .

7 (2): 12– 26.

doi : 10.2979/ETE.2002.7.2.12 .

S2CID 144641656 .

^ a b c d e Merchant, Carolyn (2005). "Ecofeminism".

Radical Ecology .

Routledge . pp.

193– 221.

^ Adams, Carol (2007).

Ecofeminism and the Sacred . Continuum. pp.

1– 8.

^ Mann, Susan A (2011). "Pioneers of U.S. Ecofeminism and Environmental Justice".

Feminist Formations .

23 (2): 1– 25.

doi : 10.1353/ff.2011.0028 .

S2CID 146349456 .

^ Glazebrook, Trish (Autumn 2002). "Karen Warren's Ecofeminism".

Ethics & the Environment .

7 (2): 12– 27.

doi : 10.2979/ete.2002.7.2.12 .

S2CID 144641656 .

^ Norlock, Kathryn J. (December 2011).

"Building Receptivity: Leopold's Land Ethic and Critical Feminist Interpretation" .

Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature and Culture (Submitted manuscript).

5 (4): 491– 509.

doi : 10.1558/jsrnc.v5i4.491 .

^ Seager, Joni (Spring 2003). "Rachel Carson Died of Breast Cancer: The Coming of Age of Feminist Environmentalism".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

28 (3): 945– 973.

doi : 10.1086/345456 .

S2CID 146687251 .

^ a b c Warren, Karen J. (2000).

Ecofeminist Philosophy: A Western Perspective on What It Is and Why It Matters . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.

ISBN 9780847692996 .

^ Poon, Felix (10 January 2022).

"The Life and Legacy of Sunderlal Bahuguna and the Chipko Movement in India" .

New Hampshire Public Radio . Retrieved April 9, 2023 .

^ "Our History" .

The Green Belt Movement . Retrieved October 8, 2016 .

^ "Love Canal" .

Center for Health, Environment, & Justice . Retrieved October 8, 2016 .

^ a b Lehar, Stephanie (1991). "Ecofeminist Theory and Grassroots Politics".

Hypatia .

6 (1): 28– 45.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1991.tb00207.x .

S2CID 145518119 .

^ Doverspike, Nicole (2012).

"Mother's Milk Project" .

English 487W Blog: West of Everything . Retrieved October 9, 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Bernstein, Emily (1993).

"Neighborhood Report: Harlem; Sowing a Future With Green in It" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 9, 2016 .

^ Hawthorne, Susan (2002).

Wild Politics: Feminism, Globalisation, Bio/diversity . Melbourne, Australia: Spinifex Press.

^ a b c d Gaard, Greta Claire (2002). "Vegetarian ecofeminism: A review essay".

Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies .

23 (2): 117– 146.

doi : 10.1353/fro.2003.0006 .

S2CID 143879458 .

^ Gaard, Greta (2011). "Ecofeminism Revisited: Rejecting Essentialism and Re-Placing Species in a Material Feminist Environmentalism".

Feminist Formations .

23 (2): 26– 53.

doi : 10.1353/ff.2011.0017 .

S2CID 145195744 .

^ a b "Do Feminists Need to Liberate Animals, Too?" .

Carol J. Adams . 1995 . Retrieved 2019-04-30 .

^ a b Shiva, Vandana (1988).

Staying alive: women, ecology and development . London: Zed Books .

ISBN 978-0-86232-823-8 .

^ a b Salleh, Ariel (1997).

Ecofeminism as Politics: nature, Marx, and the postmodern . London: Zed Books.

^ a b Spretnak, Charlene (1990). "Ecofeminism: Our Roots and Flowering". In Diamond, Irene; Ornstein, Gloria (eds.).

Reweaving the World: The Emergence of Feminism . Sierra Club Books. pp.

3– 14.

^ Gaard, Greta; Gruen, Lori (1993). "Ecofeminism: Toward Global Justice and Planetary Health".

Society and Nature .

2 : 1– 35.

^ Tuana, Nancy; Tong, Rosemarie, eds. (2018).

"Anarcha Feminist and Ecological Feminist Perspectives" .

Feminism And Philosophy: Essential Readings In Theory, Reinterpretation, And Application .

Routledge . pp.

327– 9.

ISBN 978-0-8133-2212-4 – via Google Books .

^ Merchant, Carolyn (2005).

Radical Ecology .

Routledge . pp.

169– 173.

^ Hobgood-Oster, Laura.

"Ecofeminism: Historic and International Evolution" (PDF) . Retrieved March 17, 2012 .

^ Oksala, Johanna (Spring 2018). "Feminism, Capitalism, and Ecology".

Hypatia .

33 (2): 216– 234.

doi : 10.1111/hypa.12395 .

S2CID 149338235 .

^ Warren, Karen J. (2015).

"Feminist Environmental Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Stoddart, Mark; Tindall, D. B. (2011). "Ecofeminism, Hegemonic Masculinity, And Environmental Movement Participation In British Columbia, Canada, 1998-2007: "Women Always Clean Up The Mess" ".

Sociological Spectrum .

31 (3): 342– 368.

doi : 10.1080/02732173.2011.557065 .

S2CID 146343509 .

^ Shiva, Vandana. "Development as a New Project of Western Patriarchy." Reweaving the World: The Emergence of Feminism, edited by Irene Diamond and Gloria Ornstein, Sierra Club Books, 1990, pp. 189-200.

^ (Mies, Maria, and Vandana Shiva.

Ecofeminism . Halifax, N.S. : Fernwood Publications; 1993. 24.) ^ "Ecofeminism: Is the Movement Still Relevant?" . Gender Across Borders. Archived from the original on 2019-09-29 . Retrieved 2014-05-13 .

^ Starhawk. "Power, Authority, and Mystery: Ecofeminism and Earth-based Spirituality." Reweaving the World: The Emergence of Ecofeminism, edited by Irene Diamond and Gloria Orenstein, Sierra Club Books, 1990, pp. 73-86.

^ a b Eisler, Riane. "The Gaia Tradition & The Partnership Future: An Ecofeminist Manifesto." Reweaving the World: The Emergence of Ecofeminism, edited by Irene Diamond and Gloria Orenstein, Sierra Club Books, 1990, pp. 23-34.

^ Merchant, Carolyn (2005). "Spiritual Ecology".

Radical Ecology .

Routledge . pp.

124– 125.

^ Arriagada Oyarzún, Evelyn; Zambra Álvarez, Antonia (2019-09-01).

"Apuntes iniciales para la construcción de una Ecología Política Feminista de y desde Latinoamérica" .

Polis. Revista Latinoamericana (in Spanish) (54).

ISSN 0717-6554 .

^ a b Kuhnen, Tânia (2022-01-01).

"Marcha das Margaridas: Notes for a Latin American (Eco)Feminism" .

Revista Sul Sul .

3 : 101– 121.

doi : 10.53282/SULSUL.V3I01.919 .

^ LaDanta LasCanta (2017).

"De la teología al antiextractivismo: ecofeminismos en Abya Yala" .

Ecología Política .

54 . Archived from the original on 2018-03-15.

^ a b c Ferreira, L., & Marinho, S. (2022).

Resisting violence, creating dignity: Negotiating violence against women and girls through community history-making in Rio de Janeiro . People’s Palace Projects.

https://peoplespalaceprojects.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/body-mapping-report-1.pdf ^ a b c Nohely, Guzmán Narváez (2024).

"Review of Embodied Geographies: Feminist Body-Mapping with Amazonian Indigenous Girls, Cuerpo-Territorio, and the Outlining of a New Academic Grammar" .

Portal Web Magazine. LLILAS Benson Latin American Studies and Collections, the University of Texas at Austin .

^ a b c Sweet, Elizabeth L.; and Ortiz Escalante, Sara (2017-04-03).

"Engaging territorio cuerpo-tierra through body and community mapping: a methodology for making communities safer" .

Gender, Place & Culture .

24 (4): 594– 606.

doi : 10.1080/0966369X.2016.1219325 .

ISSN 0966-369X .

^ a b Sweet, et. al; Ventos Lopes Heimer, Rosa dos, and Nina Franco.

"Travelling Body-territories: A video-essay on survivors mapping coloniality, violence and resistance" .

Arts Cabinet . Retrieved 2025-05-27 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Panez Pinto, Alexander (2018).

"Agua-Territorio en América Latina: Contribuciones a partir del análisis de estudios sobre conflictos hídricos en Chile" .

Revista Rupturas (in Spanish).

8 (1): 193– 217.

doi : 10.22458/rr.v8i1.1978 .

ISSN 2215-2466 .

^ Zaragocin, Sofia (2024-11-01).

"Agua-cuerpo-territorio/Water-body-territory" .

Political Geography .

115 103230.

doi : 10.1016/j.polgeo.2024.103230 .

ISSN 0962-6298 .

^ a b Lobos Castro, Fany (2021).

"Agua-cuerpo-territorio. Las cicatrices y reexistencias de las mujeres rurales en el Maule Sur precordillerano de Chile" .

Ecología Política (61): 112– 116.

doi : 10.53368/EP61FCrr04 .

^ Michiels, Nete. "Social Movements And Feminism." Women & Environments International Magazine, no. 92/93, 2013, pp. 15-17.

^ Norie Ross Singer, "Toward Ecofeminist Communication Studies," Communication Theory , 2020, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 268-89.

https://doi.org/10.1093/ct/qtz023 ^ Kings, A.E. (2017). "Intersectionality and the Changing Face of Ecofeminism".

Ethics and the Environment .

22 (1): 63– 87.

doi : 10.2979/ethicsenviro.22.1.04 .

^ a b Ruether, Rosemary Radford (2003). Eaton, Heather; Lorentzen, Lois Ann (eds.).

Ecofeminism and Globalization . Lanham, Boulder, New York, Toronto, Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

vii– xi.

ISBN 978-0-7425-2697-6 .

^ Biehl, Janet (1991).

Rethinking eco-feminist politics . Boston, Massachusetts: South End Press .

ISBN 978-0-89608-392-9 .

^ Rocheleau, Dianne; et al. (1996).

Feminist Political Ecology: Global Issues & Local Experiences . New York: Routledge .

^ Salleh, Ariel (1991). "Essentialism and Ecofeminism".

Arena .

94 : 167– 173.

^ Charles, Andrew; Thomas, Huw (June 2007).

"Deafness and Disability—Forgotten Components of Environmental Justice: Illustrated by the Case of Local Agenda 21 in South Wales" .

Local Environment .

12 (3): 209– 221.

Bibcode : 2007LoEnv..12..209C .

doi : 10.1080/13549830601183677 .

ISSN 1354-9839 .

S2CID 144903630 .

^ Bandyopadhyay, Ranjan; Patil, Vrushali (2017-08-08).

" 'The white woman's burden' – the racialized, gendered politics of volunteer tourism" .

Tourism Geographies .

19 (4): 644– 657.

doi : 10.1080/14616688.2017.1298150 .

ISSN 1461-6688 .

S2CID 152134531 .

^ Ruiz Carreras, María (2016-11-04).

" "La lucha por la igualdad y la justicia es necesariamente feminista y antiespecista" " [The fight for equality and justice is necessarily feminist and antispeciesist].

Diagonal (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2021-02-13 .

^ "Greta Gaard" .

www.uwrf.edu . Retrieved 2019-10-08 .

^ Isla, Ana (2022). " "Greening," the highest stage of extractivism in Latin America". In Brownhill, Leigh (ed.).

The Routledge Handbook on Ecosocialism . London: Routledge.

^ Guia ecofeminista: Mulheres, direito, ecologia (in Spanish).

^ "Ecofeminist Talks – Medium" .

[ self-published source ] ^ "Meet Google Drive – One place for all your files" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Instagram" .

[ self-published source ] ^ Ralte, Lalrinawmi.

The World as the Body of God Ecofeminist Theological Discourse with Special Reference to Tribal Women in India.

Archived 2016-05-22 at the Wayback Machine , rethinkingmission.org, accessed March 24, 2012 ^ Mellor, Mary (1992).

Breaking the Boundaries . London: Virago.

^ Mellor, Mary (1997).

Feminism and Ecology . Cambridge: Polity Press.

^ Parr, Adrian (2009).

Hijacking Sustainability . Cambridge: MIT Press.

^ Plumwood, Val (2003).

Feminism and the Mastery of Nature . New Fetter Lane, London: Routledge .

^ Johnson, Roberta (2013).

"For a Better World: Alicia Puleo's Critical Ecofeminism" . In Cibreiro, Estrella; López, Francisca (eds.).

Global Issues in Contemporary Hispanic Women's Writing . Routledge. p. 107.

ISBN 9780415626941 . Retrieved 20 February 2019 – via Google Books .

^ LaRosa, Patricia.

"Finding Aid for Rosemary Radford Ruether Papers, 1954-2002" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 15 March 2013 .

^ Bouma-Prediger, Steven (1995).

The greening of theology: the ecological models of Rosemary Radford Ruether, Joseph Sittler, and Juergen Moltmann . Atlanta, Ga.: Scholars Press.

ISBN 0-7885-0163-1 .

OCLC 33105042 .

^ "Who's Who of Women and the Environment" . Archived from the original on 28 October 2012 . Retrieved 15 March 2013 .

^ Barthold, Charles; Bevan, David; Corvellec, Hervé (2022) [11 July 2022].

"An ecofeminist position in critical practice: Challenging corporate truth in the Anthropocene" .

Gender, Work & Organization .

29 (6): 1796– 1814.

doi : 10.1111/gwao.12878 .

S2CID 250467484 .

^ Charlene Spretnak, "The Early Years of the Green Movement in the United States", in Zelko and Brinkmann, eds., Green Parties , p. 48.

^ see Starhawk ^ Vakoch, Douglas A. (2011-01-01).

Ecofeminism and rhetoric: critical perspectives on sex, technology, and discourse . New York: Berghahn Books .

ISBN 9780857451873 .

OCLC 714734848 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A. (2012-01-01).

Feminist ecocriticism: environment, women, and literature . Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books .

ISBN 9780739176825 .

OCLC 815941726 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A., ed. (2021).

Dystopias and Utopias on Earth and Beyond: Feminist Ecocriticism of Science Fiction . London: Routledge .

ISBN 9780367716233 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A., ed. (2021).

Ecofeminist Science Fiction: International Perspectives on Gender, Ecology, and Literature . London: Routledge .

ISBN 9780367716417 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A.

, ed. (2023).

The Routledge Handbook of Ecofeminism and Literature .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781032050119 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A.

; Anae, Nicole, eds. (2022).

Indian Feminist Ecocriticism .

Lexington Books .

ISBN 978-1-66690-871-8 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A.; Mickey, Sam (2018).

Ecofeminism in Dialogue . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books .

ISBN 9781498569279 .

OCLC 1005695115 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas A.; Mickey, Sam (2018).

Literature and Ecofeminism: Intersectional and International Voices . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0815381723 .

OCLC 1020319048 .

^ Vakoch, Douglas; Mickey, Sam (2018).

Women and Nature?: Beyond Dualism in Gender, Body, and Environment . London: Routledge .

ISBN 9781138053427 .

OCLC 975383028 .

Further reading [ edit ] Key works [ edit ] Ancient Futures: Learning from Ladakh , by Helena Norberg-Hodge The Body of God by Sallie McFague The Chalice and The Blade: Our History, Our Future , by Riane Eisler The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution by Carolyn Merchant Ecofeminism by Maria Mies and Vandana Shiva Ecofeminism in Latin America by Mary Judith Ross Ecofeminist Philosophy by Karen J. Warren Environmental Culture by Val Plumwood Feminism and the Mastery of Nature by Val Plumwood Gaia and God: An Ecofeminist Theology of Earth Healing by Rosemary Radford Ruether Integrating Ecofeminism, Globalization, and World Religions by Rosemary Radford Ruether Neither Man Nor Beast by Carol J. Adams Refuge: An Unnatural History of Family and Place by Terry Tempest Williams The Resurgence of the Real: Body, Nature, and Place in a Hypermodern World by Charlene Spretnak Sacred Longings: Ecofeminist theology and Globalization by Mary Grey The Sexual Politics of Meat by Carol J. Adams Silent Spring by Rachel Carson The Spiral Dance by Starhawk Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Development by Vandana Shiva Thinking Green! Essays on Environmentalism, Feminism, and Nonviolence by Petra Kelly Tomorrow's Biodiversity by Vandana Shiva Woman and Nature: The Roaring Inside Her by Susan Griffin Breaking the Boundaries by Mary Mellor Feminism and Ecology by Mary Mellor Ecofeminism as Politics: Nature, Marx, and the Postmodern by Ariel Salleh DeColonize EcoModernism!

by Ariel Salleh The Greening of Costa Rica by Ana Isla Anthologies [ edit ] Animals and Women: Feminist Theoretical Explorations , edited by Carol J. Adams and Josephine Donovan Dystopias and Utopias on Earth and Beyond: Feminist Ecocriticism of Science Fiction , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch Ecofeminism: Women, Animals, Nature , edited by Greta Gaard Ecofeminism: Women, Culture, Nature , edited by Karen J. Warren with editorial assistance from Nisvan Erkal EcoFeminism & Globalization: exploring culture, context and religion , edited by Heather Eaton & Lois Ann Lorentzen Ecofeminism and Rhetoric: Critical Perspectives on Sex, Technology, and Discourse , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch Ecofeminism and the Sacred , edited by Carol J. Adams Ecofeminism in Dialogue , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch and Sam Mickey Ecofeminist Science Fiction: International Perspectives on Gender, Ecology, and Literature , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch Eco-Sufficiency & Global Justice: Women write Political Ecology , edited by Ariel Salleh Feminist Ecocriticism: Environment, Women, and Literature , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch Indian Feminist Ecocriticism , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch and Nicole Anae Literature and Ecofeminism: Intersectional and International Voices , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch and Sam Mickey The Politics of Women's Spirituality: Essays on the Rise of Spiritual Power within the Feminist Movement , edited by Charlene Spretnak Readings in Ecology and Feminist Theology , edited by Mary Heather MacKinnon and Moni McIntyre Reclaim the Earth , edited by Leonie Caldecott & Stephanie Leland Reweaving the World: The Emergence of Ecofeminism , edited by Irene Diamond and Gloria Feman Orenstein The Routledge Handbook of Ecofeminism and Literature , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch Women and Nature?: Beyond Dualism in Gender, Body, and Environment , edited by Douglas A. Vakoch and Sam Mickey Women Healing Earth: Third World Women on Ecology, Feminism, and Religion , edited by Rosemary Radford Ruether GUIA ECOFEMINISTA: mulheres, direito, ecologia, written by Vanessa Lemgruber edited by Ape'Ku Journal articles [ edit ] Buckingham, Susan (2015). "Ecofeminism".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (Second Edition) : 845– 850.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.91020-1 .

ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 .

Gaard, Greta Claire (2011). "Ecofeminism Revisited: Rejecting Essentialism and Re-Placing Species in a Material Feminist Environmentalism".

Feminist Formations .

23 (2): 26– 53.

doi : 10.1353/ff.2011.0017 .

S2CID 145195744 .

Huggan, Graham (2004). " "Greening" Postcolonialism: Ecocritical Perspectives".

MFS Modern Fiction Studies .

50 (3): 701– 733.

doi : 10.1353/mfs.2004.0067 .

S2CID 143900488 .

Mack-Canty, Colleen (2004). "Third-Wave Feminism and the Need to Reweave the Nature/ Culture Duality".

NWSA Journal .

16 (3): 154– 179.

doi : 10.1353/nwsa.2004.0077 .

MacGregor, Sherilyn (2004). "From care to citizenship: Calling ecofeminism back to politics".

Ethics & the Environment .

9 (1): 56– 84.

doi : 10.1353/een.2004.0007 .

S2CID 144880391 .

Mallory, Chaone (2013). "Locating Ecofeminism in Encounters with Food and Place".

Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics .

26 (1): 171– 189.

doi : 10.1007/s10806-011-9373-8 .

S2CID 144880945 .

Mann, Susan A. 2011. Pioneers of U.S. Ecofeminism and Environmental Justice, Feminist Formations, 23(2): 1-25.

Wildy, Jade (2012). "The Artistic Progressions of Ecofeminism: The Changing Focus of Women in Environmental Art".

International Journal of the Arts in Society .

6 (1): 53– 65.

doi : 10.18848/1833-1866/cgp/v06i01/35978 .

Salleh, Ariel (1984) 'From Feminism to Ecology', Social Alternatives , Vol. 4, No. 3, 8–12.

Salleh, Ariel (2019) ' Ecofeminist Sociology as a New Class Analysis ' in Klaus Dorre and Brigitte Aulenbacher (eds.), Global Dialogue , International Sociological Association Newsletter: Vol. 9, No. 1.

Salleh, Ariel (1991) 'Essentialism and Ecofeminism', Arena No. 94:167-173.

David Pellow (2018), 'Review of EcoFeminism as Politics: Nature, Marx and the Postmodern', Journal of World-Systems Research , doi:10.5195/JWSR.2018.864.

Fiction [ edit ] See also: Feminist science fiction A Door Into Ocean by Joan Slonczewski Always Coming Home by Ursula K. Le Guin Buffalo Gals, Won't You Come Out Tonight by Ursula K. Le Guin The Fifth Sacred Thing by Starhawk The Gate to Women's Country by Sheri S. Tepper The Holdfast Chronicles by Suzy McKee Charnas The Madonna Secret by Sophie Strand Native Tongue by Suzette Haden Elgin Parable of the Sower by Octavia Butler Prodigal Summer by Barbara Kingsolver Surfacing by Margaret Atwood The Wanderground by Sally Miller Gearhart Woman on the Edge of Time by Marge Piercy The Kin of Ata are Waiting for You by Dorothy Bryant Bear by Marian Engel The Temple of My Familiar by Alice Walker Sultana's Dream by Begum Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain Poetry [ edit ] The Sea of Affliction (1987, reprinted 2010) by Rosemarie Rowley External links [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Women's Studies Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ecofeminism .

Ecofeminism: Toward global justice and planetary health Feminist Greta Gaard and Lori Gruen's ecofeminist framework "An Ecology of Knowledge: Feminism, Ecology and the Science and Religion Discourse" Metanexus Institute by Lisa Stenmark "Ecofeminism and the Democracy of Creation" by Catherine Keller (2005); cf.

Carol P. Christ , "Ecofeminism", in Michel Weber and Will Desmond (eds.), Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought , Frankfurt / Lancaster, ontos verlag, 2008, pp. 87–98.

"Toward a Queer Ecofeminism" by Greta Gaard Feminism and ecology: the same struggle? – The shaping of ecofeminism by Marijke Colle Feminist Environmental Philosophy by Karen Warren What is Ecofeminism?

Perlego Books v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecofeminism&oldid=1303264230 " Categories : Ecofeminism 1974 neologisms Environmental humanities Environmental movements Environmental social science concepts Environmentalism Feminism and health Feminism and history Feminist movements and ideologies Feminist theory Green politics Left-wing politics Liberalism Political ecology Progressivism Relational ethics Social justice Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from January 2023 Articles with dead external links from January 2023 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecofeminism 45 languages Add topic

