Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Invasive species 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fauna of New Zealand 9 languages Esperanto Gaeilge Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски Simple English Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The kiwi is a national symbol of New Zealand.

The animals of New Zealand , part of its biota , have an unusual history because, before the arrival of humans less than 900 years ago, the country was mostly free of mammals, except those that could swim there ( seals , sea lions , and, off-shore, whales and dolphins ) or fly there ( bats ). However, as recently as the Miocene , it was home to the terrestrial Saint Bathans mammal , implying that mammals had been present since the island had broken away from other landmasses. The absence of mammals meant that all of the ecological niches occupied by mammals elsewhere were occupied instead by either insects or birds, leading to an unusually large number of flightless birds, including the kiwi , the weka , the moa (now extinct), the takahē , and the kākāpō .

A tuatara , sometimes described as a "living fossil" Diversity of marine mollusc shells at Akaroa Beach Because of the lack of predators, even bats spend most of their time on the ground. There are also about 60 species of lizard (30 each of gecko and skink ), four species of frog (all rare and endangered), and the tuatara (reptiles resembling lizards but with a distinct lineage).

Some butterflies of New Zealand are endemic, while many species have been introduced and some species of butterflies periodically migrate to New Zealand. The Australian painted lady has been known to migrate from Australia to New Zealand in times of strong migration in Australia.

[ 1 ] Invasive species [ edit ] Humans first arrived via the Pacific islands, in several waves at some time before 1300 AD, [ 2 ] bringing with them the Polynesian rat ( kiore ) and the domesticated dog . Europeans later brought pigs, ferrets, stoats, mice, rats, dogs, cats, sheep, cattle, and many other mammals. Of these, the rats , ferrets , cats , stoats and dogs have all seriously impacted the New Zealand fauna, driving some species to extinction.

[ quantify ] Brushtail possums were introduced from Australia for a fur industry, and deer from Europe as game animals, both seriously damaging the forest habitat of many birds.

[ 3 ] Since the 1910's, successful efforts have been made to remove possums, rats, ferrets, and other mammals from many large and small offshore islands in an effort to return these places to something more closely resembling their pre-human state. Between 1982 and 1986, trappers eliminated all remaining possums from Kapiti Island , for example: over 20,000 were removed.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 1996, all rats on the island were eliminated using an aerial application of brodifacoum .

[ 6 ] Similarly, efforts are being made to control such species in selected locations on the mainland. In a further step, in certain mainland reserves mammals are being eliminated within predator-proof fences creating ecological islands . Examples are Zealandia in Wellington city, from which about a ton of dead possums was removed after the installation of a mammal-proof fence, and the Maungatautari Restoration Project .

See also [ edit ] Part of a series on Biota of New Zealand Biodiversity Flora and Fauna Amphibians Birds Butterflies Cicadas Crabs Fish Geckos Mammals Molluscs Moths Dragonflies and damselflies Reptiles Spiders Trees Wētā Extinct animals Extinct plants Invasive species Conservation Protected areas Conservation parks National parks Regional parks Marine reserves Wetlands Organisations National DoC EPA Forest & Bird MfE SPCA International CITES IUCN WAZA WAP WWF Associated laws New Zealand environmental law Conservation Act 1987 Wildlife Act 1953 Related topics 1080 usage Agriculture Animal welfare Aquaculture Climate change Deforestation Ecoregions Environment Fishing Natural history Tourism Wildlife smuggling v t e Fauna Birds of New Zealand Butterflies of New Zealand Crabs of New Zealand Frogs of New Zealand Geckos of New Zealand Mammals of New Zealand Non-marine and marine molluscs of New Zealand Reptiles of New Zealand Spiders of New Zealand Stick insects of New Zealand Other Animal welfare in New Zealand Biodiversity of New Zealand Invasive species in New Zealand Flora of New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ Dingle, Hugh; Zalucki, Myron P.; Rochester, Wayne A. (1999). "Season-specific directional movement in migratory Australian Butterflies".

Australian Journal of Entomology .

38 (4): 323– 329.

doi : 10.1046/j.1440-6055.1999.00117.x .

^ " Rat remains help date New Zealand's colonisation ".

New Scientist . 4 June 2008. Accessed 2008-06-23 ^ T. T. Veblen and G. H. Stewart (1982). "The effects of introduced wild animals on New Zealand forests".

Annals of the Association of American Geographers , Vol. 72, No. 3, pp. 372 397.

^ Hewson, Catherine (21 February 2010).

"Kapiti Island – Part 2" .

Envirohistory NZ . Retrieved 8 June 2025 .

^ "Kapiti Island: sanctuary for wildlife" .

National Library of New Zealand Catalogue . Retrieved 8 June 2025 .

^ Hewson, Catherine (21 February 2010).

"Kapiti Island – Part 2" .

Envirohistory NZ . Retrieved 8 June 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] King, Carolyn M.; Barrett, Priscilla (2005).

The Handbook of New Zealand Mammals . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195584776 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Animals of New Zealand .

Native animals at the Department of Conservation Fauna of New Zealand Archived 2012-05-11 at the Wayback Machine at Landcare Research Animals databases Archived 2012-05-27 at the Wayback Machine at Landcare Research v t e Fauna of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_New_Zealand&oldid=1302031884 " Category : Fauna of New Zealand Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from December 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 00:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of New Zealand 9 languages Add topic

