Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Age of Discovery 3 Painting and sculpture 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Northern Renaissance 33 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Renaissance that occurred in the European countries north of the Alps Jan van Eyck , The Arnolfini Portrait , 1434, National Gallery , London. An Italian merchant based in Bruges in modern Belgium The Adoration of the Magi in the snow , Pieter Brueghel the Younger , 1584–1638 Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e The Northern Renaissance was the Renaissance that occurred in Europe north of the Alps , developing later than the Italian Renaissance , and in most respects only beginning in the last years of the 15th century. It took different forms in the various countries involved, and the German , French , English , Low Countries and Polish Renaissances often had different characteristics.

Early Netherlandish painting , especially its later phases, is often classified as part of the Northern Renaissance. Rapidly expanding trade and commerce and a new class of rich merchant patrons in then Burgundian cities like Bruges in the 15th century and Antwerp in the 16th increased cultural exchange between Italy and the Low Countries ; however in art, and especially architecture, late Gothic influences remained present until the arrival of Baroque even as painters increasingly drew on Italian models.

[ 1 ] In France, King Francis I imported Italian Renaissance art , and commissioned Italian artists (including Leonardo da Vinci ), building grand palaces at great expense, starting the French Renaissance .  In England also, the first signs of Renaissance art and architecture were the result of patronage by a small circle of patrons at the royal courts of Henry VII of England and his son Henry VIII ( Nonsuch Palace ), and courtiers such as Cardinal Thomas Wolsey , who built Hampton Court Palace .

Universities and the printed book helped spread the spirit of the age through France, the Low Countries and the Holy Roman Empire , and then to Scandinavia and Britain in the early 16th century. Writers and humanists such as Rabelais , Pierre de Ronsard and Desiderius Erasmus were greatly influenced by the Italian Renaissance model and were part of the same intellectual movement. During the English Renaissance (which overlapped with the Elizabethan era ) writers such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe composed works of lasting influence. The Renaissance was brought to Poland directly from Italy by artists from Florence and the Low Countries, starting the Polish Renaissance .

In some areas the Northern Renaissance was distinct from the Italian Renaissance in its centralization of political power. While Italy and Germany were dominated by independent city-states , most of Europe began emerging as nation-states or even unions of countries. The Northern Renaissance was also closely linked to the Protestant Reformation with the resulting long series of internal and external conflicts between various Protestant groups and the Roman Catholic Church having lasting effects.

Overview [ edit ] Feudalism was on the decline at the beginning of the Renaissance .  The reasons for this decline include the post- Plague environment, the increasing use of money rather than land as a medium of exchange , the growing number of serfs living as freemen, the formation of nation-states with monarchies interested in reducing the power of feudal lords, the increasing uselessness of feudal armies in the face of new military technology (such as gunpowder ), and a general increase in agricultural productivity due to improving farming technology and methods. As in Italy, the decline of feudalism opened the way for the cultural, social, and economic changes associated with the Renaissance in Europe.

Reproduction of Johannes Gutenberg -era Press on display at the Printing History Museum in Lyon, France.

Finally, the Renaissance in Europe would also be kindled by a weakening of the Roman Catholic Church. The slow demise of feudalism also weakened a long-established policy in which church officials helped keep the population of the manor under control in return for tribute. Consequently, the early 15th century saw the rise of many secular institutions and beliefs. Among the most significant of these, Renaissance humanism would lay the philosophical grounds for much of Renaissance art , music , science and technology .

Erasmus , for example, was important in spreading humanist ideas in the north , and was a central figure at the intersection of classical humanism and mounting religious questions. Forms of artistic expression which a century ago would have been banned by the church were now tolerated or even encouraged in certain circles.

The velocity of transmission of the Renaissance throughout Europe can also be ascribed to the invention of the printing press . Its power to disseminate information enhanced scientific research , spread political ideas and generally impacted the course of the Renaissance in northern Europe. As in Italy, the printing press increased the availability of books written in both vernacular languages and the publication of new and ancient classical texts in Greek and Latin . Furthermore, the Bible became widely available in translation , a factor often attributed to the spread of the Protestant Reformation.

Age of Discovery [ edit ] Main article: Age of Discovery One of the most important technological development of the Renaissance was the invention of the caravel . This combination of European and North African ship building technologies for the first time made extensive trade and travel over the Atlantic feasible.  While first introduced by the Italian states and the early captains, such as Giovanni Caboto , Giovanni da Verrazzano and Columbus , who were Italian explorers, the development would end Northern Italy's role as the trade crossroads of Europe, shifting wealth and power westwards to Portugal , Spain , France , England , and the Netherlands . These states all began to conduct extensive trade with Africa and Asia , and in the Americas began extensive colonisation activities. This period of exploration and expansion has become known as the Age of Discovery . Eventually European power spread around the globe.

Painting and sculpture [ edit ] See also: Early Netherlandish painting , Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting , and Northern Mannerism The Ghent Altarpiece (interior view) by Hubert and Jan van Eyck , completed 1432.

Saint Bavo Cathedral , Ghent , Belgium .

Early Netherlandish painting often included complicated iconography , and art historians have debated the "hidden symbolism" of works by artists like Hubert and Jan van Eyck .

The detailed realism of Early Netherlandish painting , led by Robert Campin and Jan van Eyck in the 1420s and 1430s, is today generally considered to be the beginning of the early Northern Renaissance in painting.  This detailed realism was greatly respected in Italy, but there was little reciprocal influence on the North until nearly the end of the 15th century.

[ 2 ] Despite frequent cultural and artistic exchange, the Antwerp Mannerists (1500–1530)—chronologically overlapping with but unrelated to Italian Mannerism —were among the first artists in the Low Countries to clearly reflect Italian formal developments.

Around the same time, Albrecht Dürer made his two trips to Italy, where he was greatly admired for his prints . Dürer, in turn, was influenced by the art he saw there and is agreed to be one of the first Northern High Renaissance painters. Other notable northern painters such as Hans Holbein the Elder and Jean Fouquet , retained a Gothic influence that was still popular in the north, while highly individualistic artists such as Hieronymus Bosch and Pieter Bruegel the Elder developed styles that were imitated by many subsequent generations. Later in the 16th century Northern painters increasingly looked and travelled to Rome, becoming known as the Romanists . The High Renaissance art of Michelangelo and Raphael and the late Renaissance stylistic tendencies of Mannerism that were in vogue had a great impact on their work.

Renaissance humanism and the large number of surviving classical artworks and monuments encouraged many Italian painters to explore Greco-Roman themes more prominently than northern artists, and likewise the famous 15th-century German and Dutch paintings tend to be religious. In the 16th century, mythological and other themes from history became more uniform amongst northern and Italian artists. Northern Renaissance painters, however, had new subject matter, such as landscape and genre painting .

As Renaissance art styles moved through northern Europe, they changed and were adapted to local customs. In England and the northern Netherlands the Reformation brought religious painting almost completely to an end . Despite several very talented artists of the Tudor Court in England, portrait painting was slow to spread from the elite. In France the School of Fontainebleau was begun by Italians such as Rosso Fiorentino in the latest Mannerist style, but succeeded in establishing a durable national style. By the end of the 16th century, artists such as Karel van Mander and Hendrik Goltzius collected in Haarlem in a brief but intense phase of Northern Mannerism that also spread to Flanders .

References [ edit ] ^ Janson, H.W.; Anthony F. Janson (1997).

History of Art (5th, rev. ed.). New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

ISBN 0-8109-3442-6 .

^ Although the notion of a north to south-only direction of influence arose in the scholarship of Max Jakob Friedländer and was continued by Erwin Panofsky , art historians are increasingly questioning its validity: Lisa Deam, "Flemish versus Netherlandish: A Discourse of Nationalism," in Renaissance Quarterly, vol. 51, no. 1 (Spring, 1998), pp. 28–29.

Bibliography [ edit ] Chipps Smith, Jeffrey (2004).

The Northern Renaissance . Phaidon Press.

ISBN 978-0-7148-3867-0 .

Campbell, Gordon, ed. (2009).

The Grove Encyclopedia of Northern Renaissance Art . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-533466-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] O'Neill, J, ed. (1987).

The Renaissance in the North . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Bezrucka, Yvonne (2017).

The Invention of Northern Aesthetics in 18th-Century English Literature . Cambridge Scholars Press.

ISBN 978-1-5275-0302-1 .

Snyder, James .

Northern Renaissance Art , 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0136235964 Snyder, James , Introduction to The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Vol. 5, The Renaissance in the North , 1987.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Northern Renaissance paintings and Renaissance by country .

v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Early modern Europe Overviews Eras Renaissance Outline High Renaissance Early modern period Early modern Europe Elizabethan era Age of Discovery Baroque Age of Enlightenment International relations (1648–1814) By country Northern Europe England Papacy France Germany Low Countries Events Political Fall of Constantinople Decline of the Byzantine Empire Technological: Printing Revolution Intellectual: Scientific Revolution Social history Concepts Absolute monarchy Journalism of Early Modern Europe The General Crisis Peasant Wars Politics Countries Holy Roman Empire Free imperial city France Germany Britain British Empire Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic Seventeen Provinces Economic history Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Kingdom of Bohemia Lands of the Bohemian Crown Protestant Union Grand Duchy of Tuscany Leaders Habsburg monarchy England House of Stuart House of Tudor France House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy in France Ancien Régime Louis XIV Wars French Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Cabinet wars Second Hundred Years' War War of the Spanish Succession Seven Years' War Diplomacy French–Habsburg rivalry Peace of Westphalia Treaties of Nijmegen Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Religion Overviews Christianity in the modern era Proto-Protestantism Bohemian Reformation Hussites History of European Jews in the Middle Ages Haskalah Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Protestant Reformation Ninety-five Theses Calvinism Huguenots English Lutheranism Scottish Switzerland Radical Counter-Reformation European wars of religion Academic fields Philosophy Philosophy: Renaissance philosophy Renaissance humanism Northern Europe Greek scholars in the Renaissance Science Science in the Renaissance Works Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) Authors : Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Matteo Palmieri Leonardo da Vinci Arts General Renaissance art Painting: Italian painting Florentine painting Venetian painting Dutch and Flemish painting Early Netherlandish painting End of period Great Divergence Industrial Revolution Age of Revolution French Revolution Coalition Wars Revolutionary Napoleonic Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 See also Europe Art of Europe Genetic history of Europe History of the European Union Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe World History of Western civilization History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region Human history • History of philosophy • History of Europe NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐9sx9f
Cached time: 20250812003103
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.396 seconds
Real time usage: 0.506 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1047/1000000
Revision size: 12868/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76017/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 982/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 43477/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.269/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5741319/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  403.771      1 -total
 29.01%  117.118      1 Template:Renaissance
 28.46%  114.903      1 Template:Sidebar
 23.78%   96.027      5 Template:Cite_book
 17.04%   68.815      1 Template:Short_description
 12.54%   50.615     10 Template:Navbox
  9.21%   37.199      1 Template:Renaissance_navbox
  8.75%   35.336      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.42%   29.943      1 Template:Commonscat-multi
  6.73%   27.193      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:893563:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003103 and revision id 1280414766. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_Renaissance&oldid=1280414766 " Categories : Northern Renaissance Renaissance 15th century in Europe 16th century in Europe 17th century in Europe Art of Europe Renaissance art Cultural history of Europe Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 14:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Northern Renaissance 33 languages Add topic

