Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Key concepts Toggle Key concepts subsection 1.1 Interlocking matrix of oppression 1.2 Multiple discrimination 1.3 Standpoint theory 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Precursors to intersectionality 2.2 Second wave feminism 2.3 Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex 3 Development Toggle Development subsection 3.1 Caste 3.2 Class 3.3 Colonialism 4 Forms Toggle Forms subsection 4.1 Structural intersectionality 4.2 Political intersectionality 4.3 Representational intersectionality 4.4 Other forms 4.4.1 Strategic intersectionality 4.4.2 Transnational intersectionality 5 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 5.1 Domestic violence 5.2 Education 5.3 Employment 5.4 Healthcare 5.5 Immigration 5.6 Psychology 5.7 Remediation 5.8 Social work 5.9 Other fields 6 Responses Toggle Responses subsection 6.1 Academic 6.2 Utility 6.3 Research 6.4 Political 6.5 Others 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Intersectionality 45 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî Кыргызча Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Intersectional feminism ) Theory of discrimination The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An intersectional analysis considers a collection of factors that affect a social individual in combination, rather than considering each factor in isolation, as illustrated here using a Venn diagram .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Intersectionality is an analytical framework for understanding how groups' and individuals' social and political identities result in unique combinations of discrimination and privilege . Examples of these intersecting and overlapping factors include gender , caste , sex , race , ethnicity , class , sexuality , religion , disability , physical appearance , and age .

[ 1 ] These factors can lead to both empowerment and oppression .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Intersectionality arose in reaction to both white feminism and the then male-dominated black liberation movement, citing the "interlocking oppressions" of racism , sexism and heteronormativity . It broadens the scope of the first and second waves of feminism , which largely focused on the experiences of women who were white , cisgender , and middle-class , [ 4 ] to include the different experiences of women of color , poor women , immigrant women , and other groups, and aims to separate itself from white feminism by acknowledging women's differing experiences and identities.

[ 5 ] The term intersectionality was coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw in 1989.

[ 6 ] : 385 She describes how interlocking systems of power affect those who are most marginalized in society .

[ 6 ] Activists and academics use the framework to promote social and political egalitarianism .

[ 5 ] Intersectionality opposes analytical systems that treat each axis of oppression in isolation. In this framework, for instance, discrimination against black women cannot be explained as a simple combination of misogyny and racism , but as something more complicated.

[ 7 ] Intersectionality has heavily influenced modern feminism and gender studies.

[ 8 ] Its proponents suggest that it promotes a more nuanced and complex approach to addressing power and oppression, rather than offering simplistic answers.

[ 9 ] [ 8 ] Its critics suggest that the concept is too broad or complex, [ 10 ] tends to reduce individuals to specific demographic factors, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] is used as an ideological tool, [ 12 ] [ 11 ] and is difficult to apply in research contexts.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Key concepts [ edit ] Interlocking matrix of oppression [ edit ] Patricia Hill Collins , author of Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory (2019), refers to the various intersections of social inequality as "vectors of oppression and privilege" that together form a matrix of domination . These concepts describe how people's experiences of privilege and marginalization are shaped not just by individual differences in isolation (sexual orientation, class, race, age, and so on), but also by the effect of overlaps and interactions between these differences. The impact of a particular factor such as race can vary based on the presence or absence of other factors, such as gender or class.

[ 16 ] : 204 Multiple discrimination [ edit ] Intersectionality at a Dyke March in Hamburg, Germany, 2020 In the European Union (EU) and UK, "multiple discrimination" refers to discrimination which encompasses more than one social classification (gender, race, class, religion, sexuality, and so on). These categories, which were previously considered in isolation as defining in their own right, are now increasingly approached as different facets of a person's identity that are considered as a multidimensional whole.

[ 17 ] Standpoint theory [ edit ] Standpoint theory has been described by Patricia Collins and Dorothy E. Smith . A standpoint is an individual's world perspective. Standpoint theory suggests that societal knowledge is subjective, being situated within an individual's specific geographic location and the social conditions under which it was produced.

[ 18 ] : 392 History [ edit ] External videos Women of the World Festival 2016 Kimberlé Crenshaw – On Intersectionality via Southbank Centre on YouTube [ 19 ] Black feminist scholar Kimberlé Crenshaw introduced the concept of intersectionality in a pair of essays published in 1989 and 1991, within the subject of legal studies.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 6 ] Intersectionality originated in critical race studies and considers the way different forms of oppression (such as racism, sexism, classism, homophobia, and so on) can combine and interact to produce multifaceted systems of oppression and privilege that shape the experiences of individuals. Crenshaw used intersectionality to demonstrate how these intersecting systems of oppression disadvantaged minorities in the workplace and society.

[ 21 ] [ 23 ] Precursors to intersectionality [ edit ] The historical exclusion of Black women from the feminist movement in the United States resulted in many Black 19th- and 20th-century feminists—including Sojourner Truth , Anna J. Cooper , Maria W. Stewart , Ida B. Wells and others—challenging their historical exclusion from earlier feminist movements, which were primarily led by white middle-class women who suggested that women were a homogeneous category who shared the same life experiences.

[ 24 ] [ 6 ] [ 25 ] In her 1851 " Ain't I a Woman?

" speech, Sojourner Truth spoke from her racialized position as a formerly enslaved woman to critique essentialist notions of femininity .

[ 26 ] She highlighted the differences between the treatment of white and Black women in society, saying that white women were often regarded as emotional and delicate, while Black women were stereotyped as brutish and subjected to both gendered and racialized abuse. These observations were largely dismissed by many white feminists of the time, who prioritized the suffrage movement over addressing the intersecting oppressions faced by Black women.

[ 27 ] Early writers and intellectuals such as Cooper, Stewart, Wells, Stuart Hall and Nira Yuval-Davis also emphasized the interconnected nature of racial and gender oppressions, prefiguring intersectionality.

[ 6 ] [ 25 ] In her 1892 essay "The Colored Woman's Office", Cooper identified Black women as crucial agents of social change, emphasizing their unique understanding of multiple forms of oppression.

[ 28 ] [ 6 ] In Cooper's publication of "A Voice from the South" (1892), she emphasized the importance of considering the "whole race" by focusing on the lived experiences of Black women. Cooper said that their oppression was just not racial or gender-based but a complex combination of the two.

[ 29 ] [ 6 ] W. E. B. Du Bois theorized that the intersectional paradigms of race, class, and nation might explain specific aspects of the Black political economy.

Patricia Hill Collins writes: "Du Bois saw race, class, and nation not primarily as personal identity categories but as social hierarchies that shaped African-American access to status, poverty, and power." [ 30 ] Du Bois nevertheless omitted gender from his theory and considered it more of a personal identity category.

[ 6 ] In 1947, Pauli Murray used the phrase "Jane Crow" to describe the compounded challenges faced by black women in the Jim Crow south.

[ 31 ] Second wave feminism [ edit ] Patricia Hill Collins describes the many proponents of Black, Asian American, Latina, Indigenous, and Chicana feminism active in North America between 1960s and 1980s as instrumental in the development of intersectionality.

[ 25 ] In the 1970s and 1980s, a number of non-Western feminists of color also articulated ideas similar to intersectionality, such as Awa Thiam , Chandra Talpade Mohanty , Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak , Chela Sandoval , and others.

[ 32 ] In 1974, a group of Black feminists organized the Combahee River Collective in Boston, Massachusetts , in response to what they felt was an alienation from both white feminism and the male-dominated Black liberation movement , citing the "interlocking oppressions" of racism, sexism and heteronormativity .

[ 33 ] The collective developed the concept of "simultaneity": the simultaneous influences of race, class, gender, and sexuality, which informed the members' lives and their resistance to oppression.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The Combahee River Collective advanced an understanding of African-American experiences that challenged analyses emerging from Black and male-centered social movements, as well as those from mainstream cisgender, white, middle-class, heterosexual feminists.

[ 36 ] In DeGraffenreid v. General Motors (1976), Emma DeGraffenreid and four other Black female auto workers alleged compound employment discrimination as Black women resulting from General Motors ' seniority-based system of layoffs. The courts weighed the allegations of race and gender discrimination separately, finding that the employment of African-American men in the factory disproved racial discrimination, and the employment of white women in the offices disproved gender discrimination . The court declined to consider compound discrimination, and dismissed the case.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Crenshaw said that in cases such as this, the courts have tended to ignore Black women's unique experiences by treating them as only women or only Black.

[ 11 ] [ 22 ] : 141–143 In 1978, Senegalese write Awa Thiam wrote of the "threefold oppression" of racism, sexism and class oppression which impacted African women: [ 32 ] The Black woman of Africa suffers threefold oppression: by virtue of her sex, she is dominated by man in a patriarchal society; by virtue of her class she is at the mercy of capitalist exploitation; by virtue of her race she suffers from the appropriation of her country by colonial or neo-colonial powers. Sexism, racism, class division; three plagues.

[ 32 ] By the 1980s, as second-wave feminism began to recede, scholars of color including Audre Lorde , Gloria E. Anzaldúa and Angela Davis brought their lived experiences into academic discussion, shaping what would become known as "intersectionality" within race, class, and gender studies in U.S. academia.

[ 25 ] [ 39 ] Scholar bell hooks , in her groundbreaking work Ain't I a Woman? Black Women and Feminism (1981), described the exclusion of Black women's experiences from mainstream feminist narratives and underscored the importance of addressing race, gender, and class as intersecting systems of oppression.

[ 40 ] For hooks, the emergence of intersectionality "challenged the notion that 'gender' was the primary factor determining a woman's fate".

[ 41 ] Inspired by Lorde, Afro-German women also began to explore issues of overlapping oppression in Germany.

[ 42 ] Also in 1981, Cherríe Moraga and Gloria Anzaldúa published This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color , an anthology centering the experiences of women of color, which challenges white feminists who made claims to solidarity based on sisterhood , calling for greater recognition of their multiple identities.

[ 43 ] Among other things, works in the anthology call for greater attention to race-related subjectivities in feminism, and ultimately laid the foundation for third wave feminism .

[ 44 ] In 1988, Deborah K. King published the article "Multiple Jeopardy, Multiple Consciousness: The Context of a Black Feminist Ideology". In it, King addresses what soon became the foundation for intersectionality, saying, "Black women have long recognized the special circumstances of our lives in the United States: the commonalities that we share with all women, as well as the bonds that connect us to the men of our race".

[ 45 ] Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex [ edit ] In 1989, Kimberlé Crenshaw coined the term intersectionality as a way to help explain the oppression of African-American women in her essay "Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Anti-discrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics".

[ 6 ] [ 22 ] Crenshaw's term has risen to the forefront of national conversations about racial justice, identity politics , and policing—and over the years has helped shape legal discussions.

[ 46 ] [ 38 ] In her work, Crenshaw discusses Black feminism , arguing that the experience of being a Black woman cannot be understood in terms independent of either being Black or a woman. Rather, it must include interactions between the two identities, which, she adds, should frequently reinforce one another.

[ 47 ] In order to demonstrate that women of color have different experiences to white women, Crenshaw explores domestic violence and rape committed by men, which for women of color consist of a combination of both racism and sexism. She says that because the discourses designed to address either race or sex do not consider both at the same time, women of color are marginalized within both of them a result.

[ 21 ] Crenshaw also delves into several legal cases that exhibit the concept of political intersectionality and how anti-discrimination law has been historically limited, such as DeGraffenreid v Motors , Moore v Hughes Helicopter Inc.

, and Payne v Travenol . There are two commonalities, amongst others, between these cases: firstly, each respective court's inability to fully understand the multidimensionality of the plaintiff's intersecting identities, and the limited ability that the plaintiffs had to argue their case due to restrictions created by the very legislation that exists in opposition to discrimination such as Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

[ 22 ] Development [ edit ] Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e The concept of intersectionality was intended to illuminate dynamics that have often been overlooked by feminist theory and movements.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Racial inequality was largely ignored by first-wave feminism, which was primarily concerned with achieving political equality between white men and white women, [ 51 ] : 59–60 and second-wave feminism, which sought to dismantle sexism relating to the perceived domestic purpose of women.

[ 52 ] Third-wave feminism —which emerged shortly after the term intersectionality was coined—attempted to address the lack of attention given to race, class, sexual orientation, and gender identity in early feminist movements.

[ 51 ] : 72–73 The term became more widely used in the 1990s, particularly following further development of Crenshaw's work by sociologist Patricia Hill Collins . Collins says Crenshaw's term replaced her own previous coinage "Black feminist thought", and "increased the general applicability of her theory from African American women to all women".

[ 53 ] : 61 Collins sought to create frameworks to think about intersectionality, rather than expanding on the theory itself. She identified three main branches of study within intersectionality: one dealing with the background, ideas, issues, conflicts, and debates within intersectionality; another that seeks to apply intersectionality as an analytical strategy to examine how various social institutions might perpetuate social inequality; and one that uses intersectionality to bring social change through social justice initiatives.

[ 25 ] [ 54 ] Though intersectionality began with the exploration of the interplay between sexist and racist oppression, with classist and homophobic/biphobic oppression sometimes included, the theory has since expanded to cover other forms of oppression.

[ 55 ] Additionally, intersectionality has been used to address the differences between women of color even regarding shared experiences such as racism. For example, Asian American women have reported intersectional experiences that set them apart from other women of color as well as Asian men.

[ 56 ] Gloria Wekker says the Chicana feminist work of Gloria E. Anzaldúa is important because "existent categories for identity are strikingly not dealt with in separate or mutually exclusive terms, but are always referred to in relation to one another".

[ 39 ] Caste [ edit ] In South Asia, Dalit feminists have drawn on intersectional analysis to emphasize the compounded marginalization faced by Dalit women, who experience both caste-based and gender-based discrimination. Scholars such as Thenmozhi Soundararajan argue in their works like The Trauma of Caste that mainstream feminist frameworks often neglect these intersecting oppressions, calling for a more nuanced analysis that recognizes caste as a central axis of inequality.

[ 57 ] Class [ edit ] Collins has used a Marxist feminist approach to apply intersectional principles to study Black women's poverty and what she calls the "work/family nexus". In her 2000 article "Black Political Economy", she suggests the intersections of consumer racism , gender hierarchies, and disadvantages in the labor market can be centered on Black women's unique experiences—such as the suppression of Black women's economic mobility due to inheritance and anti-miscegenation laws .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] : 506 Chiara Bottici has also incorporated elements of anarcha-feminism to counter criticisms that intersectionality is incomplete or fails to recognize the specificity of women's oppression, saying "that there is something specific about the oppression of women and that in order to fight it you have to fight all other forms of oppression." [ 60 ] Colonialism [ edit ] In Latin America, Maria Lugones introduced the concept of the "coloniality of gender" to explore how colonial histories intersect across race, gender, and class, creating unique forms of oppression for Indigenous and Afro-descendant women. Her work reveals the imposition of Eurocentric gender norms during colonial rule, which marginalized non-Western gender identities and social structures.

[ 61 ] Mara Viveros Vigoya also provides a Latin American perspective which considers the need to address colonialism as part of an intersectional approach.

[ 62 ] Forms [ edit ] In "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence Against Women of Color", Kimberlé Crenshaw outlines three different forms of intersectionality to describe the violence that women experience: structural, political, and representational intersectionality.

[ 21 ] These frameworks are still used today.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Structural intersectionality [ edit ] Structural intersectionality considers how people are marginalized by the combined effects of different overlapping and reinforcing forms of systemic, institutional, and structural inequality.

[ 63 ] [ 65 ] [ 64 ] : 797 [ 21 ] : 1245 Crenshaw uses this approach to analyze the structural classism, racism, and sexism that combine to make women of color more vulnerable to domestic violence and rape, as well as how a failure to recognise the overlapping of these structures has resulted in inadequate interventions for such women.

[ 66 ] [ 64 ] : 797 In 2020, Alesha Durfee used the structural intersectional approach to examine the inability of "multiply marginalized" people, such as women of color, to file for, obtain, serve, and enforce protective orders in domestic violence situations, and suggested that the systems in place replicated wider social inequalities. Durfee said the basis for such inequalities were "policies and procedures based on inappropriate assumptions about individuals" that do not account for the complexity of their lived experiences.

[ 67 ] In 2021, a group of researchers using a structural intersectional approach found that the impact of overlapping structural racism, sexism, and income inequality in U.S. healthcare varied considerably across the country but was most consistently associated with poor health in Black women.

[ 68 ] Political intersectionality [ edit ] Political intersectionality considers how activist or political movements can marginalize people with multiple intersecting identities by focusing on "allegedly universal, single-axis approaches" which either exclude them or else ignore or downplay the complexities of their experiences.

[ 64 ] : 800 [ 63 ] Black feminists such as Crenshaw and Deborah K. King have used political intersectionality to explore the separation of race- and gender-based discourse within the anti-racist and feminist movements, which requires women of color to prioritise their interests as either "people of color" or "women", rather than reflecting that they are both.

[ 21 ] [ 45 ] This framework has since been applied to consider other intersections, such as class, sexuality, and disability.

[ 66 ] [ 63 ] Sameena Azhar et al. have argued that Asian Americans are subject to myths that they "do not experience racialized, sexualized, and gendered microaggressions ". They suggest these attitudes serve to socially and politically delegitimize Asian Americans' experiences of racism. They suggest that stereotypes of Asian Americans that frame their sexuality "in ways that maintain the social and political dominance of white men" affect Asian American men and women differently. For example, Asian American women were often perceived as romantically desirable and overly-sexualized, while their male counterparts were perceived as asexual.

[ 69 ] Representational intersectionality [ edit ] Representational intersectionality is the study of how intersecting identities (e.g., race, gender, class, sexuality) are depicted in cultural narratives and media, and how this creates or reinforces overlapping forms of marginalization.

[ 63 ] Crenshaw used this framework to analyze how stereotypical portrayals of women of color in popular culture often perpetuate harm against them.

[ 21 ] Subsequent analysis of representation in popular culture has also used an international approach.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Analyzing film and television, bell hooks suggests women of color are frequently portrayed as hyper-sexualized, "sassy", or docile tropes—such as the "fiery Latina', "submissive Asian", " angry Black woman "— which erase the full complexity of their intersecting identities, perpetuate oppressive societal attitudes and norms (such as sexism, racism, and classism), and even lead to violence against women of color.

[ 70 ] According to Mari J. Matsuda and others, these tropes also appear in advertising and marketing campaigns, which often portray women of color in "exotic" or "hyper-feminine" terms and thereby reinforce stereotypes of them as commodities or objects of consumption.

[ 71 ] [ page needed ] In their analysis of news media, including over two million articles published by Fox News and The New York Times between 2000–2022, Elliot Ash and others found that news stories involving women of color , LGBTQ + people, and other minority groups often used sensational or stereotypical lenses, ignoring socioeconomic contexts or broader structural inequalities , and effectively "flattening" the narrative of complex identities. They especially noted tropes of criminality, cleanliness, and invasion about immigrants, single parents, and trans people, which they found had shaped broader perceptions of marginalized communities.

[ 72 ] Other forms [ edit ] Strategic intersectionality [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Intersectionality" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) Marie-Claire Belleau has called for "strategic intersectionality" in order to foster cooperation between feminisms of different ethnicities.

[ 73 ] : 51 She refers to different nat-cult (national-cultural) groups that produce different types of feminisms. Using the Québécois nat-cult as an example, Belleau says that many nat-cult groups contain infinite sub-identities within themselves, saying that there are endless ways in which different feminisms can cooperate by using strategic intersectionality, and that these partnerships can help bridge gaps between "dominant and marginal" groups.

[ 73 ] : 54 Belleau argues that, through strategic intersectionality, differences between nat-cult feminisms are neither essentialist nor universal, but should be understood as resulting from socio-cultural contexts. Furthermore, the performances of these nat-cult feminisms are also not essentialist. Instead, they are strategies.

[ 73 ] Transnational intersectionality [ edit ] Postcolonial feminists and transnational feminists have criticized intersectionality as a concept emanating from WEIRD (Western, educated, industrialized, rich, democratic) [ 74 ] societies that unduly universalizes women's experiences.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Postcolonial feminists have worked to revise Western conceptualizations of intersectionality that assume all women experience the same type of gender and racial oppression.

[ 75 ] [ 77 ] Shelly Grabe coined the term transnational intersectionality to represent a more comprehensive conceptualization of intersectionality. Grabe wrote, "Transnational intersectionality places importance on the intersections among gender, ethnicity, sexuality, economic exploitation, and other social hierarchies in the context of empire building or imperialist policies characterized by historical and emergent global capitalism ." [ 78 ] Both Postcolonial and transnational feminists advocate attending to "complex and intersecting oppressions and multiple forms of resistance".

[ 75 ] [ 77 ] Vrushali Patil argues that intersectionality ought to recognize transborder constructions of racial and cultural hierarchies. About the effect of the state on identity formation, Patil says: "If we continue to neglect cross-border dynamics and fail to problematize the nation and its emergence via transnational processes, our analyses will remain tethered to the spatialities and temporalities of colonial modernity." [ 79 ] Chandra Mohanty discusses alliances between women throughout the world as intersectionality in a global context. She rejects the western feminist theory, especially when it writes about global women of color and generally associated "third world women". She argues that "third world women" are often thought of as a homogeneous entity, when, in fact, their experience of oppression is informed by their geography, history, and culture. When western feminists write about women in the global South in this way, they dismiss the inherent intersecting identities that are present in the dynamic of feminism in the global South. Mohanty questions the performance of intersectionality and relationality of power structures within the US and colonialism and how to work across identities with this history of colonial power structures.

[ 80 ] This is elaborated on by Christine Bose, who discusses a global use of intersectionality which works to remove associations of specific inequalities with specific institutions while showing that these systems generate intersectional effects. She uses this approach to develop a framework that can analyze gender inequalities across different nations and differentiates this from an approach (the one that Mohanty was referring to) which, one, paints national-level inequalities as the same and, two, differentiates only between the global North and South. This is manifested through the intersection of global dynamics like economics, migration, or violence, with regional dynamics, like histories of the nation or gendered inequalities in education and property education.

[ 81 ] Applications [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( March 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Intersectionality has been applied in many fields from politics, [ 82 ] [ 83 ] education [ 48 ] [ 28 ] [ 84 ] healthcare, [ 85 ] [ 86 ] and employment, to economics.

[ 87 ] Scholars of intersectionality have also advocated for its use more widely.

[ 23 ] [ 88 ] Little good-quality quantitative research has been done to support or undermine the practical uses  of intersectionality, owing to misapplication of theoretical concepts and problems in methodology.

[ 13 ] Domestic violence [ edit ] Women with disabilities encounter more frequent domestic abuse with a greater number of abusers. Health care workers and personal care attendants perpetrate abuse in these circumstances, and women with disabilities have fewer options for escaping the abusive situation.

[ 89 ] There is a "silence" principle concerning the intersectionality of women and disability, which maintains an overall social denial of the prevalence of abuse among the disabled and leads to this abuse being frequently ignored when encountered.

[ 90 ] This can exacerbate limited autonomy and social isolation of disabled individuals, and place women with disabilities in situations where further or more frequent abuse can occur.

[ 89 ] Education [ edit ] Intersectionality in education involves considering multiple elements of peoples' identities to increase accessibility—such as language, learning style, and disabilities. Laura Gonzales and Janine Butler say that an intersectional approach can help decrease the impact of disadvantages in the learning environment.

[ 91 ] For example, the research by Gonzales and Butler found benefits from incorporating bilingual delivery, adjustments for disability, and inclusion of marginalized subjects in their writing assignments.

[ 91 ] Authors Collin Lamout Craig and Staci Maree suggest there are also benefits for intersectionality in aiding acknowledgment and understanding in academia.

[ 92 ] Within the institution of education, Sandra Jones' research on working-class women in academia takes into consideration meritocracy within all social strata, but argues that it is complicated by race and the external forces that oppress.

[ 84 ] Employment [ edit ] Intersectional approaches to employment may be implemented in different ways in different organizations. Within the UK charity sector, Ashlee Christoffersen identified five different conceptualizations of intersectionality. "Generic intersectionality" was observed in policy areas, where intersectionality was conceptualized as developing policies to be in everyone's universal interest rather than being targeted to particular groups. "Pan equality" was concern for issues that affected most marginalised groups. "Multi-strand intersectionality" attempted to consider different groups when making a decision, but rarely viewed the groups as overlapping or focused on issues for a particular group. "Diversity within" considered one main form of identity, such as gender, as most important while occasionally considering other aspects of identity, with these different forms of identity sometimes seen as detracting from the main identity. "Intersections of equality strands" considered the intersection of identities but no form of identity was seen as more relevant. In this approach it was sometimes felt that if one dealt with the most marginalized identity, the system would tend to work for all people. Christoffersen referred to some of these meanings given to intersectionality as "additive" where inequalities are thought of as being added to and subtracted from one another.

[ 93 ] In the United States, studies of the labor market suggest there are economic inequalities due to the intersections of race and gender, including for African American women.

[ 59 ] : 506–507 In a book by Esther Chow and others, the authors write: "The impact of patriarchy and traditional assumptions about gender and families are evident in the lives of Chinese migrant workers, sex workers and their clients in South Korea, and Indian widows, but also Ukrainian migrants and Australian men of the new global middle class." [ 94 ] Healthcare [ edit ] Intersectionality has been used as a critical framework in healthcare, such as in addressing issues of reproductive justice, where the intersection of race, class, and gender shapes access to healthcare and family planning resources for women of color. An intersectional lens reveals a disproportionate rate of maternal mortality among Black women in the United States. Black women experience a significantly higher rate of pregnancy-related deaths, despite controlling for insurance status, income, and education. Research has linked these disparities to structural racism and implicit bias within the healthcare system. Healthcare providers have been shown to cause an underestimation of Black patients’ pain and inadequate or delayed treatment, specifically in maternal care and pain management.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] People of color in general often experience differential treatment in the healthcare system. For example, in the period immediately after 9/11 researchers noted low birth weights and other poor birth outcomes among Muslim and Arab Americans, a result they connected to the increased racial and religious discrimination of the time.

[ 97 ] Some researchers have also argued that immigration policies can affect health outcomes through mechanisms such as stress , restrictions on access to health care, and the social determinants of health .

[ 86 ] Social determinants of health , such as food security, access to clean air and water, housing stability, and employment conditions, can also have significant impacts on health outcomes, [ 98 ] particularly for marginalized communities.

[ 99 ] Environmental racism, [ 100 ] a form of systemic racism where communities of color disproportionately bear the burden of environmental hazards, contributes to elevated rates of asthma, cancer, and other chronic illnesses. Rising temperatures and natural disasters as a result of climate change also disproportionately impact populations with limited economic resources and restricted access to healthcare.

Historical medical exploitation are continuing to inform health disparities today. The Tuskegee Syphilis Study , in which Black men were denied treatment for syphilis without their consent or knowledge, and the forced sterilization of Indigenous and Latina women, driven by the eugenics movement, [ 101 ] racial and colonial control, and targeting through welfare and public health programs, [ 102 ] are all examples of systemic medical abuse. These events have contributed to longstanding distrust in healthcare institutions among marginalized communities. Additionally, medical research has historically excluded people of color, women, and disabled individuals [ 103 ] from clinical trials, resulting in gaps in knowledge about how various treatments affect these populations. This underrepresentation persists in many areas of research and contributes to unequal health outcomes today.

Loretta Ross and the SisterSong Collective suggest that healthcare policies disproportionately affect Black, Indigenous, and Latina women, highlighting the importance of applying an intersectional lens in policy-making. This ensures that systematic disparities are identified and addressed to create equitable healthcare policies and resources for marginalized communities.

[ 104 ] The Women's Institute for Science, Equity and Race advocates for the disaggregation of data in order to highlight intersectional identities in all kinds of research.

[ 105 ] Additional organizations such as the National Black Women's Reproductive Justice Agenda, [ 106 ] the Black Mamas Matter [ 107 ] Alliance, and the Disability Justice Collective [ 108 ] also work to center intersectionality in health justice advocacy, public policy, and community-driven research efforts.

Immigration [ edit ] The African American Policy Forum (AAPF) has advocated for an intersectional approach to immigration policy, considering factors such as race, marriage and gender. The AAPF says that immigrant women's lives are often threatened by abusive spouses who are already citizens, and yet such women cannot divorce their spouses for two years if they seek permanent resident status. According to the AAPF, the law currently includes "no exceptions for battered women who often faced the risk of serious injury and death on the one hand, or deportation on the other".

[ 109 ] Psychology [ edit ] Main articles: Biases and Heuristics in judgment and decision-making Researchers in psychology have incorporated intersection effects since the 1950s.

[ 110 ] These intersection effects were based on studying the lenses of biases, heuristics, stereotypes, and judgments. Psychologists have extended research in psychological biases to the areas of cognitive and motivational psychology. What is found, is that every human mind has its own biases in judgment and decision-making that tend to preserve the status quo by avoiding change and attention to ideas that exist outside one's personal realm of perception.

[ 110 ] Psychological interaction effects span a range of variables, although person-by-situation effects are the most examined category. As a result, psychologists do not construe the interaction effect of demographics such as gender and race as either more noteworthy or less noteworthy than any other interaction effect. In addition, oppression can be regarded as a subjective construct when viewed as an absolute hierarchy.

Even if an objective definition of oppression was reached, person-by-situation effects would make it difficult to deem certain persons or categories of persons as uniformly oppressed. For instance, black men are stereotypically perceived as criminals, which makes it much more difficult for them to get hired for a job than a white man. However, gay black men are perceived as harmless, which increases their chances of getting employed and receiving bonuses, despite the fact that gay males are also socially disadvantaged. The stereotype of gay men as harmless helps black men transcend their reputation for criminality.

[ 66 ] Several psychological studies have likewise shown that possessing multiple oppressed or marginalized identities has effects that are not necessarily additive, or even multiplicative, but rather, interactive in complex ways.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] One of the main issues that affects the research of intersectionality is the construct problem. Constructs are what scientists use to build blocks of understanding within their field of study.

[ 113 ] It is important because it gives us something to measure. As mentioned previously, it is incredibly difficult to define oppression and, specifically, the feeling of being oppressed and ways that different kinds of oppression may interact as a construct.

[ 114 ] As psychology grows and changes its ability to define constructs, this research will likely improve.

[ 114 ] Remediation [ edit ] To provide sufficient preventive, redressive and deterrent remedies, judges in courts and others working in conflict resolution mechanisms take into account intersectional dimensions.

[ 115 ] Social work [ edit ] In the field of social work , proponents of intersectionality hold that unless service providers take intersectionality into account, they will be of less use for various segments of the population, such as those reporting domestic violence or disabled victims of abuse. According to intersectional theory, the practice of domestic violence counselors in the United States urging all women to report their abusers to police is of little use to women of color due to the history of racially motivated police brutality , and those counselors should adapt their counseling for women of color.

[ 116 ] Other fields [ edit ] Intersectionality has also been used in critical animal studies and ecofeminist literature, particularly in considering how our treatment of animals and the natural environment has an impact upon people.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] For example, factory farming can be understood not just as an issue of animal welfare but also as an issue of environmental justice , workers' rights, and public health which may disproportionately impact marginalized communities and peoples.

[ 119 ] Responses [ edit ] Academic [ edit ] A crowd of people in a Black Lives Matter protest in 2015. The main focus is four black women, one holding a sign.

Many feminists have positively engaged with the idea of intersectionality. Black feminists, in particular, suggest that an understanding of intersectionality is a vital element of gaining political and social equity and improving the societal structures that oppress individuals.

[ 120 ] Beverly Guy-Sheftall says, "black women experience a special kind of oppression and suffering in this country which is racist, sexist, and classist because of their dual race and gender identity and their limited access to economic resources".

[ 121 ] Stephanie A. Shields says that each part of someone's identity "serve as organizing features of social relations, mutually constitute, reinforce, and naturalize one another". Shields says that one aspect cannot exist individually, rather it "takes its meaning as a category in relation to another category." [ 122 ] Some scholars suggest intersectionality is often weaponized against other forms of feminism.

[ 12 ] [ 10 ] Barbara Tomlinson, of the Department of Feminist Studies at University of California, Santa Barbara , has been critical of the applications of intersectional theory to attack other ways of feminist thinking.

[ 12 ] Downing says intersectionality, seen through the framework of Andrea Dworkin 's class-based radical feminism , focuses too much on group identities and interests over individuality, leading to simplistic analysis and inaccurate assumptions about how a person's values and attitudes are determined.

[ 10 ] Iris Marion Young suggests that differences must be acknowledged in order to find unifying social justice issues that create coalitions that aid in changing society for the better.

[ 123 ] More specifically, this relates to the ideals of the National Council of Negro Women (NCNW).

[ 124 ] Scholar Jennifer Nash says that, using an Afropessimist framework, intersectionality may flatten the unique experiences of blackness and gender by treating different forms of identity as equivalent.

[ 125 ] [ page needed ] Nash also criticizes the superficial use of intersectionality by some institutions without addressing systematic inequalities.

[ 125 ] [ page needed ] Utility [ edit ] Among scholars, proponents of intersectionality cite its broad applicability and embrace of nuance, while its critics say it is overly complex or too broad.

[ 9 ] [ 6 ] [ 8 ] Sociologist Kathy Davis says intersectionality's broad applicability and consideration of multiple factors makes it a useful critical tool: "It encourages complexity, stimulates creativity, and avoids premature closure, tantalizing feminist scholars to raise new questions and explore uncharted territory." [ 9 ] Rekia Jibrin and Sara Salem suggest that because intersectional theory creates a unified but complex idea of anti-oppression politics, this creates difficulties achieving praxis and results in significant ambiguity in how the framework should be applied.

[ 8 ] As it is based in standpoint theory , Lisa Downing says the focus on subjective experiences can lead to contradictions and the inability to identify common causes of oppression.

[ 10 ] Brittney Cooper says that "intersectionality does not deserve our religious devotion" but that "as a conceptual and analytic tool for thinking about operations of power, intersectionality remains one of the most useful and expansive paradigms we have".

[ 6 ] In responding to critics of intersectionality who find it to be incomplete, or argue that it fails to recognize the specificity of women's oppression, Chiara Bottici says that "there is something specific about the oppression of women and that in order to fight it you have to fight " all other forms of oppression".

[ 126 ] Cheryl Townsend Gilkes and Joy James say there is value in focusing on the experiences of black women.

[ 30 ] Patricia Hill Collins also argues that without critical social theory , intersectionality falls flat. She argues that the mission of intersectionality currently within academia is too broad as a theoretical project, leading to its meaning being diluted both by the left and the right.

[ 127 ] As a result, intersectionality needs to take a position as a critical social theory in order to further it as a discipline and as a theory that can be utilized to dismantle systematic oppression.

[ 128 ] Research [ edit ] Many recent academics, such as Leslie McCall , have argued that the introduction of the intersectionality theory was vital to sociology and that before the development of the theory, there was little research that specifically addressed the experiences of people who are subjected to multiple forms of oppression within society.

[ 48 ] There have been recent attempts to apply the intersectionality theory to research that involves disability, gender, and poverty. For example, Jacqueline Moodley and Lauren Graham [ 129 ] focused on the intersection of disabled, impoverished, South African men and women to find what effect different combinations of the characteristics and identities had on outcomes of education, income, and employment. Also, researchers have used data from the National Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, EEOC, and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Research Project to explore the interactions among disability, gender, age, race, and employer characteristics and it connection to the outcome of workplace harassment.

[ 130 ] Others suggest that generating testable predictions from intersectionality theory can be complex.

[ 131 ] [ 13 ] Liam Kofi Bright, Daniel Malinsky,
and Morgan Thompson suggest a framework of graphical causal modeling to provide " empirically testable interpretations of intersectional theory" to address such concerns.

[ 14 ] An analysis of academic articles published through December 2019 found that there are no widely adopted quantitative methods to investigate research questions informed by intersectionality and provided recommendations on analytic best practices for future research.

[ 15 ] An analysis of academic articles published through May 2020 found that intersectionality is frequently misunderstood when bridging theory into quantitative methodology.

[ 13 ] Political [ edit ] Critics of intersectionality also say that it is used as a tool of neoliberalism . Cooper says: "To suggest as Puar does that intersectionality is a tool of a neoliberal agenda rather than a tool that works against it is a line of thinking that should be vigilantly guarded against." [ 6 ] Jibrin and Salem suggest that, while intersectionality has radical origins, its ambiguities mean it has been embraced by neoliberal feminists, undermining its radical nature: [ 8 ] Given the empirical examples presented, we are convinced that the rise of class domination in what we know as the neoliberal university creates the conditions for concepts like intersectionality to become diluted and commodified. By depoliticizing intersectionality neoliberal market regimes empty radical struggle of structural critiques and translate them into palatable (unthreatening) narratives of social justice, multiculturalisms.

[ 8 ] Conservatives such as American conservative commentator Ben Shapiro suggest that intersectionality creates a "hierarchy of victimhood", where individuals are categorized as "members of a victim class by virtue of membership in a particular group".

[ 11 ] On the international political scale, intersectional lenses have not been applied to the topic of human right laws. Gauthier de Beco found using an intersectional lens that people with disabilities that belong to racial or ethnic, gender, and age minorities lack suitable human rights.

[ 132 ] Others [ edit ] Philosopher Tommy J. Curry published several works suggesting intersectional feminism implicitly adopts, and thereby perpetuates, harmful stereotypes of Black men.

[ 133 ] Curry says Crenshaw's intersectional model depends on second-wave feminist ideas, imported from subculture of violence theorists who argue that Black masculinity is compensatory and sexually predatory. In so doing, Curry says that the intersectional feminist concept of " Double Jeopardy " is fundamentally mistaken because intersectionality is over-determined by feminist politics. Curry also says that Crenshaw's conclusions in Mapping the Margins rely on gender essentialism that erases Black male victims of intimate partner violence, sexual assault, and lethal violence.

[ 134 ] See also [ edit ] Class discrimination Class reductionism Disability justice Humanism Implicit stereotype Kyriarchy Matrix of domination Misogynoir Oppression Olympics Polylogism Progressive stack Speciesism Syndemic Woke Womanism References [ edit ] ^ Deckha, M. (November 2008).

"Intersectionality and posthumanist visions of equality" .

Wisconsin Journal of Law, Gender & Society .

XXIII (2).

^ Holley, Lynn C.; Mendoza, Natasha S.; Del-Colle, Melissa M.; Bernard, Marquita Lynette (2 April 2016). "Heterosexism, racism, and mental illness discrimination: Experiences of people with mental health conditions and their families".

Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services .

28 (2): 93– 116.

doi : 10.1080/10538720.2016.1155520 .

S2CID 147454725 .

^ Zinn, Maxine Baca; Dill, Bonnie Thornton (1996).

"Theorizing Difference from Multiracial Feminism" .

Feminist Studies .

22 (2): 321– 331.

doi : 10.2307/3178416 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0022.206 .

JSTOR 3178416 .

ProQuest 233181156 Gale A18800342 .

^ bell hooks (2015).

Ain't I a woman: Black women and feminism (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-82148-4 .

OCLC 886381091 .

^ a b "What Does Intersectional Feminism Actually Mean?" . International Women's Development Agency. 11 May 2018.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2019.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Cooper, Brittney (2016). "Intersectionality". In Disch, Lisa; Hawkesworth, Mary (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Feminist Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

385– 406.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199328581.013.20 .

ISBN 978-0-19-932858-1 .

^ Crenshaw, Kimberlé (October 2016).

The urgency of intersectionality . TEDWomen 2016.

^ a b c d e f Jibrin, Rekia; Salem, Sara (2015).

"Revisiting intersectionality: reflections on theory and praxis" (PDF) .

Trans-Scripts .

5 .

ISSN 2160-6730 .

^ a b c Davis, Kathy (1 April 2008). "Intersectionality as buzzword: A sociology of science perspective on what makes a feminist theory successful".

Feminist Theory .

9 : 67– 85.

doi : 10.1177/1464700108086364 .

S2CID 145295170 .

^ a b c d e Downing, Lisa (November 2018).

"The body politic: Gender, the right wing and 'identity category violations' " (PDF) .

French Cultural Studies .

29 (4): 367– 377.

doi : 10.1177/0957155818791075 .

S2CID 165115259 .

^ a b c d Coaston, Jane (28 May 2019).

"The intersectionality wars" .

Vox .

^ a b c Tomlinson, Barbara (Summer 2013). "To Tell the Truth and Not Get Trapped: Desire, Distance, and Intersectionality at the Scene of Argument".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

38 (4): 993– 1017.

doi : 10.1086/669571 .

S2CID 144641071 .

^ a b c d Bauer, Greta R.; Churchill, Siobhan M.; Mahendran, Mayuri; Walwyn, Chantel; Lizotte, Daniel; Villa-Rueda, Alma Angelica (June 2021).

"Intersectionality in quantitative research: A systematic review of its emergence and applications of theory and methods" .

SSM - Population Health .

14 100798.

doi : 10.1016/j.ssmph.2021.100798 .

PMC 8095182 .

PMID 33997247 .

^ a b Bright, Liam Kofi; Malinsky, Daniel; Thompson, Morgan (17 December 2015). "Causally Interpreting Intersectionality Theory".

Philosophy of Science .

83 (1): 60– 81.

doi : 10.1086/684173 .

S2CID 53695694 .

^ a b Guan, Alice; Thomas, Marilyn; Vittinghoff, Eric; Bowleg, Lisa; Mangurian, Christina; Wesson, Paul (December 2021).

"An investigation of quantitative methods for assessing intersectionality in health research: A systematic review" .

SSM - Population Health .

16 100977.

doi : 10.1016/j.ssmph.2021.100977 .

PMC 8626832 .

PMID 34869821 .

^ Ritzer, George ; Stepinisky, Jeffrey (2013).

Contemporary sociological theory and its classical roots: the basics (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp.

204– 207.

ISBN 978-0-07-802678-2 .

^ Schiek, Dagmar; Lawson, Anna (2011).

European Union Non-discrimination Law and Intersectionality: Investigating the Triangle of Racial, Gender and Disability Discrimination . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7980-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Mann, Susan A.; Kelley, Lori R. (August 1997). "Standing at the crossroads of modernist thought: Collins, Smith, and the new feminist epistemologies".

Gender & Society .

11 (4): 391– 408.

doi : 10.1177/089124397011004002 .

S2CID 55757598 .

^ Crenshaw, Kimberlé (14 March 2016).

Kimberlé Crenshaw – On Intersectionality – keynote – WOW 2016 (Video).

Southbank Centre via YouTube . Retrieved 31 May 2016 .

^ Duran, Antonio; Jones, Susan R. (2020). "Intersectionality". In Casey, Zachary A. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Critical Whiteness Studies in Education . Brill. pp.

310– 320.

doi : 10.1163/9789004444836_041 .

ISBN 978-90-04-44483-6 .

S2CID 242630915 .

^ a b c d e f g Crenshaw, Kimberle (July 1991). "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of Color".

Stanford Law Review .

43 (6): 1241– 1299.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.695.5934 .

doi : 10.2307/1229039 .

JSTOR 1229039 .

S2CID 24661090 .

Reprinted in: Crenshaw, Kimberlé; Gotanda, Neil; Peller, Gary; Thomas, Kendall, eds. (1995).

Critical Race Theory: The Key Writings that Formed the Movement . New York: The New Press. pp.

357– 384.

ISBN 978-1-56584-271-7 .

^ a b c d Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1989).

"Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: a black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics" .

University of Chicago Legal Forum .

1989 (1): 139– 167.

ISSN 0892-5593 .

Full text at Archive.org ^ a b Cho, Sumi; Crenshaw, Kimberlé Williams; McCall, Leslie (June 2013).

"Toward a Field of Intersectionality Studies: Theory, Applications, and Praxis" .

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

38 (4): 785– 810.

doi : 10.1086/669608 .

JSTOR 10.1086/669608 .

S2CID 143982074 .

^ Davis, Angela Y.

(1983).

Women, Race & Class . New York: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-394-71351-9 .

^ a b c d e Collins, Patricia Hill (2015).

"Intersectionality's definitional dilemmas" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

41 : 1– 20.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-soc-073014-112142 .

S2CID 145739525 .

^ Brah, Avtar; Phoenix, Ann (15 January 2013).

"Ain't I A Woman? Revisiting Intersectionality" .

Journal of International Women's Studies .

5 (3): 75– 86.

^ Truth, Sojourner (2001). " 'Speech at the Woman's Rights Convention, Akron, Ohio' (1851)". In Ritchie, Joy; Ronald, Kate (eds.).

Available Means: An Anthology Of Women's Rhetoric(s) . University of Pittsburgh Press. pp.

144– 146.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt5hjqnj.28 .

ISBN 978-0-8229-7975-3 .

JSTOR j.ctt5hjqnj.28 .

^ a b Cooper, Anna Julia (2016) [1892]. "The colored woman's office". In Lemert, Charles (ed.).

Social theory: the multicultural, global, and classic readings (6th ed.). Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-8133-5044-8 .

^ Cooper, Anna Julia (1892).

A Voice from the South . Aldine Printing House.

ISBN 9780598556370 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Collins 2000 , p. 44.

^ "Jane Crow: Pauli
Murray's Intersections and Antidiscrimination
Law." Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 29, no. 1 (2013): 155–160.

^ a b c Mays, V. M., & Ghavami, N. (2018). "History, aspirations, and transformations of intersectionality: Focusing on gender." In C. B. Travis, J. W. White, A. Rutherford, W. S. Williams, S. L. Cook, & K. F. Wyche (Eds.), APA handbook of the psychology of women: History, theory, and battlegrounds (pp. 541–566). American Psychological Association.

https://doi.org/10.1037/0000059-028 ^ "The Roots of Intersectionality | University of Rochester School of Nursing" .

son.rochester.edu .

^ Wiegman, Robyn (2012).

"Critical kinship (universal aspirations and intersectional judgements)" . In Wiegman, Robyn (ed.).

Object lessons . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. p. 244.

doi : 10.1515/9780822394945 .

ISBN 978-0-8223-5160-3 .

S2CID 242615176 .

Citing: Hull, Gloria T.; Bell-Scott, Patricia; Smith, Barbara (1982).

All the women are White, all the blacks are men, but some of us are brave: black women's studies . Old Westbury, N.Y.: Feminist Press .

ISBN 978-0-912670-92-8 .

^ Johnson, Amanda Walker (2 October 2017). "Resituating the Crossroads: Theoretical Innovations in Black Feminist Ethnography".

Souls .

19 (4): 401– 415.

doi : 10.1080/10999949.2018.1434350 .

S2CID 149590053 .

^ Norman, Brian (2007). " 'We' in Redux: The Combahee River Collective's black Feminist Statement ".

differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies .

18 (2): 104.

doi : 10.1215/10407391-2007-004 .

^ HoSang, Daniel M. (2020).

"Intersectionality" . In Burgett, Bruce; Hendler, Glenn (eds.).

Keywords for American cultural studies (3rd ed.). New York University Press. pp.

142– 144.

doi : 10.18574/9781479867455-038 (inactive 1 July 2025).

ISBN 978-1-4798-6745-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b Adewunmi, Bim (2 April 2014).

"Kimberlé Crenshaw on intersectionality: 'I wanted to come up with an everyday metaphor that anyone could use' " .

New Statesman . Archived from the original on 18 May 2018.

^ a b Buikema, Rosemarie; van der Tuin, Iris, eds. (2009).

Doing Gender in Media, Art and Culture: A Comprehensive Guide to Gender Studies . London: Routeledge. pp.

63– 65.

ISBN 978-0-415-49383-3 .

^ hooks, bell (2014).

Ain't I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism (2nd ed.). Routledge (published 14 October 2014).

ISBN 978-1138821514 .

^ hooks, bell (2014) [1984].

Feminist Theory: from margin to center (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-82166-8 .

^ Roig, Emilia (6 March 2018).

"Intersectionality in Europe: a depoliticized concept?" .

Völkerrechtsblog .

doi : 10.17176/20180306-142929 .

^ Moraga, Cherríe; Anzaldúa, Gloria (11 February 2015).

This Bridge Called My Back, Fourth Edition: Writings by Radical Women of Color . SUNY Press. p. xxii.

ISBN 9781438454382 .

Nisha Agarwal (11 January 2010).

"This Bridge Called My Back: A Retro Look at Women of Color and Power" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 13 January 2010 .

^ Aenerud, Rebecca " Thinking Again: This Bridge Called My Back and the Challenge to Whiteness " in AnaLouise Keating; Gloria E. Anzaldúa (2002).

This Bridge We Call Home: Radical Visions for Transformation . p. 71.

^ a b King, Deborah K. (1 October 1988). "Multiple Jeopardy, Multiple Consciousness: The Context of a Black Feminist Ideology".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

14 (1): 42– 72.

doi : 10.1086/494491 .

S2CID 143446946 .

^ "Kimberlé Crenshaw on Intersectionality, More than Two Decades Later" . Columbia Law School. 8 June 2017 . Retrieved 14 May 2022 .

^ Thomas, Sheila; Crenshaw, Kimberlé (Spring 2004).

"Intersectionality: the double bind of race and gender" (PDF) .

Perspectives Magazine .

American Bar Association . p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012.

^ a b c McCall, Leslie (March 2005). "The Complexity of Intersectionality".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

30 (3): 1771– 1800.

doi : 10.1086/426800 .

hdl : 20.500.12209/1062 .

JSTOR 10.1086/426800 .

S2CID 16690122 .

^ Thompson, Becky (2002). "Multiracial Feminism: Recasting the Chronology of Second Wave Feminism".

Feminist Studies .

28 (2): 337– 360.

doi : 10.2307/3178747 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0028.210 .

JSTOR 3178747 .

S2CID 152165042 .

^ "What Is Intersectionality? | Intersections of Gender" .

www.ualberta.ca . Retrieved 11 May 2023 .

^ a b Fixmer-Oraiz, Natalie; Wood, Julia (2015).

Gendered Lives: Communication, Gender, & Culture . Boston, Mass.: Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1-305-28027-4 .

^ Grady, Constance (20 March 2018).

"The waves of feminism, and why people keep fighting over them, explained" .

Vox . Archived from the original on 5 April 2019.

^ Mann, Susan A.; Huffman, Douglas J. (January 2005). "The decentering of second wave feminism and the rise of the third wave".

Science & Society .

69 (1): 56– 91.

doi : 10.1521/siso.69.1.56.56799 .

JSTOR 40404229 .

^ "$1 Million Berggruen Philosophy Prize Awarded to Patricia Hill Collins – Berggruen Institute" .

www.berggruen.org . 22 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 July 2024 .

^ Davis, Kathy (2014). "Intersectionality as Critical Methodology". In Lykke, Nina (ed.).

Writing academic texts differently: intersectional feminist methodologies and the playful art of writing . Routledge Advances in Feminist Studies and Intersectionality. London: Routledge. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-415-50225-2 .

^ Choi, Jin Young; Smith, Mitzi J. (24 September 2020).

Minoritized Women Reading Race and Ethnicity: Intersectional Approaches to Constructed Identity and Early Christian Texts . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 112.

ISBN 978-1-4985-9159-1 .

^ Soundararajan, Thenmozhi (2022).

The Trauma of Caste . United States of America: North Atlantic Books (published 15 November 2022).

ISBN 9781623177669 .

^ Hill Collins, Patricia (1 June 2002).

Black Feminist Thought (0 ed.). Routledge. pp.

45– 46.

doi : 10.4324/9780203900055 .

ISBN 978-1-135-96014-8 .

^ a b Browne, Irene; Misra, Joya (August 2003). "The Intersection of Gender and Race in the Labor Market".

Annual Review of Sociology .

29 (1): 487– 513.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100016 .

JSTOR 30036977 .

^ Bottici, Chiara (2017). "Bodies in Plural: Towards an Anarcha-feminist Manifesto".

Thesis Eleven .

142 (1): 95.

doi : 10.1177/0725513617727793 .

S2CID 148911963 .

^ Lugones, María (2007).

"Heterosexualism and the Colonial / Modern Gender System" .

Hypatia .

22 (1): 186– 209.

ISSN 0887-5367 .

JSTOR 4640051 .

^ Viveros Vigoya, Mara (1 October 2016).

"La interseccionalidad: una aproximación situada a la dominación" .

Debate Feminista .

52 : 1– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.df.2016.09.005 .

ISSN 0188-9478 .

^ a b c d e Evans, Elizabeth (1 September 2022).

"Political intersectionality and disability activism: Approaching and understanding difference and unity" .

The Sociological Review .

70 (5): 986– 1004.

doi : 10.1177/00380261221111231 .

ISSN 0038-0261 .

^ a b c d Cho, Sumi; Crenshaw, Kimberlé Williams; McCall, Leslie (June 2013).

"Toward a Field of Intersectionality Studies: Theory, Applications, and Praxis" .

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

38 (4): 785– 810.

doi : 10.1086/669608 .

ISSN 0097-9740 .

^ Homan, Patricia; Brown, Tyson H.; King, Brittany (1 September 2021).

"Structural Intersectionality as a New Direction for Health Disparities Research" .

Journal of Health and Social Behavior .

62 (3): 350– 370.

doi : 10.1177/00221465211032947 .

ISSN 0022-1465 .

PMC 8628816 .

PMID 34355603 .

^ a b c Pedulla, David S. (March 2014). "The Positive Consequences of Negative Stereotypes: Race, Sexual Orientation, and the Job Application Process".

Social Psychology Quarterly .

77 (1): 75– 94.

doi : 10.1177/0190272513506229 .

S2CID 144311164 .

^ Durfee, Alesha (1 April 2021).

"The Use of Structural Intersectionality as a Method to Analyze How the Domestic Violence Civil Protective Order Process Replicates Inequality" .

Violence Against Women .

27 (5): 639– 665.

doi : 10.1177/1077801220958495 .

ISSN 1077-8012 .

PMID 32965175 .

^ Homan, Patricia; Brown, Tyson H.; King, Brittany (1 September 2021).

"Structural Intersectionality as a New Direction for Health Disparities Research" .

Journal of Health and Social Behavior .

62 (3): 350– 370.

doi : 10.1177/00221465211032947 .

ISSN 0022-1465 .

PMC 8628816 .

PMID 34355603 .

^ Azhar, Sameena; Alvarez, Antonia R. G.; Farina, Anne S. J.; Klumpner, Susan (1 August 2021).

" 'You're So Exotic Looking': An Intersectional Analysis of Asian American and Pacific Islander Stereotypes" .

Affilia .

36 (3): 282– 301.

doi : 10.1177/08861099211001460 .

ISSN 0886-1099 .

Coupled with these racialized stereotypes regarding the assumed higher education and wealth of APIs are coexisting stereotypes regarding their gender and sexuality. In American context, Asian women are often portrayed in overtly sexualized ways as the objects of desire for men, particularly white men (Sue et al., 2007). Conversely, Asian men are portrayed as effeminate, emasculated, weak, and sexually undesirable. [...] API sexuality is again shaped in ways that maintain the social and political dominance of white men.

^ a b hooks, bell (2007).

Black looks: race and representation (Nachdr. ed.). Boston, Mass: South End Press.

ISBN 978-0-89608-433-9 .

^ a b Matsuda, Mari J.; Lawrence, Charles R. III; Delgado, Richard; Crenshaw, Kimberlé (2019).

Words that wound: critical race theory, assaultive speech, and the First Amendment . New York London: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 978-0-367-31404-0 .

^ Ash, Elliot (April 2022), Visual Representation and Stereotypes in News Media (PDF) , CESifo Group Munich ^ a b c Belleau, Marie-Claire (2007). "L'intersectionalité: Feminisms in a divided world; Québec-Canada". In Orr, Deborah; et al. (eds.).

Feminist Politics: identity, difference, and agency . Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp.

51– 62.

ISBN 978-0-7425-4778-0 .

^ Henrich, J.; Heine, S. J.; Norenzayan, A. (2010).

"The weirdest people in the world?" (PDF) .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

33 ( 2– 3): 61– 83.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X0999152X .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0013-26A1-6 .

PMID 20550733 .

S2CID 220918842 .

^ a b c Herr, Ranjoo Seodu (1 March 2014).

"Reclaiming Third World Feminism" .

Meridians .

12 (1): 1– 30.

doi : 10.2979/meridians.12.1.1 .

S2CID 145668809 .

^ Kurtis, T.; Adams, G. (2015).

"Decolonizing liberation: Toward a transnational feminist psychology" .

Journal of Social and Political Psychology .

3 (2): 388– 413.

doi : 10.5964/jspp.v3i1.326 .

hdl : 1808/21823 .

JSTOR 3178747 .

^ a b Collins, Lynn H.; Machizawa, Sayaka; Rice, Joy K. (2019).

Transnational Psychology of Women: Expanding International and Intersectional Approaches (1st ed.). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.

ISBN 978-1-4338-3069-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Grabe, Shelly; Else-Quest, Nicole M. (22 May 2012). "The Role of Transnational Feminism in Psychology: Complementary Visions".

Psychology of Women Quarterly .

doi : 10.1177/0361684312442164 .

S2CID 53585351 .

^ Patil, Vrushali (1 June 2013). "From Patriarchy to Intersectionality: A Transnational Feminist Assessment of How Far We've Really Come".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

38 (4): 847– 867.

doi : 10.1086/669560 .

JSTOR 10.1086/669560 .

S2CID 144680534 .

^ Mohanty, Chandra Talpade (1984). "Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses".

Boundary 2 . 12/13: 333– 358.

doi : 10.2307/302821 .

JSTOR 302821 .

INIST 11910852 .

^ Bose, Christine E. (February 2012). "Intersectionality and Global Gender Inequality".

Gender & Society .

26 (1): 67– 72.

doi : 10.1177/0891243211426722 .

S2CID 145233506 .

^ Hancock, Ange-Marie (June 2007). "Intersectionality as a normative and empirical paradigm".

Politics & Gender .

3 (2): 248– 254.

doi : 10.1017/S1743923X07000062 .

S2CID 144145167 .

^ Holvino, Evangelina (May 2010). "Intersections: The simultaneity of race, gender and class in organization studies".

Gender, Work & Organization .

17 (3): 248– 277.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0432.2008.00400.x .

^ a b Jones, Sandra J. (December 2003). "Complex subjectivities: class, ethnicity, and race in women's narratives of upward mobility".

Journal of Social Issues .

59 (4): 803– 820.

doi : 10.1046/j.0022-4537.2003.00091.x .

^ Kelly, Ursula A. (April–June 2009). "Integrating intersectionality and biomedicine in health disparities research".

Advances in Nursing Science .

32 (2): E42 – E56 .

doi : 10.1097/ANS.0b013e3181a3b3fc .

PMID 19461221 .

S2CID 26510963 .

^ a b Viruell-Fuentes, Edna A.; Miranda, Patricia Y.; Abdulrahim, Sawsan (December 2012). "More than culture: Structural racism, intersectionality theory, and immigrant health".

Social Science & Medicine .

75 (12): 2099– 2106.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.12.037 .

PMID 22386617 .

S2CID 12047435 .

^ Ladson-Billings, Gloria; Tate, William F. (2016).

"Toward a Critical Race Theory of Education" (PDF) .

Critical Race Theory in Education . pp.

10– 31.

doi : 10.4324/9781315709796-2 .

ISBN 978-1-315-70979-6 .

S2CID 140276325 .

^ Levine-Rasky, Cynthia (March 2011). "Intersectionality theory applied to whiteness and middle-classness".

Social Identities .

17 (2): 239– 253.

doi : 10.1080/13504630.2011.558377 .

S2CID 145104826 .

^ a b Cramer, Elizabeth P.; Plummer, Sara-Beth (2010).

"Social work practice with abused persons with disabilities" . In Lockhart, Lettie; Danis, Fran S. (eds.).

Domestic violence: intersectionality and culturally competent practice . New York: Columbia University Press. pp.

131– 134.

ISBN 978-0-231-14027-0 .

^ Chenoweth, Lesley (December 1996). "Violence and women with disabilities: silence and paradox".

Violence Against Women .

2 (4): 391– 411.

doi : 10.1177/1077801296002004004 .

S2CID 56939366 .

^ a b "CF 44: Multilingualism, Multimodality, and Accessibility by Laura Gonzales and Janine Butler" .

compositionforum.com . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ Craig, Collin Lamont; Perryman-Clark, Staci Maree (Spring 2011).

"Troubling the Boundaries: (De)Constructing WPA Identities at the Intersections of Race and Gender" (PDF) .

Council of Writing Program Administrators .

34 (2): 37– 58 – via WPA Journal Archives.

^ Christoffersen, Ashlee (1 October 2021).

"The politics of intersectional practice: competing concepts of intersectionality" (PDF) .

Policy & Politics .

49 (4): 573– 593.

doi : 10.1332/030557321X16194316141034 .

ISSN 1470-8442 .

S2CID 236668880 .

^ Chow, Esther Ngan-Ling; Segal, Marcia Texler; Lin, Tan (2011).

Analyzing Gender, Intersectionality, and Multiple Inequalities: Global-transnational and Local Contexts . Emerald Group Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-85724-744-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ Howell, Elizabeth A. (June 2018).

"Reducing Disparities in Severe Maternal Morbidity and Mortality" .

Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology .

61 (2): 387– 399.

doi : 10.1097/GRF.0000000000000349 .

ISSN 1532-5520 .

PMC 5915910 .

PMID 29346121 .

^ Hoffman, Kelly M.; Trawalter, Sophie; Axt, Jordan R.; Oliver, M. Norman (19 April 2016).

"Racial bias in pain assessment and treatment recommendations, and false beliefs about biological differences between blacks and whites" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

113 (16): 4296– 4301.

Bibcode : 2016PNAS..113.4296H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1516047113 .

ISSN 1091-6490 .

PMC 4843483 .

PMID 27044069 .

^ Lauderdale, Diane S. (2006).

"Birth Outcomes for Arabic-Named Women in California Before and After September 11" .

Demography .

43 (1): 185– 201.

doi : 10.1353/dem.2006.0008 .

PMID 16579214 .

S2CID 12752541 .

^ Rodriguez, Carmen B.; Wu, Stephanie M.; Alimena, Stephanie; McGregor, Alecia J.; Stephenson, Briana JK (10 December 2024), A Bayesian Mixture Model Approach to Examining Neighborhood Social Determinants of Health Disparities in Endometrial Cancer Care in Massachusetts , arXiv : 2412.07134 ^ Williams, David R.; Cooper, Lisa A. (19 February 2019).

"Reducing Racial Inequities in Health: Using What We Already Know to Take Action" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

16 (4): 606.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph16040606 .

ISSN 1660-4601 .

PMC 6406315 .

PMID 30791452 .

^ Beard, Sharon; Freeman, Kenda; Velasco, Maria L.; Boyd, Windy; Chamberlain, Toccara; Latoni, Alfonso; Lasko, Denise; Lunn, Ruth M.; O’Fallon, Liam; Packenham, Joan; Smarr, Melissa M.; Arnette, Robin; Cavalier-Keck, Crystal; Keck, Jason; Muhammad, Naeema (22 January 2024).

"Racism as a public health issue in environmental health disparities and environmental justice: working toward solutions" .

Environmental Health .

23 (1): 8.

Bibcode : 2024EnvHe..23....8B .

doi : 10.1186/s12940-024-01052-8 .

ISSN 1476-069X .

PMC 10802013 .

PMID 38254105 .

^ Novak, Nicole L.; Lira, Natalie; O’Connor, Kate E.; Harlow, Siobán D.; Kardia, Sharon L. R.; Stern, Alexandra Minna (May 2018).

"Disproportionate Sterilization of Latinos Under California's Eugenic Sterilization Program, 1920–1945" .

American Journal of Public Health .

108 (5): 611– 613.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2018.304369 .

ISSN 0090-0036 .

PMC 5888070 .

PMID 29565671 .

^ Borrero, Sonya; Zite, Nikki; Creinin, Mitchell D. (October 2012).

"Federally funded sterilization: time to rethink policy?" .

American Journal of Public Health .

102 (10): 1822– 1825.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2012.300850 .

ISSN 1541-0048 .

PMC 3490665 .

PMID 22897531 .

^ DeCormier Plosky, Willyanne; Ne’eman, Ari; Silverman, Benjamin C.; Strauss, David H.; Francis, Leslie P.; Stein, Michael A.; Bierer, Barbara E. (October 2022).

"Excluding People With Disabilities From Clinical Research: Eligibility Criteria Lack Clarity And Justification" .

Health Affairs .

41 (10): 1423– 1432.

doi : 10.1377/hlthaff.2022.00520 .

ISSN 0278-2715 .

PMID 36190895 .

^ "Sister Song" .

Sister Song . Retrieved 29 October 2024 .

^ Ryssdal, Kai; Hollenhorst, Maria (8 June 2020).

"How's the economy? vs. how's the economy for each of us?" .

Marketplace .

^ "In Our Own Voice - National Black Women's Reproductive Justice Agenda" .

blackrj.org . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ "Black Mamas Matter Alliance - Advancing Black Maternal Health, Rights & Justice" .

Black Mamas Matter Alliance . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ "Disability Justice" .

Disability Justice . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ African American Policy Form. (n.d.).

A primer on intersectionality .

https://www.aapf.org/_files/ugd/62e126_19f84b6cbf6f4660bac198ace49b9287.pdf ^ a b Samuelson, William; Zeckhauser, Richard (1 March 1988). "Status quo bias in decision making".

Journal of Risk and Uncertainty .

1 (1): 7– 59.

doi : 10.1007/BF00055564 .

ISSN 1573-0476 .

S2CID 5641133 .

^ Remedios, Jessica D.; Chasteen, Alison L.; Rule, Nicholas O.; Plaks, Jason E. (November 2011). "Impressions at the intersection of ambiguous and obvious social categories: Does gay+Black=likable?".

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

47 (6): 1312– 1315.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2011.05.015 .

hdl : 1807/33199 .

^ Fattoracci, Elisa S. M.; Revels-Macalinao, Michelle; Huynh, Que-Lam (19 March 2020).

"Greater than the sum of racism and heterosexism: Intersectional microaggressions toward racial/ethnic and sexual minority group members" .

Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology .

27 (2): 176– 188.

doi : 10.1037/cdp0000329 .

PMID 32191048 .

S2CID 213180686 .

^ "Construct | Psychology, Measurement & Testing | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .

^ a b Grabe, Shelly (2020).

"Research Methods in the Study of Intersectionality in Psychology: Examples Informed by a Decade of Collaborative Work With Majority World Women's Grassroots Activism" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

11 .

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.494309 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 7658295 .

PMID 33192755 .

^ Nissen, A. (2023).

"Gender-Transformative Remedies for Women Human Rights Defenders" .

Business and Human Rights Journal .

8 (3): 381– 384.

doi : 10.1017/bhj.2023.41 .

hdl : 1887/3716539 .

^ Bent-Goodley, Tricia B.; Chase, Lorraine; Circo, Elizabeth A.; Antá Rodgers, Selena T. (2010).

"Our survival, our strengths: understanding the experiences of African American women in abusive relationships" . In Lockhart, Lettie; Danis, Fran S. (eds.).

Domestic violence: intersectionality and culturally competent practice . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 77.

ISBN 978-0-231-14027-0 .

^ Falcón, Sylvanna M. (11 July 2023), "Intersectionality, Global Patriarchy, and the Power of Feminist Performance", The Routledge International Handbook of Intersectionality Studies , London: Routledge, pp.

113– 121, doi : 10.4324/9781003089520-11 , ISBN 978-1-003-08952-0 ^ Salter, Colin (1 January 2015).

"The animal question and condition: intersectionality and Critical Animal Studies in the Asia-Pacific" .

Animal Studies Journal .

4 (1): 1– 11.

ISSN 2201-3008 .

^ a b Fox, Laura (2024).

"The Intersectionality of Environmental Injustice, Other Societal Harms, and Farmed Animal Welfare" .

Environmental Justice .

17 (2): 101– 109.

Bibcode : 2024EnvJ...17..101F .

doi : 10.1089/env.2021.0125 .

ISSN 1939-4071 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ Hutchinson, Janet R. (2011). "Feminist theories and their application to public administration". In D'Agostino, Maria; Levine, Helisse (eds.).

Women in Public Administration: theory and practice . Sudbury, Mass.: Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-7637-7725-8 .

^ Guy-Sheftall, Beverly (1995).

Words of fire: an anthology of African-American feminist thought . New York: New Press.

ISBN 978-1-56584-256-4 .

^ Shields, Stephanie (18 July 2008).

"Gender: An Intersectionality Perspective" (PDF) .

^ Carastathis, Anna (2016). Leong, Karen J.; Smith, Andrea (eds.).

Intersectionality: Origins, Contestations, Horizons . University of Nebraska Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1fzhfz8 .

ISBN 978-0-8032-8555-2 .

JSTOR j.ctt1fzhfz8 .

[ page needed ] ^ Mueller, Ruth Caston (1954). "The National Council of Negro Women, Inc".

Negro History Bulletin .

18 (2): 27– 31.

JSTOR 44175227 .

^ a b Nash, Jennifer C. (6 December 2018).

Black Feminism Reimagined: After Intersectionality . Duke University Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv111jhd0 .

ISBN 978-1-4780-0225-3 .

JSTOR j.ctv111jhd0 .

^ Bottici, Chiara (2017). "Bodies in Plural: Towards an Anarcha-feminist Manifesto".

Thesis Eleven .

142 (1): 95.

doi : 10.1177/0725513617727793 .

S2CID 148911963 .

^ Collins, Patricia Hill (23 August 2019).

Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory . Duke University Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv11hpkdj .

ISBN 978-1-4780-0709-8 .

JSTOR j.ctv11hpkdj .

^ Collins, Patricia Hill (23 August 2019).

Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory . Duke University Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv11hpkdj .

ISBN 978-1-4780-0709-8 .

JSTOR j.ctv11hpkdj .

^ Moodley, Jacqueline; and Graham, Lauren (3 April 2015).

"The importance of intersectionality in disability and gender studies" .

Agenda .

29 (2): 24– 33.

doi : 10.1080/10130950.2015.1041802 .

ISSN 1013-0950 .

^ Shaw, Linda R.; Chan, Fong; McMahon, Brian T. (1 January 2012).

"Intersectionality and Disability Harassment: The Interactive Effects of Disability, Race, Age, and Gender" .

Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin .

55 (2): 82– 91.

doi : 10.1177/0034355211431167 .

ISSN 0034-3552 .

^ Bowleg, Lisa (1 September 2008). "When Black + Lesbian + Woman ≠ Black Lesbian Woman: The Methodological Challenges of Qualitative and Quantitative Intersectionality Research".

Sex Roles .

59 (5): 312– 325.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-008-9400-z .

ISSN 1573-2762 .

S2CID 49303030 .

^ de Beco, Gauthier (27 May 2020).

"Intersectionality and disability in international human rights law" .

The International Journal of Human Rights .

24 (5): 593– 614.

doi : 10.1080/13642987.2019.1661241 .

ISSN 1364-2987 .

^ Tommy J. Curry (2021). "Decolonizing the Intersection: Black Male Studies as a Critique of Intersectionality's Indebtedness to Subculture of Violence Theory". In Robert Beshara (ed.).

Critical Psychology Praxis: Psychosocial Non-Alignment to Modernity/Coloniality . New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003119678-11 .

ISBN 978-1-003-11967-8 .

S2CID 234091480 .

^ Curry, Tommy (2018).

The Man-Not: Race, Class, Genre, and the Dilemmas of Black Manhood . Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4399-1486-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Carastathis, Anna (2013).

"Basements and Intersections" .

Hypatia .

28 (4): 698– 715.

doi : 10.1111/hypa.12044 .

ISSN 0887-5367 .

JSTOR 24542081 .

S2CID 143824123 – via ResearchGate.

Carastathis, Anna (2014).

"The Concept of Intersectionality in Feminist Theory" .

Philosophy Compass .

9 (5): 304– 314.

doi : 10.1111/phc3.12129 – via ResearchGate.

Collins, Patricia Hill (1990).

"Defining Black Feminist Thought" . Women of Color Web. Archived from the original on 11 December 2006.

Bernroider, Lucie; Born, Anthony; Kulz, Christy; Gang, Sung, eds. (2025).

Intersectionality and the City: Exploring Violence and Inequality in Urban Space .

Taylor & Francis .

doi : 10.4324/9781003529729 .

ISBN 9781003529729 .

Collins, Patricia Hill; Bilge, Sirma (2020).

Intersectionality (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-1-5095-3967-3 .

Hankivsky, Olena (2014).

Intersectionality 101 (PDF) . Vancouver, B.C.: Institute for Intersectionality Research & Policy, Simon Fraser University.

ISBN 978-0-86491-355-5 . Archived from the original on 23 April 2017.

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Intersectionality at Wikiquote The dictionary definition of intersectionality at Wiktionary "Justice Rising: moving intersectionally in the age of post-everything" (podcast). Public Lectures and Events. London School of Economics. 26 March 2014.

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intersectionality&oldid=1306306323 " Categories : Intersectionality Intersectional feminism Feminist theory 2010s controversies 2020s controversies Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2020 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2021 CS1: long volume value Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2025 United States-centric Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles with excerpts Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2025 Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2017 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2025 CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 02:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intersectionality 45 languages Add topic

