Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Middle Ages 1.2 Renaissance 1.3 Baroque to Romantic (Catholic and Lutheran traditions) 1.4 20th and 21st century 1.4.1 Musical reforms of Pius X 2 Major works Toggle Major works subsection 2.1 Post-Renaissance 2.2 20th century 2.3 21st century 2.4 Masses written for the Anglican liturgy 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mass (music) 41 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of sacred musical composition Missa Virgo parens Christi by Jacobus Barbireau The Mass ( Latin : missa ) is a form of sacred musical composition that sets the invariable portions of the Christian Eucharistic liturgy (principally that of the Catholic Church , the Anglican Communion , and Lutheranism ), known as the Mass .

Most Masses are settings of the liturgy in Latin , the sacred language of the Catholic Church's Roman Rite , but there are a significant number written in the languages of non-Catholic countries where vernacular worship has long been the norm. For example, there have been many Masses written in English for a United States context since the Second Vatican Council , and others (often called "communion services") for the Church of England .

Masses can be a cappella , that is, without an independent accompaniment , or they can be accompanied by instrumental obbligatos up to and including a full orchestra. Many masses, especially later ones, were never intended to be performed during the celebration of an actual mass.

History [ edit ] Middle Ages [ edit ] The earliest musical settings of the mass are Gregorian chant . The different unchanging portions of the mass, collectively known as the Ordinary , came into the liturgy at different times, with the Kyrie probably being first (perhaps as early as the 7th century) and the Credo being last (it did not become part of the Roman mass until 1014).

[ 1 ] In the early 14th century, composers began writing polyphonic versions of the sections of the Ordinary. The reason for this surge in interest is not known, but it has been suggested that there was a shortage of new music since composers were increasingly attracted to secular music, and overall interest in writing sacred music had entered a period of decline.

[ 2 ] The Ordinary then would have music which was available for performance all the time.

Two manuscripts from the 14th century, the Ivrea Codex and the Apt Codex , are the primary sources for polyphonic settings of the Ordinary. Stylistically, these settings are similar to both motets and secular music of the time, with a three-voice texture dominated by the highest part. Most of this music was written or assembled at the papal court at Avignon .

Several anonymous complete masses from the 14th century survive, including the Tournai Mass ; however, discrepancies in style indicate that the movements of these masses were written by several composers and later compiled by scribes into a single set. The first complete mass we know of whose composer can be identified was the Messe de Nostre Dame (Mass of Our Lady) by Guillaume de Machaut in the 14th century.

Renaissance [ edit ] Further information: Cyclic mass , Paraphrase mass , and Parody mass Part of a series on Renaissance music Overview Composers / Transition to Baroque Movements and schools Burgundian Franco-Flemish English Votive Colorist Florentine Camerata Roman Venetian English Virginalist English Madrigal Major figures Du Fay Binchois Ockeghem Busnois Tinctoris Josquin Tallis Zarlino Palestrina Lasso Byrd Victoria Monteverdi Major forms Anthem Chanson Madrigal Mass Motet ← Medieval music Baroque music → v t e The musical setting of the Ordinary of the mass was the principal large-scale form of the Renaissance. The earliest complete settings date from the 14th century, with the most famous example being the Messe de Nostre Dame of Guillaume de Machaut . Individual movements of the mass, and especially pairs of movements (such as Gloria–Credo pairs, or Sanctus–Agnus pairs), were commonly composed during the 14th and early 15th centuries. Complete masses by a single composer were the norm by the middle of the 15th century, and the form of the mass, with the possibilities for large-scale structure inherent in its multiple movement format, was the main focus of composers within the area of sacred music; it was not to be eclipsed until the motet and related forms became more popular in the first decades of the 16th century.

Most 15th-century masses were based on a cantus firmus , usually from a Gregorian chant, and most commonly put in the tenor voice. The cantus firmus sometimes appeared simultaneously in other voices, using a variety of contrapuntal techniques. Later in the century, composers such as Guillaume Dufay , Johannes Ockeghem , and Jacob Obrecht , used secular tunes for cantus firmi. This practice was accepted with little controversy until prohibited by the Council of Trent in 1562. In particular, the song L'homme armé has a long history with composers; more than 40 separate mass settings exist.

Other techniques for organizing the cyclic mass evolved by the beginning of the 16th century, including the paraphrase technique, in which the cantus firmus was elaborated and ornamented, and the parody technique, in which several voices of a polyphonic source, not just one, were incorporated into the texture of the mass. Paraphrase and parody supplanted cantus firmus as the techniques of choice in the 16th century: Palestrina alone wrote 51 parody masses.

Yet another technique used to organize the multiple movements of a mass was canon . The earliest masses based entirely on canon are Johannes Ockeghem's Missa prolationum , in which each movement is a prolation canon on a freely-composed tune, and the Missa L'homme armé of Guillaume Faugues , which is also entirely canonic but also uses the famous tune L'homme armé throughout.

Pierre de La Rue wrote four separate canonic masses based on plainchant, and one of Josquin des Prez 's mature masses, the Missa Ad fugam , is entirely canonic and free of borrowed material.

[ 3 ] The Missa sine nomine , literally "Mass without a name", refers to a mass written on freely composed material. Sometimes these masses were named for other things, such as Palestrina's famous Missa Papae Marcelli , the Mass of Pope Marcellus, and many times they were canonic masses, as in Josquin's Missa sine nomine .

Many famous and influential masses were composed by Josquin des Prez , the single most influential composer of the middle Renaissance. At the end of the 16th century, prominent representatives of a cappella choral counterpoint included the Englishman William Byrd , the Castilian Tomás Luis de Victoria and the Roman Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina , whose Missa Papae Marcelli is sometimes credited with saving polyphony from the censure of the Council of Trent. By the time of Palestrina, however, most composers outside of Rome were using other forms for their primary creative outlet for expression in the realm of sacred music, principally the motet and the madrigale spirituale ; composers such as the members of the Venetian School preferred the possibilities inherent in the new forms. Other composers, such as Orlande de Lassus , working in Munich and comfortably distant from the conservative influence of the Council of Trent , continued to write parody masses on secular songs. Monteverdi composed masses in stile antico , the Missa in illo tempore was published in 1610, one Messa a 4 da cappella in 1641 as part of Selva morale e spirituale along with single movements of the mass in stile concertato , another Messa a 4 da cappella was published after his death, in 1650.

Antoine Brumel composed a M issa  Et ecce terrae motus with the employment of twelve voices, Stefano Bernardi created masses for double choir for the balconies of the Salzburg Cathedral , such as the 1630 Missa primi toni octo vocum , when he was music director of the new building.

Baroque to Romantic (Catholic and Lutheran traditions) [ edit ] The early Baroque era initiated stylistic changes which led to increasing disparity between masses written entirely in the traditional polyphonic manner (stile antico), whose principal advancements were the use of the basso continuo and the gradual adoption of a wider harmonic vocabulary, and the mass in modern style with solo voices and instrumental obbligatos . The Lutheran Michael Praetorius composed a mass for double choir in the old style, which he published in 1611 in the collection of church music for the mass in Latin, Missodia Sionia . Composers such as Henri Dumont (1610–1684) continued to compose plainsong settings, distinct from and more elaborate than the earlier Gregorian chants.

[ 4 ] A further disparity arose between the festive missa solemnis and the missa brevis , a more compact setting. Composers like Johann Joseph Fux in the 18th century continued to cultivate the stile antico mass, which was suitable for use on weekdays and at times when orchestral masses were not practical or appropriate, and in 19th-century Germany the Cecilian movement kept the tradition alive.

František Brixi , who worked at the Prague Cathedral , wrote his Missa aulica , a missa brevis in C, for four voices, trumpets, violin and continuo, "cantabile" but solo voices just singing short passages within chorale movements. The Italian style cultivated orchestral masses including soloists, chorus and obbligato instruments. It spread to the German-speaking Catholic countries north of the Alps, using instruments for color and creating dialogues between solo voices and chorus that was to become characteristic of the 18th-century Viennese style. The so-called "Neapolitan" or "cantata" mass style also had much influence on 18th-century mass composition, with its short sections set as self-contained solo arias and choruses in a variety of styles.

[ 5 ] The 18th-century Viennese mass combines operatic elements from the cantata mass with a trend in the symphony and concerto to organize choral movements. The large scale masses of the first half of the century still have Glorias and Credos divided into many movements, unlike smaller masses for ordinary churches. Many of Mozart's masses are in missa brevis form, as are some of Haydn's early ones. Later masses, especially of Haydn, are of symphonic structure, with long sections divided into fewer movements, organized like a symphony, with soloists used as an ensemble rather than as individuals. The distinction between concert masses and those intended for liturgical use also came into play as the 19th century progressed.

[ 5 ] After the Renaissance, the mass tended not to be the central genre for any one composer, yet among the most famous works of the Baroque, Classical, and Romantic periods are settings of the Ordinary of the Mass . Many of the famous masses of the Romantic era were Requiems , one of the most famous, A German Requiem by Brahms , being the composer's own selection of biblical texts rather than a setting of a standard liturgy.

20th and 21st century [ edit ] By the end of the 19th century, composers were combining modern elements with the characteristics of Renaissance polyphony and plainchant, which continued to influence 20th-century composers, possibly fueled by the motu proprio Tra le sollecitudini (1903) of Pope Pius X . The revival of choral celebration of Holy Communion in the Anglican Church in the late 19th century marked the beginning several liturgical settings of mass texts in English, particularly for choir and organ.

[ 6 ] The movement for liturgical reform has resulted in revised forms of the mass, making it more functional by using a variety of accessible styles, popular or ethnic, and using new methods such as refrain and response to encourage congregational involvement.

[ 6 ] Nevertheless, the mass in its musical incarnation continues to thrive beyond the walls of the church, as is evident in many of the 21st-century masses listed here which were composed for concert performance rather than in service of the Roman Rite.

[ citation needed ] Musical reforms of Pius X [ edit ] Pope Pius X initiated many regulations reforming the liturgical music of the mass in the early 20th century. He felt that some of the masses composed by the famous post-Renaissance composers were too long and often more appropriate for a theatrical rather than a church setting. He advocated primarily Gregorian plainchant and polyphony. He was primarily influenced by the work of the Abbey of Solesmes . Some of the rules he put forth include the following: [ 7 ] That any mass be composed in an integrated fashion, not by assembling different compositions for different parts.

That all percussive instruments should be forbidden.

That the piano be explicitly forbidden.

That the centuries' old practice of alternatim between choir and organ be concluded immediately.

That women must not be present in the choir.

These regulations carry little if any weight today, especially after the changes of the Second Vatican Council . Quite recently, Pope Benedict XVI has encouraged a return to chant as the primary music of the liturgy, as this is explicitly mentioned in the documents of the Second Vatican Council , specifically Sacrosanctum Concilium 116.

[ 8 ] Major works [ edit ] Post-Renaissance [ edit ] Messa Concertata by Cavalli (1656) Mass for double choir, from Missodia Sionia , by Michael Praetorius (1611) 12 masses by Marc-Antoine Charpentier (including 3 Requiem + H.12, H.311), H.1, H.2, H.3, H.4, H.5, H.6, H.7, H.8, H.9, H.10, H.11, H.513.

Missa Scala Aretina by Francesc Valls (Barcelona, 1702) Mass in B minor and four Missae by Johann Sebastian Bach High Masses by Jan Dismas Zelenka Requiem by Jean Gilles Mass for double choir and double orchestra by Henri Desmarets Requiem by André Campra (1723) Requiem by François-Joseph Gossec (1760) 18 masses by W. A. Mozart, including the Great Mass in C minor (1782) and Requiem (1791) 14 masses by Joseph Haydn, including Nelson Mass and Mass in Time of War Mass in C major and Missa Solemnis in D major by Ludwig van Beethoven Mass in G major and 5 others by Franz Schubert Missa Choralis and Hungarian Coronation Mass by Franz Liszt Requiem by Hector Berlioz (1837) Mass in D minor , Mass in E minor and Mass in F minor by Anton Bruckner Mass in D minor, op. 10 (1866) by John Knowles Paine Petite messe solennelle (1863) by Gioachino Rossini Requiem by Giuseppe Verdi (1874) Cantus Missae , mass for double choir in E-flat major, Op. 109, by Josef Rheinberger (1878) Requiem by Camille Saint-Saëns (1878) St. Cecilia Mass and 13 others by Charles Gounod Messa by Giacomo Puccini (1880) Mass in E♭, Op. 5 (1886) by Amy Beach Requiem by Gabriel Fauré (1887) Mass in D major , Op. 86 (1887) by Antonín Dvořák Requiem in B-flat minor (1890) by Antonín Dvořák Mass in D by Ethel Smyth (1891) 20th century [ edit ] Requiem by Maurice Duruflé Mass in G by Francis Poulenc Messe Solennelle by Jean Langlais Glagolitic Mass (1926) by Leoš Janáček Messe modale en septuor (1938) for soprano, alto, flute and string quartet by Jehan Alain Mass in G minor by Ralph Vaughan Williams Mass, Op. 130 (1945) for choir and brass by Joseph Jongen Requiem by Bruno Maderna (1946) Mass by Igor Stravinsky Mass by Leonard Bernstein [ 9 ] Bộ lễ Seraphim (1960) by Paul Nguyễn Văn Hoà War Requiem (1962) by Benjamin Britten Mass for mixed chorus (1963) by Paul Hindemith Requiem, for soprano and mezzo-soprano solo, mixed chorus and orchestra (1963–65) by György Ligeti Missa Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae (1979) by William Lloyd Webber Mass of Creation (1984) by Marty Haugen Missa supra Parsifal (1985) by Dimitri Aguero [ 10 ] Requiem (1990), Mass of the Children (2004), and Gloria by John Rutter Requiem by Andrew Lloyd Webber Mass in F minor by The Electric Prunes Mass by David Maslanka Mass Of The Sea , Op. 47 by Paul Patterson Berliner Messe and Missa Syllabica by Arvo Pärt Mass by Frank Martin A Symphonic Mass by George Lloyd Missa Laudate Pueri by Bertold Hummel [ 11 ] At Grace Cathedral , jazz mass by Vince Guaraldi Mass To Hope by Dave Brubeck Misa Criolla by Ariel Ramírez Misa by Rodrigo Prats New Plainsong Mass by David Hurd Mass in Honor of St. Cecilia by Lou Harrison African Sanctus by David Fanshawe Polish Requiem by Krzysztof Penderecki Missa Luba by Guido Haazen Misa flamenca (1991) by Paco Peña "Misatango" o "Misa a Buenos Aires" by Martín Palmieri (1996) 21st century [ edit ] Missa Latina : pro Pace by Roberto Sierra Missa Rigensis (2002) by Uģis Prauliņš The Armed Man : A Mass for Peace by Karl Jenkins Missa Concertante (2008) by Marcus Paus Mass of Christ the Savior (2012) by Dan Schutte Street Requiem (for those who have died on the street) for choir and orchestra by Kathleen McGuire , Jonathon Welch and Andy Payne (2014) [ 12 ] Missa Papae Francisci (2015) by Ennio Morricone [ 13 ] Missa Lucis , a jazz mass by Justin Binek Masses written for the Anglican liturgy [ edit ] These are more often known as 'Communion Services', and differ not only in that they are settings of English words, [ 9 ] but also, as mentioned above, in that the Gloria usually forms the last movement. Sometimes the Kyrie movement takes the form of sung responses to the Ten Commandments, 1 to 9 being followed by the words 'Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep this law', and the tenth by 'Lord have mercy upon us and write all these thy laws in our hearts, we beseech thee'. Since the texts of the 'Benedictus qui venit' and the 'Agnus Dei' do not actually feature in the liturgy of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer , these movements are often missing from some of the earlier Anglican settings.

Charles Villiers Stanford composed a Benedictus and Agnus in the key of F major which was published separately to complete his service in C.

With reforms in the Anglican liturgy, the movements are now usually sung in the same order that they are in the Roman Catholic rite. Choral settings of the Creed, the most substantial movement, are nowadays rarely performed in Anglican cathedrals.

[ citation needed ] Well known Anglican settings of the mass, which may be found in the repertoire of many English cathedrals are: Darke in F Darke in E Darke in A minor Ireland in C Stanford in C & F Stanford in B flat Stanford in A Sumsion in F Oldroyd , Mass of the Quiet Hour Jackson in G Howells , Collegium Regale Leighton in D Harwood in A flat Wood in the Phrygian mode See also [ edit ] Classical music portal Alternatim Mass in the Catholic Church Notes [ edit ] ^ Harvard Dictionary of Music, p. 472.

^ Lockwood, "Mass", Grove (1980).

^ Bloxham, p. 196 ^ Benjamin van Wye, Review of Marc-Antoine Charpentier, Messe pour le Port-Royal , in Journal of Seventeenth-Century Music 1999 Archived 2011-07-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Roche, Elizabeth and Alex Lingas. "Mass".

The Oxford Companion to Music . Ed. Alison Latham. Oxford Music Online.

^ a b McKinnon, James W. et al. “Mass”. Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online.

^ "Tra Le Sollecitudini" .

Adoremus Bulletin . 22 November 1903.

Archived from the original on 2020-02-09 . Retrieved 2020-09-06 .

^ "Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy Sacrosanctum Concilium" .

Archived from the original on 2008-02-21 . Retrieved 2020-03-15 .

^ a b "Mass: Music" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . 11 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2018 . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

^ "Concert Chorale Le Bon Tempérament - Piégros-la-Clastre - (26400) - sam. 20 août 16 - Spectable" .

Archived from the original on 2016-08-25 . Retrieved 2016-08-10 .

^ "Bertold Hummel work commentaries" .

Archived from the original on 2005-01-23 . Retrieved 2007-10-01 .

^ "STREET REQUIEM Home page - Music team/Club based in Melbourne, VIC, Australia. | Team App" .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-03 . Retrieved 2021-10-28 .

^ "Missa Papae Francisci (Morricone) - Rai 5" .

Archived from the original on 2015-06-15 . Retrieved 2015-06-13 .

References [ edit ] Gustave Reese , Music in the Renaissance . New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 1954.

ISBN 0-393-09530-4 Harold Gleason and Warren Becker, Music in the Middle Ages and Renaissance (Music Literature Outlines Series I). Bloomington, Indiana. Frangipani Press, 1986.

ISBN 0-89917-034-X Lewis Lockwood, "Mass" The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980.

ISBN 1-56159-174-2 The New Harvard Dictionary of Music , ed. Don Randel. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1986.

ISBN 0-674-61525-5 M. Jennifer Bloxham, "Masses on Polyphonic Songs", in Robert Scherr, ed., The Josquin Companion Oxford University Press, 1999.

ISBN 0-19-816335-5 http://classicalmusic.about.com/od/theordinaryofthemass/f/gloria.htm Dennis Arnold, John Harper,  "Mass 1600-2000" Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Music of the Mass" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Roche, Elizabeth and Alex Lingas. "Mass" The Oxford Companion to Music . Ed. Alison Latham. Oxford Music Online.

Jean-Paul C. Montagnier , The Polyphonic Mass in France, 1600-1780: The Evidence of the Printed Choirbooks . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017.

ISBN 978-1-107-17774-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mass (music) .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Mass ".

Johann Sebastian Bach's Mass in B Minor v t e Mass of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church Forms and uses Pre-Tridentine Mass Tridentine Mass After the Second Vatican Council Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary Form) Zaire Use Anglican Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Types Low Mass Missa Cantata Solemn Mass Pontifical High Mass Papal Mass sine populo Votive Mass Ritual Masses Blue Mass Chapter and Conventual Mass Coronation Mass Nuptial Mass Red Mass Requiem Mass Month's mind Language Liturgical use of Latin Ecclesiastical Latin Vernacular Order of Mass Pre-Mass Vesting prayers Asperges me Vidi aquam in Eastertide Processional hymn Liturgy of the Word Sign of the Cross Psalm 43 Entrance Antiphon Penitential Act Confiteor / Kyrie Gloria Dominus vobiscum Collect Oremus Responsorial Psalm or Gradual Epistle Alleluia Tract / sequence Gospel Homily Credo Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed or Apostles' Creed Universal Prayer Liturgy of the Eucharist Offertory Orate fratres / prayer over the gifts Preface Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna Eucharistic Prayer / Canon of the Mass oblation / epiclesis / Words of Institution / elevation / anamnesis texts and rubrics Canonical digits Roman Canon history Memorial Acclamation Lord's Prayer embolism / doxology Pax Sign of peace Agnus Dei Dona nobis pacem Fraction Holy Communion Communion antiphon Ablutions Postcommunion Dismissal Ite, missa est / Benedicamus Domino Last Gospel Post-Mass Leonine Prayers Recessional hymn Participants Acolyte Altar server female Bishop Boat boy Cantor Choir Crucifer Deacon Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion Laity Eucharistic Congress Lector Porter Priest Subdeacon Usher Altar Altar crucifix Altar rails Ambo Antependium Candles and candlesticks Triple candlestick Paschal candle Sanctuary lamp Chalice veil Communion bench Corporal Credence table Kneeler Lavabo Misericord Pall Piscina Purificator Rood Tabernacle Liturgical objects Altar bell Ashes Aspergillum Bugia Censer Chalice Ciborium Crotalus Collection basket Communion-plate Cruet Evangeliary Fistula Flabellum Funghellino Holy water Incense use Manuterge Paten Processional cross Pyx Sacramental bread wafer Sacramental wine (or must ) Thurible Liturgical books Antiphonary Ceremonial of Bishops Customary Roman Gradual Graduale Simplex Roman Missal Divine Worship: The Missal Sacramentary and Lectionary Roman Pontifical Tonary Vestments Alb Amice Chasuble Dalmatic Episcopal gloves Episcopal sandals Humeral veil Pallium Pontifical Stole Surplice Tunicle Vimpa Liturgical year Calendars Tridentine calendar General Roman Calendar of 1954 General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII General Roman Calendar of 1960 General Roman Calendar (current) Periods Advent Christmastide Ordinary Time Septuagesima Lent Passiontide Holy Week Paschal Triduum Eastertide Ascensiontide Eucharistic discipline Abstemius Concelebration Church etiquette Closed communion Canon 844 Canon 915 Communion and the developmentally disabled Communion under both kinds Eucharistic fast First Communion Frequent Communion Genuflection Head cover Host desecration Infant communion Intinction Reserved sacrament Sacramental bread and wine (or must ) Spiritual communion Thanksgiving after Communion Anima Christi Viaticum Eucharistic theology Body and Blood of Christ Corpus Christi Epiousion Grace ex opere operato In persona Christi Historical roots of Catholic Eucharistic theology Koinonia Liturgical colours Mirae caritatis Mysterium fidei (encyclical) Origin of the Eucharist Last Supper Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature Priesthood of Melchizedek Real presence Transubstantiation Year of the Eucharist Regulations and concepts Accentus Ad orientem and versus populum Calendar of saints Canon law Code of Rubrics Commemoration General Instruction of the Roman Missal Holy day of obligation Intercession of saints Ordinary and Propers Pro multis Sunday Lord's Day Related Agape feast Anaphora of the Apostolic Tradition Ambrosian Rite Catholic theology Christian liturgy Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Christian prayer effects of prayer Dicastery for Divine Worship Council of Trent Ecclesia de Eucharistia Eucharistic adoration and benediction Dominicae Cenae / Holy Hour Eucharistic miracle Fermentum Fourth Council of the Lateran Gelineau psalmody Gregorian chant History of the Roman Canon Lex orandi, lex credendi Liturgical Movement Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII Mediator Dei Missale Romanum (apostolic constitution) Music Pope Paul VI Sacraments of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Sacrosanctum concilium Summorum Pontificum Traditionis custodes Stercoranism Tra le sollecitudini v t e Order of the Divine Service in Lutheranism Preparatory Service Entrance hymn and Trinitarian formula (known as the Invocation) Penitential Act including the Confiteor and Declaration of Grace (or Asperges on Easter) The Service of the Word Introit Gloria Patri Kýrie Gloria Dominus vobiscum Oremus Collect Old Testament reading gradual (or Responsorial Psalm ) Epistle Alleluia ( tract during Lent ) Gospel Hymn of the day Homily or Postil ( Sermon ) Nicene Creed ( Athanasian Creed on Trinity Sunday ) Offertory Prayers of the Faithful The Service of the Eucharist Preface ( Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna ) Eucharistic Prayer ( Epiclesis / Words of Institution / Memorial Acclamation ) Lord's Prayer Sign of peace / pax ( elevation ) Agnus Dei Distribution Nunc dimittis Postcommunion Benedicamus Domino Benediction Dismissal Ite, missa est Participants Acolyte bishop cantor choir crucifer deacon elder laity lector Pastor (or Priest ) usher Parts of the Sanctuary altar altar bell altar crucifix altar rail kneeler piscina processional cross tabernacle Candles altar candle paschal candle sanctuary lamp votive candle Liturgical vessels ciborium chalice cruet Liturgical objects collection basket holy water incense ( use ) paten sacramental bread ( wafer ) sacramental wine thurible Vestments alb chasuble dalmatic geneva gown humeral veil stole surplice tunicle Liturgical books and hymnals Christian Worship (1993) Christian Worship (2021) Common Service Book (1917) Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book (1912) Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996) Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006) Lutheran Book of Worship (1978) The Lutheran Hymnal (1941) Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement (1989) Lutheran Service Book (2006) Lutheran Worship (1982) ReClaim Hymnal (2006) Service Book and Hymnal (1958) v t e Anglican church music Category Commons Audio Service settings Holy Communion Sung Eucharist Kyrie Gloria Credo Sanctus & Benedictus Agnus Dei Mattins Preces and responses Venite Te Deum Benedicite Benedictus Jubilate Evensong Preces and responses Magnificat Nunc dimittis Musical forms Anglican chant Anthem Antiphon Bell ringing Carol Contemporary worship music Gregorian chant Hymnody Introit Motet Nine Lessons and Carols Metrical psalm Organ Voluntary Composers Tudor/Renaissance Richard Ayleward Adrian Batten William Byrd Richard Dering Richard Farrant Orlando Gibbons John Merbecke Robert Parsons John Redford John Sheppard Thomas Tallis John Taverner Thomas Tomkins Christopher Tye Thomas Weelkes William Mundy Restoration / Georgian Thomas Attwood John Blow Jeremiah Clarke Maurice Greene George Frideric Handel Pelham Humfrey Daniel Purcell Henry Purcell Victorian / Edwardian Edgar Bainton Edward Bairstow Lennox Berkeley Hugh Blair William Boyce John Goss T. Tertius Noble Frederick Ouseley Hubert Parry John Stainer Charles Villiers Stanford Ralph Vaughan Williams Thomas Attwood Walmisley Samuel Wesley Samuel Sebastian Wesley Charles Wood Interwar / Postwar Harold Darke George Dyson Gerald Finzi William H. Harris Basil Harwood Herbert Howells John Ireland Francis Jackson William Mathias Herbert Murrill George Oldroyd Bernard Rose Martin Shaw Herbert Sumsion William Walton Modern Malcolm Archer Harry Bramma Benjamin Britten Jonathan Dove Graham Kendrick Kenneth Leighton John Rutter Richard Shephard John Tavener Other noted people Stephen Cleobury William Cowper Percy Dearmer Philip Ledger John Newton David Willcocks Isaac Watts List of musicians at English cathedrals Masters of the Children of the Chapel Royal Publications Contemporary Carols for Choirs The English Hymnal The Hymnal 1982 Hymns Ancient and Modern The New English Hymnal The Oxford Book of Carols The Oxford Book of Tudor Anthems The New Oxford Book of Carols Historic Caius Choirbook Dow Partbooks Drexel 4041 4180–4185 4302 Eton Choirbook Forrest-Heyther partbooks Gyffard partbooks Lambeth Choirbook The Mulliner Book Old Hall Manuscript Pepys Manuscript Music organisations Cathedral schools Central Council of Church Bell Ringers Chapel Royal Guild of Church Musicians Royal School of Church Music Royal College of Organists Performance Choir Choirboy Lay clerk Decani Cantoris Organ scholar Pipe organ Choir (architecture) History History of the Church of England English Reformation Oxford Movement Related topics Anglicanism Christian music Book of Common Prayer Music of the United Kingdom Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐vscr2
Cached time: 20250814215649
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.745 seconds
Real time usage: 0.981 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3099/1000000
Revision size: 25916/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 164977/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5897/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 103782/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.423/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15854465/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  755.591      1 -total
 21.78%  164.580      1 Template:Reflist
 16.60%  125.412      6 Template:Cite_web
 14.22%  107.409      1 Template:Renaissance_music_sidebar
 13.82%  104.408      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.74%  103.855      1 Template:Langx
 10.76%   81.311      1 Template:Short_description
 10.05%   75.941     10 Template:Navbox
  7.14%   53.947      2 Template:Citation_needed
  6.18%   46.713      2 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:184908:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215649 and revision id 1281761576. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mass_(music)&oldid=1281761576 " Categories : Christian liturgical music Catholic liturgical music Renaissance music Masses (music) Medieval music genres Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 March 2025, at 09:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mass (music) 41 languages Add topic

