Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Education 4 Sub-discipline 5 Explosives engineering 6 Military engineering by country Toggle Military engineering by country subsection 6.1 Brazil 6.2 Russia 6.3 United Kingdom 6.4 United States 6.5 Other nations 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Related topics 7.2 Notable military engineers 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Military engineering 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latina Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Building and maintaining structures and systems for armies For soldiers who perform construction and demolition tasks in battle, see Combat engineer . For engineering research and development conducted for the military, see Military technology .

Military engineer training in Ukraine, 2017 Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e Military engineering is loosely defined as the art, science, and practice of designing and building military works and maintaining lines of military transport and military communications . Military engineers are also responsible for logistics behind military tactics. Modern military engineering differs from civil engineering . In the 20th and 21st centuries, military engineering also includes CBRN defense and other engineering disciplines such as mechanical and electrical engineering techniques.

[ 1 ] According to NATO , "military engineering is that engineer activity undertaken, regardless of component or service, to shape the physical operating environment. Military engineering incorporates support to maneuver and to the force as a whole, including military engineering functions such as engineer support to force protection, counter improvised explosive devices, environmental protection, engineer intelligence and military search. Military engineering does not encompass the activities undertaken by those 'engineers' who maintain, repair and operate vehicles, vessels, aircraft, weapon systems and equipment." [ 2 ] Military engineering is an academic subject taught in military academies or schools of military engineering . The construction and demolition tasks related to military engineering are usually performed by military engineers including soldiers trained as sappers or pioneers .

[ 3 ] In modern armies, soldiers trained to perform such tasks while well forward in battle and under fire are often called combat engineers .

In some countries, military engineers may also perform non-military construction tasks in peacetime such as flood control and river navigation works, but such activities do not fall within the scope of military engineering.

Etymology [ edit ] The word engineer was initially used in the context of warfare, dating back to 1325 when engine’er (literally, one who operates an engine) referred to "a constructor of military engines".

[ 4 ] In this context, "engine" referred to a military machine, i. e., a mechanical contraption used in war (for example, a catapult ).

As the design of civilian structures such as bridges and buildings developed as a technical discipline, the term civil engineering [ 5 ] entered the lexicon as a way to distinguish between those specializing in the construction of such non-military projects and those involved in the older discipline. As the prevalence of civil engineering outstripped engineering in a military context and the number of disciplines expanded, the original military meaning of the word "engineering" is now largely obsolete. In its place, the term "military engineering" has come to be used.

History [ edit ] Aerial view of Mulberry harbour "B" (27 October 1944) US Combat Engineer setting a charge (1944) In ancient times, military engineers were responsible for siege warfare and building field fortifications , temporary camps and roads. The most notable engineers of ancient times were the Romans and Chinese , who constructed huge siege-machines (catapults, battering rams and siege towers ). The Romans were responsible for constructing fortified wooden camps and paved roads for their legions . Many of these Roman roads are still in use today.

[ 6 ] The first civilization to have a dedicated force of military engineering specialists were the Romans, whose army contained a dedicated corps of military engineers known as architecti . This group was pre-eminent among its contemporaries. The scale of certain military engineering feats, such as the construction of a double-wall of fortifications 30 miles (48 km) long, in just 6 weeks to completely encircle the besieged city of Alesia in 52 B.C.E.

, is an example. Such military engineering feats would have been completely new, and probably bewildering and demoralizing, to the Gallic defenders.

Vitruvius is the best known of these Roman army engineers, due to his writings surviving.

Examples of battles before the early modern period where military engineers played a decisive role include the Siege of Tyre under Alexander the Great , the Siege of Masada by Lucius Flavius Silva as well as the Battle of the Trench under the suggestion of Salman the Persian to dig a trench.

For about 600 years after the fall of the Roman Empire , the practice of military engineering barely evolved in the west. In fact, much of the classic techniques and practices of Roman military engineering were lost. Through this period, the foot soldier (who was pivotal to much of the Roman military engineering capability) was largely replaced by mounted soldiers. It was not until later in the Middle Ages , that military engineering saw a revival focused on siege warfare.

[ 7 ] Military engineers planned castles and fortresses. When laying siege, they planned and oversaw efforts to penetrate castle defenses. When castles served a military purpose, one of the tasks of the sappers was to weaken the bases of walls to enable them to be breached before means of thwarting these activities were devised. Broadly speaking, sappers were experts at demolishing or otherwise overcoming or bypassing fortification systems.

Working dress of the Royal Military Artificers in Gibraltar, 1795 With the 14th-century development of gunpowder , new siege engines in the form of cannons appeared. Initially military engineers were responsible for maintaining and operating these new weapons just as had been the case with previous siege engines. In England, the challenge of managing the new technology resulted in the creation of the Office of Ordnance around 1370 in order to administer the cannons, armaments and castles of the kingdom. Both military engineers and artillery formed the body of this organization and served together until the office's successor, the Board of Ordnance was disbanded in 1855.

[ 8 ] In comparison to older weapons, the cannon was significantly more effective against traditional medieval fortifications . Military engineering significantly revised the way fortifications were built in order to be better protected from enemy direct and plunging shot. The new fortifications were also intended to increase the ability of defenders to bring fire onto attacking enemies. Fort construction proliferated in 16th-century Europe based on the trace italienne design.

[ 9 ] French sappers during the Battle of Berezina in 1812 By the 18th century, regiments of foot (infantry) in the British, French, Prussian and other armies included pioneer detachments. In peacetime these specialists constituted the regimental tradesmen, constructing and repairing buildings, transport wagons, etc. On active service they moved at the head of marching columns with axes, shovels, and pickaxes, clearing obstacles or building bridges to enable the main body of the regiment to move through difficult terrain. The modern Royal Welch Fusiliers and French Foreign Legion still maintain pioneer sections who march at the front of ceremonial parades, carrying chromium-plated tools intended for show only. Other historic distinctions include long work aprons and the right to wear beards. In West Africa , the Ashanti army was accompanied to war by carpenters who were responsible for constructing shelters and blacksmiths who repaired weapons.

[ 10 ] By the 18th century, sappers were deployed in the Dahomeyan army during assaults against fortifications.

[ 11 ] The Peninsular War (1808–14) revealed deficiencies in the training and knowledge of officers and men of the British Army in the conduct of siege operations and bridging. During this war low-ranking Royal Engineers officers carried out large-scale operations. They had under their command working parties of two or three battalions of infantry, two or three thousand men, who knew nothing in the art of siegeworks. Royal Engineers officers had to demonstrate the simplest tasks to the soldiers, often while under enemy fire. Several officers were lost and could not be replaced, and a better system of training for siege operations was required. On 23 April 1812 an establishment was authorised, by Royal Warrant, to teach "Sapping, Mining, and other Military Fieldworks" to the junior officers of the Corps of Royal Engineers and the Corps of Royal Military Artificers, Sappers and Miners.

The first courses at the Royal Engineers Establishment were done on an all ranks basis with the greatest regard to economy. To reduce staff the NCOs and officers were responsible for instructing and examining the soldiers. If the men could not read or write they were taught to do so, and those who could read and write were taught to draw and interpret simple plans. The Royal Engineers Establishment quickly became the centre of excellence for all fieldworks and bridging. Captain Charles Pasley , the director of the Establishment, was keen to confirm his teaching, and regular exercises were held as demonstrations or as experiments to improve the techniques and teaching of the Establishment. From 1833 bridging skills were demonstrated annually by the building of a pontoon bridge across the Medway which was tested by the infantry of the garrison and the cavalry from Maidstone . These demonstrations had become a popular spectacle for the local people by 1843, when 43,000 came to watch a field day laid on to test a method of assaulting earthworks for a report to the Inspector General of Fortifications. In 1869 the title of the Royal Engineers Establishment was changed to "The School of Military Engineering" (SME) as evidence of its status, not only as the font of engineer doctrine and training for the British Army , but also as the leading scientific military school in Europe.

A Bailey bridge being deployed in the Korean War to replace a bridge destroyed in combat.

The dawn of the internal combustion engine marked the beginning of a significant change in military engineering. With the arrival of the automobile at the end of the 19th century and heavier than air flight at the start of the 20th century, military engineers assumed a major new role in supporting the movement and deployment of these systems in war. Military engineers gained vast knowledge and experience in explosives . They were tasked with planting bombs, landmines and dynamite .

At the end of World War I , the standoff on the Western Front caused the Imperial German Army to gather experienced and particularly skilled soldiers to form "Assault Teams" which would break through the Allied trenches. With enhanced training and special weapons (such as flamethrowers ), these squads achieved some success, but too late to change the outcome of the war. In early WWII, however, the Wehrmacht "Pioniere" battalions proved their efficiency in both attack and defense, somewhat inspiring other armies to develop their own combat engineers battalions. Notably, the attack on Fort Eben-Emael in Belgium was conducted by Luftwaffe glider -deployed combat engineers.

The need to defeat the German defensive positions of the " Atlantic wall " as part of the amphibious landings in Normandy in 1944 led to the development of specialist combat engineer vehicles. These, collectively known as Hobart's Funnies , included a specific vehicle to carry combat engineers, the Churchill AVRE . These and other dedicated assault vehicles were organised into the specialised 79th Armoured Division and deployed during Operation Overlord – 'D-Day'.

Other significant military engineering projects of World War II include Mulberry harbour and Operation Pluto .

Modern military engineering still retains the Roman role of building field fortifications , road paving and breaching terrain obstacles. A notable military engineering task was, for example, breaching the Suez Canal during the Yom Kippur War .

Education [ edit ] Military engineers can come from a variety of engineering programs.  They may be graduates of mechanical , electrical , civil , or industrial engineering .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Sub-discipline [ edit ] Slovak AM 50 laying a bridge over the Torysa river Modern military engineering can be divided into three main tasks or fields: combat engineering, strategic support, and ancillary support. Combat engineering is associated with engineering on the battlefield. Combat engineers are responsible for increasing mobility on the front lines of war such as digging trenches and building temporary facilities in war zones.

[ 14 ] Strategic support is associated with providing service in communication zones such as the construction of airfields and the improvement and upgrade of ports, roads and railways communication. Ancillary support includes provision and distribution of maps as well as the disposal of unexploded warheads. Military engineers construct bases, airfields, roads, bridges, ports, and hospitals. During peacetime before modern warfare, military engineers took the role of civil engineers by participating in the construction of civil-works projects. Nowadays, military engineers are almost entirely engaged in war logistics and preparedness.

[ 1 ] Explosives engineering [ edit ] Explosives are defined as any system that produces rapidly expanding gases in a given volume in a short duration.

[ 15 ] Specific military engineering occupations also extend to the field of explosives and demolitions and their usage on the battlefield. Explosive devices have been used on the battlefield for several centuries, in numerous operations from combat to area clearance. Earliest known development of explosives can be traced back to 10th-century China where the Chinese are credited with engineering the world's first known explosive, black powder .

[ 15 ] Initially developed for recreational purposes, black powder later was utilized for military application in bombs and projectile propulsion in firearms. Engineers in the military who specialize in this field formulate and design many explosive devices to use in varying operating conditions. Such explosive compounds range from black powder to modern plastic explosives.

[ 16 ] This particular is commonly listed under the role of combat engineers who demolitions expertise also includes mine and IED detection and disposal. For more information, see Bomb disposal .

Military engineering by country [ edit ] Military engineers are key in all armed forces of the world, and invariably found either closely integrated into the force structure, or even into the combat units of the national troops.

Brazil [ edit ] Instituto Militar de Engenharia, Rio de Janeiro - RJ Brazilian Army [ 17 ] engineers can be part of the Quadro de Engenheiros Militares, with its members trained or professionalized by the traditional Instituto Militar de Engenharia (IME) (Military Institute of Engineering) , or the Arma de Engenharia, with its members trained by the Academia Militar das Agulhas Negras (AMAN) (Agulhas Negras Military Academy).

In the Brazil's Navy , [ 18 ] engineers can occupy the Corpo de Engenheiros da Marinha, the Quadro Complementar de Oficiais da Armada and the Quadro Complementar de Oficiais Fuzileiros Navais. Officers can come from the Centro de Instrução Almirante Wandenkolk (CIAW) (Admiral Wandenkolk Instruction Center) and the Escola Naval (EN) (Naval School) which, through internal selection of the Navy, finish their graduation at the Universidade de São Paulo (USP) (University of São Paulo) .

The Quadro de Oficias Engenheiros of the Brazilian Air Force [ 19 ] is occupied by engineers professionalized by Centro de Instrução e Adaptação da Aeronáutica (CIAAR) (Air Force Instruction and Adaptation Center) and trained, or specialized, by Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica (ITA) (Aeronautics Institute of Technology).

Russia [ edit ] Russian Empire – Pososhniye lyudi Soviet Union – Engineer Troops (Soviet Union) ; Assault Engineering Brigades Russia – Russian Engineer Troops United Kingdom [ edit ] The Royal School of Military Engineering is the main training establishment for the British Army 's Royal Engineers . The RSME also provides training for the Royal Navy , Royal Air Force , other Arms and Services of the British Army , Other Government Departments, and Foreign and Commonwealth countries as required. These skills provide vital components in the Army's operational capability, and Royal Engineers are currently deployed in Afghanistan , Iraq , Cyprus , Bosnia , Kosovo , Kenya , Brunei , Falklands , Belize , Germany and Northern Ireland .

Royal Engineers also take part in exercises in Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , Italy, Egypt , Jordan , Canada, Poland and the United States.

United States [ edit ] Main article: Military engineering of the United States The prevalence of military engineering in the United States dates back to the American Revolutionary War when engineers would carry out tasks in the U.S. Army. During the war, they would map terrain to and build fortifications to protect troops from opposing forces. The first military engineering organization in the United States was the Army Corps of Engineers. Engineers were responsible for protecting military troops whether using fortifications or designing new technology and weaponry throughout the United States' history of warfare. The Army originally claimed engineers exclusively, but as the U.S. military branches expanded to the sea and sky, the need for military engineering sects in all branches increased. As each branch of the United States military expanded, technology adapted to fit their respective needs.

[ 20 ] United States Army Corps of Engineers Air Force Civil Engineer Support Agency , Rapid Engineer Deployable Heavy Operational Repair Squadron Engineers (RED HORSE), and Prime Base Engineer Emergency Force (Prime BEEF) The United States Navy Construction Battalion Corps (better known as the Seabees) and Civil Engineer Corps United States Marine Corps Combat Engineer Battalions Other nations [ edit ] Department of the Engineer Troops of the Armed Forces of Armenia Royal Australian Engineers and the Royal Australian Air Force Airfield Engineers Corps of Engineers and Military Engineer Services (MES), Bangladesh Army Canadian Military Engineers The Danish military engineering corps is almost entirely organized into one regiment, simply named " Ingeniørregimentet " ("The Engineering Regiment").

Pioniertruppe (Bundeswehr) [ de ] Engineering Arm , including the Paris Fire Brigade Indian Army Corps of Engineers Indonesian Army Corps of Engineers Irish Army Engineer Corps Combat Engineering Corps of the Israel Defense Forces Engineer Regiment (Namibia) Corps of Royal New Zealand Engineers Ingeniørbataljonen ("The Engineer Battalion") Rejimen Askar Jurutera DiRaja ("Royal Engineer Regiment") Pakistan Army Corps of Engineers and the Military Engineering Service 10th Engineer Brigade South African Army Engineer Formation Sri Lanka Engineers and the Engineer Services Regiment The Le Quy Don Technical University is the main training establishment for the Vietnamese Army's Corps of Engineers See also [ edit ] Related topics [ edit ] Bailey bridge Fortification History of warfare Military bridges Military engineering vehicles Military technology and equipment Siege engine Notable military engineers [ edit ] Mozi Gundulf of Rochester Henri Alexis Brialmont John Chard Menno van Coehoorn Pierre Charles L'Enfant Giovanni Fontana Leslie Groves Cyril Gordon Martin Coulson Norman Mitchell John Rosworm Charles Pasley Vauban Marc René, marquis de Montalembert Charles George Gordon Francis Fowke Paul R. Smith Vitruvius Eugénio dos Santos Tadeusz Kościuszko .

Leonardo da Vinci Robert E. Lee Herman Haupt Douglas MacArthur George Washington Fritz Todt References [ edit ] ^ a b "military engineering" . Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. 2013 . Retrieved 13 February 2013 .

^ NATO publication (1 April 2008).

MC 0560 "MILITARY COMMITTEE POLICY FOR MILITARY ENGINEERING" . NATO.

^ Bernard Brodie, Fawn McKay Brodie (1973).

From Crossbow to H-bomb . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 0-253-20161-6 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary ^ Engineers' Council for Professional Development definition on Encyclopædia Britannica (Includes Britannica article on Engineering) ^ Purton, Peter (April 2018).

"The Medieval Military Engineer" . Archived from the original on 26 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 April 2019 .

^ Canadian Forces Publication, A-JS-007-003/JD-001 Customs and Traditions of the Canadian Military Engineers. 30 June 2003 [1] [ permanent dead link ] ^ Museum, Royal Engineers.

"Corps History – Part 2" . Archived from the original on 4 February 2010 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

^ Langins, Janis.

Conserving the Enlightenment: French Military Engineering from Vauban to the Revolution . Cambridge, Massachusetts MIT Press. 2004.

^ Edgerton, Robert B. (2010).

The Fall of the Asante Empire: The Hundred-Year War For Africa's Gold Coast .

Simon & Schuster . p. 61.

ISBN 9781451603736 .

^ Thornton, John Kelly (1999).

Warfare in Atlantic Africa, 1500-1800 .

Psychology Press . p. 85.

ISBN 9781857283921 .

^ "Become a Military Engineer: Step-by-Step Career Guide" .

^ "מאצרות" .

Friday, 10 April 2020 ^ "Combat Engineer (12B)" .

goarmy.com . Retrieved 26 April 2019 .

^ a b "Explosive | chemical product" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 26 April 2019 .

^ Cooper, Paul W. (19 July 2018).

Explosives Engineering . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781119537137 .

^ "Quadro de Engenheiros Militares - Armas, Quadros e Serviços" .

Exército Brasileiro (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 13 May 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ "O que é o Corpo de Engenheiros? | Serviço de Seleção do Pessoal da Marinha" .

marinha.mil.br . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ "CIAAR - Página inicial" .

www2.fab.mil.br . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ Chambers, John (2000).

"Engineering, Military" . Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 14 February 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Headquarters U.S. Army Corps of Engineers NATO Military Engineering Centre of Excellence v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Military engineering at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐8pdv8
Cached time: 20250814222455
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.642 seconds
Real time usage: 0.877 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5334/1000000
Revision size: 28636/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 144853/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6601/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83603/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.357/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15520470/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  661.082      1 -total
 25.11%  166.026      1 Template:Reflist
 15.81%  104.533     11 Template:Cite_web
 12.39%   81.932      1 Template:Lang
 11.94%   78.918      1 Template:War
 11.64%   76.936      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.10%   60.153      1 Template:Short_description
  9.03%   59.684     20 Template:Flagicon
  8.85%   58.521      1 Template:Subject_bar
  5.81%   38.416      1 Template:Engineering_fields Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:100034:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222455 and revision id 1286776859. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Military_engineering&oldid=1286776859 " Categories : Military engineering Combat support occupations Land warfare Engineering disciplines Engineering occupations Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing Norwegian-language text Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 22:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Military engineering 51 languages Add topic

