Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theological voluntarism Toggle Theological voluntarism subsection 1.1 Medieval theological voluntarism 1.2 Theological voluntarism as an approach to natural philosophy 2 Metaphysical voluntarism 3 Epistemological voluntarism 4 Political voluntarism 5 In socialism Toggle In socialism subsection 5.1 Marxism 5.2 Other socialist thought 6 Critical voluntarism 7 See also 8 Notes and references 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Voluntarism (philosophy) 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Doctrine prioritizing will over intellect This article is about the metaphysical philosophy. For other uses, see Voluntarism (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Voluntarism" philosophy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Voluntarism is "any metaphysical or psychological system that assigns to the will ( Latin : voluntas ) a more predominant role than that attributed to the intellect ", [ 1 ] or equivalently "the doctrine that will is the basic factor, both in the universe and in human conduct".

[ 2 ] Voluntarism has appeared at various points throughout the history of philosophy, seeing application in the areas of metaphysics , psychology , political philosophy and theology . The term voluntarism was introduced by Ferdinand Tönnies into the philosophical literature and particularly used by Wilhelm Wundt and Friedrich Paulsen .

In the context of socialist thought, voluntarism is the use of human will and effort to overcome material limitations to advance development in the absence of advanced technology and economic resources.

Theological voluntarism [ edit ] Medieval theological voluntarism [ edit ] Associated with Duns Scotus and William of Ockham [ 3 ] , medieval theological voluntarism (not to be confused with meta-ethical theological voluntarism ) is generally taken to be the philosophical emphasis on the divine will and human freedom over and above the intellect ( voluntas superior intellectu ). For example, Scotus held that morality comes from God's will and choice rather than his intellect or knowledge. Accordingly, God should be defined as an omnipotent being whose actions should not and cannot be ultimately rationalized and explained through reason. As such, voluntarism is usually contrasted with intellectualism , championed by the scholastic Thomas Aquinas .

[ 4 ] Theological voluntarism as an approach to natural philosophy [ edit ] Theological voluntarism also refers to theological commitments—that is, specific interpretations of doctrines of Christianity—arguably held by certain early modern natural philosophers such as Pierre Gassendi , Walter Charleton , Robert Boyle , [ 5 ] Isaac Barrow and Isaac Newton . It resulted in an empirical approach associated with early modern science.  Voluntarism therefore allows that faith or belief in God can be achieved by will as opposed to requiring a prior divine gift of faith to the individual. This notion holds at least in so far as it has found favor among some historians and philosophers (e.g. the historian Francis Oakley and the philosopher Michael B. Foster ).

[ 6 ] A 20th-century theologian of voluntarism was James Luther Adams .

Metaphysical voluntarism [ edit ] A proponent of metaphysical voluntarism is 19th-century German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer .

[ 1 ] In his view, the will is not reasoning, but an irrational, unconscious urge in relation to which the intellect represents a secondary phenomenon. The will is actually the force at the core of all reality. This putting out of the drive–intention–vital dynamics later influenced Friedrich Nietzsche ( will to power ), Philipp Mainländer (will to die), Eduard von Hartmann , Julius Bahnsen and Sigmund Freud ( will to pleasure ).

Epistemological voluntarism [ edit ] In epistemology , epistemological voluntarism [ 7 ] is the view that belief is a matter of the will rather than one of simply registering one's cognitive attitude or degree of psychological certainty with respect to a stated proposition. If one is a voluntarist with respect to beliefs, it is coherent to simultaneously feel very certain about a particular proposition P and assign P a very low subjective probability. This is the basis of Bas van Fraassen 's reflection principle . See also: Doxastic voluntarism .

Political voluntarism [ edit ] Political voluntarism , or voluntaryism , is the view that understands political authority to be will-based. This view which was propounded by theorists like Thomas Hobbes , Jean-Jacques Rousseau and many members of the German idealist tradition understands political authority as emanating from a will.

[ 8 ] In socialism [ edit ] Marxism [ edit ] In Marxist discourse, voluntarism was used to designate a connection between a philosophical commitment to metaphysical voluntarism (especially Machism ) and a political commitment to extreme revolutionary tactics, particularly associated with Alexander Bogdanov .

[ 9 ] The Soviet Union promoted shock work during the First Five-Year Plan period in an effort to increase productivity through human effort in the absence of more developed machinery.

[ 10 ] : 57 The Cuban Revolutionary Offensive sought to encourage voluntary labor in the countryside both to accelerate development of the socialist economy and to encourage the development of the socialist New Man ethos.

[ 11 ] : 37–38 Other socialist thought [ edit ] As part of his view of ujamaa as an African socialism , Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere contended that socialist subjectivity could itself be a force for economic development.

[ 12 ] : 100 Nyerere stated that "the people, and the people alone are the motive force in the making of world history[,]" rather than technological capacity or historical logic.

[ 12 ] : 100 Critical voluntarism [ edit ] Hugo Dingler 's critical voluntarism in the philosophy of science is a form of conventionalism which posits that theorizing in the sciences starts with an unavoidable free decision of the will.

[ 13 ] The successor school of Dingler's critical voluntarism is the  methodical constructivism of the Erlangen School (cf. also the methodical culturalism of the Marburg School ).

See also [ edit ] Conatus Free will Voluntarism (psychology) Notes and references [ edit ] ^ a b Voluntarism (philosophy) – Britannica.com ^ Durant, Will (1926).

The Story of Philosophy . New York City, New York: Touchstone Books- Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 0-671-69500-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Walker, L. (1912).

"Voluntarism" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company . Retrieved September 27, 2019 – via New Advent .

^ "Voluntarism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Harrison, Peter .

The Fall of Man and the Foundations of Science .

Cambridge University Press . p. 220.

There has been considerable discussion in the secondary literature about the impact of Boyle's theological voluntatism on his approach to natural philosophy.

^ Harrison, Peter (2004).

"Was Newton a Voluntarist?" . In Force, James E.; Hutton, Sarah (eds.).

Newton and Newtonianism: New Studies . Springer. pp.

39– 64.

ISBN 1-4020-1969-6 – via Google Books .

^ Boucher, Sandy (July 2018). "Stances and Epistemology: Values, Pragmatics, and Rationality".

Metaphilosophy .

49 (4): 521– 547.

doi : 10.1111/meta.12317 .

S2CID 149788977 .

^ Christopher W. Morris, "The Very Idea of Popular Sovereignty: “We the People” Reconsidered" , Social Philosophy and Policy 17 (1):1 (2000).

^ Paul LeBlanc.

Lenin and the Revolutionary Party .

^ Li, Jie (2023).

Cinematic Guerillas: Propaganda, Projectionists, and Audiences in Socialist China . New York, NY: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 9780231206273 .

^ Cederlöf, Gustav (2023).

The Low-Carbon Contradiction: Energy Transition, Geopolitics, and the Infrastructural State in Cuba . Critical environments: nature, science, and politics. Oakland, California: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-39313-4 .

^ a b Lal, Priya (2013). "Maoism in Tanzania: Material Connections and Shared Imaginiaries". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ Peter Janich , Protophysics of Time: Constructive Foundation and History of Time Measurement , Springer, 2012.

External links [ edit ] Voluntarism entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Doxastic Voluntarism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Voluntarism_(philosophy)&oldid=1301786376 " Categories : Epistemological theories Free will Theology Scotism Occamism Criticism of rationalism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 17:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Voluntarism (philosophy) 36 languages Add topic

