Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 References Toggle References subsection 1.1 General references 1.2 Inline citations 2 External links Toggle the table of contents Platonism in Islamic philosophy 3 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Platonism in Islamic philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Medieval Islamic philosophy was steeped in both Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism from its ninth-century beginnings with al-Kindi ,  but the influence of Neoplatonism becomes more clearly visible in the tenth and eleventh centuries with Al-Farabi and Avicenna . Al-Farabi expanded on Plato's concept of an ideal city ruled by philosopher-kings to develop a political philosophy that could accommodate the religious and cultural diversity central to Islamic nations.

[ 1 ] On the other hand, both al-Ghazali and Ibn Rushd vigorously opposed Neoplatonic views.

[ citation needed ] The characteristic of Neoplatonic thought in Islamic theology is that of emanation , linking God's transcendence with the corporeal reality of his creation.  Islamic Neoplatonism was introduced by Al-Farabi, although  Avicenna proved to have the greater influence. Both authors present a complex scheme of emanation.

[ citation needed ] Islamic Neoplatonism was allowed to flourish in the tenth to early eleventh century, but there was a strong reaction against it in the later eleventh century, especially from Al-Ghazali , who represents Islamic theology's "most biting attack on philosophy" at the time, and the severest reaction to Neoplatonism in particular (Netton 1998).  Al-Ghazali's criticism evoked a counter-reaction by Ibn Rushd , who wrote a "systematic rebuttal of al-Ghazali's critique of Greco-Arab philosophy".

[ 2 ] While Ibn Rushd is trying to defend the possibility of philosophical thought as non-heretical, he does at the same time himself reject  the theses of the Neoplatonist philosophers.

[ 3 ] After the death of Ibn Rushd in 1198, the debate on Neoplatonism in Islam mostly comes to an end, and survival of Neoplatonic thought within Islam was mostly limited to Ismailism .

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] General references [ edit ] Netton, Ian Richard. 'Neoplatonism in Islamic Philosophy'. Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1998.

[1] Inline citations [ edit ] ^ Druart, Thérèse-Anne. "Philosophy in Islam." In The Cambridge Companion to Medieval Philosophy. Ed. A. S. McGrade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. Pp. 103-104 ^ Fakhry, A History of Islamic Philosophy , 1983, p. 276.

^ 'more often than not...does not, in fact, defend al-Farabi and Ibn Sina.... Instead, he shows to what extent they have departed from the authentic Aristotelian philosophical doctrines, and sometimes joins his voice with that of Ghazali in convicting them of heresy' (Bello 1989: 15).

External links [ edit ] Henry Corbin , History of Islamic philosophy part one , part two Neoplatonism entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Abu Nasr al-Farabi at muslimphilosophy.com Avicenna entry by Sajjad H. Rizvi in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Islamic Platonists and Neoplatonists v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Platonism_in_Islamic_philosophy&oldid=1293810686 " Categories : Neoplatonism Early Islamic philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 20:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Platonism in Islamic philosophy 3 languages Add topic

