Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Legacy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Marinus of Tyre 21 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Marinos of Tyre ) Roman cartographer and mathematician (c.70–130) Cover for "Tabulae geographica" (1578), work of Ptolemy. Depicted are both Ptolemy and Marinus of Tyre, very likely in this order.

Marinus of Tyre ( Ancient Greek : Μαρῖνος ὁ Τύριος , Marînos ho Týrios ; c.

AD 70–130) was a geographer , cartographer and mathematician , who founded mathematical geography and provided the underpinnings of Claudius Ptolemy 's influential Geography .

Life [ edit ] Marinus was originally from Tyre in the Roman province of Phoenicia .

[ 1 ] His work was a precursor to that of the great geographer Claudius Ptolemy , who used Marinus' work as a source for his Geography and acknowledges his great obligations to him.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Ptolemy said, "Marinus says of the merchant class generally that they are only intent on their business, and have little interest in exploration, and that often through their love of boasting they magnify distances." [ 4 ] Later, Marinus was also cited by the Arab geographer al-Masʿūdī . Beyond this, little is known of his life.

Legacy [ edit ] Marinus' geographical treatise is lost and known only from Ptolemy's remarks. He introduced improvements to the construction of maps and developed a system of nautical charts . His chief legacy is that he was the first to assign to each place a proper latitude and longitude . His zero meridian ran through the westernmost land known during his time, the Isles of the Blessed , around the location of the present-day Canary or Cape Verde Islands . He used the parallel of Rhodes for measurements of latitude.

Lunar crater Marinus (NASA 1967) Ptolemy mentions several revisions of Marinus' geographical work, which is often dated to AD 114, although this is uncertain. Marinus estimated a length of 180,000 stadia for the equator, roughly corresponding [ 5 ] to a circumference of the Earth of 33,300 kilometres (20,700 mi), about 17% less than the actual value.

Marinus also carefully studied the works of his predecessors and the diaries of travelers. His maps were the first in the Roman Empire to show China. He invented equirectangular projection , which is still used in map creation today. A few of Marinus' opinions are also reported by Ptolemy. Marinus was of the opinion that the World Ocean was separated into an eastern and a western part by the continents of Europe, Asia and Africa. He thought that the inhabited world stretched in latitude from Thule (Norway) to Agisymba (around the Tropic of Capricorn ) and in longitude from the Isles of the Blessed (around the Canaries ) to Sera (China). Marinus also coined the term Antarctic , referring to the opposite of the Arctic .

[1] In 1935, an impact crater on the Moon was named after Marinus.

See also [ edit ] 1st century in Lebanon References [ edit ] ^ George Sarton (1936). "The Unity and Diversity of the Mediterranean World", Osiris 2 , p. 406-463 [430].

^ Chisholm 1911 .

^ Harley, J. B. (John Brian); Woodward, David (1987).

The History of cartography . Humana Press. pp. 178–.

ISBN 978-0-226-31633-8 . Retrieved 4 June 2010 .

^ Ptolemy, "33" .

^ For a value of a 185 m or 607 ft per stadion .

Attribution Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Marinus of Tyre" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

A. Forbiger, Handbuch der alten Geographie , vol. i. (1842); E. H. Bunbury, Hist. of Ancient Geography (1879), ii. p. 519; E. H. Berger, Geschichte der wissenschaftlichen Erdkunde der Griechen (1903).

"Marinus" in Brill's New Pauly (Brill, 2010) External links [ edit ] Jones, Alexander (2008) [1970-80].

"Marinus of Tyre" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

https://web.archive.org/web/20080314171517/http://www.tmth.edu.gr/en/aet/3/66.html http://www.dioi.org/gad.htm Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 National Germany United States Portugal Poland People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marinus_of_Tyre&oldid=1286458676 " Categories : 70s births 130 deaths 1st-century Greek writers 2nd-century Greek writers 1st-century Romans 2nd-century Romans Ancient Greek geographers Ancient Greek cartographers Syrian geographers Ancient Roman geographers People from Tyre, Lebanon 1st-century geographers 2nd-century geographers Thule People from Roman Syria Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 01:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marinus of Tyre 21 languages Add topic

