Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Artworks 3 Renaming and renovation 4 References Toggle the table of contents Smith Campus Center 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Administrative and service building at Harvard University This article is about the Harvard building. For the Pomona College building, see Pomona College § Campus . For The PSU student center, see Smith Memorial Student Union .

Smith Campus Center South elevation, 2010 Former names Holyoke Center General information Architectural style Brutalist Address 1350 Massachusetts Avenue Town or city Cambridge, Massachusetts Country United States Coordinates 42°22′22″N 71°07′07″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37278°N 71.11861°W ﻿ / 42.37278; -71.11861 Construction started 1960 Completed 1966 Owner Harvard University Height 167 feet (51 m) Technical details Floor count 10 Floor area 360,000 sq ft (33,000 m 2 ) Design and construction Architect(s) José Luis Sert Architecture firm Sert, Jackson and Gourley [ 1 ] Harvard University 's Smith Campus Center (formerly Holyoke Center ) is a brutalist administrative and service building located in Harvard Square , Cambridge, Massachusetts . Opposite the Wadsworth Gate to Harvard Yard on Massachusetts Avenue , it functions as a student center , as well as housing Harvard administrative offices, University Health Services , and a restaurant arcade.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Design [ edit ] Primarily designed by José Luis Sert (then dean of the Harvard Graduate School of Design ) and completed in 1966, the Smith Campus Center is an H-shaped ten-story reinforced concrete building. Low-rise portions, including an underground parking garage , have a larger footprint of 360,000 square feet (33,000 m 2 ). The building was constructed in two phases over a six-year period between 1960 and 1966. The first phase—the southern half of the building facing Mount Auburn Street—began in 1960 and was occupied in 1962. Construction of the second phase began in 1964 and was completed in 1966. The landscaped area at the corner of Massachusetts Avenue and Dunster Street—known as Forbes Plaza—was completed the following year in 1967.

[ 3 ] As a permanent tribute, the plaza and arcade inside the Holyoke Center were named in honor of Edward W. Forbes . The occasion was marked by a ceremony on 17 October 1966 [ 4 ] After the first phase of construction in 1963, the Harvard Crimson cited a local joke: "The one nice feature about Holyoke Center is that it's the one place in Cambridge from which you can't see Holyoke Center".

[ 5 ] Within a few years the building's novel design and technical features began to present numerous difficulties, which a Harvard official likened to "a five-car accident at an intersection. You just can't tell what caused it." [ 6 ] These included crumbling of exterior structural concrete and an inefficient three-pipe heating and cooling system.

[ 6 ] It was Harvard's first highrise building, and has been called a " gray elephant " for the color of its concrete facades.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Artworks [ edit ] From 1964 to 1979, the penthouse dining room was decorated with five large paintings installed by Mark Rothko , an Abstract Expressionist artist. Due to high levels of direct sunlight onto the paintings and the presence of lithol red's calcium salt, the paintings faded severely and were moved to protective storage in 1979. Since their removal, the artworks have been publicly displayed only five times, most recently from November 2014 to July 2015, at the newly renovated Harvard Art Museums .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Danh Vō 's We the People was installed in honor of Drew Gilpin Faust as part of the renovation of the building in 2018.

[ 13 ] [ failed verification ] Renaming and renovation [ edit ] Originally known as Holyoke Center, in 2013 it was renamed the Richard A. and Susan F. Smith Campus Center.

[ 14 ] Over the next several years, its underwent extensive renovation to create gathering, lounge, and study spaces, and space for exhibitions, events, and performances, after reopening in 2018.

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Holyoke Center, Harvard University" .

DOCOMOMO US .

^ "Harvard Common Spaces" .

commonspaces.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-05-29 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-04-21 . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Beth Andrea Madelbaum and Marjorie Kitchen FitzSimmons, "Edward Waldo Forbes: City Planner" in Edward Waldo Forbes: Yankee Visionary, Fogg Art Museum, Cambridge, MA 1971, pp88 ^ "Dean Sert's Buildings" .

Harvard Crimson . October 8, 1963.

^ a b Georges, Christopher J. (November 2, 1983).

"Holyoke Center Crumbles" .

Harvard Crimson .

^ Dean, Anrea O. (January 1979). "Evaluation: 'Gray elephant' in Harvard Square: Holyoke Center, most successful of the university's first-generation highrises".

AIA Journal .

68 (1): 48– 51.

^ Cromie, William (November 19, 1988).

"UHS Celebrates A Century" .

Harvard Gazette .

^ Sheets, Hilarie M. (23 October 2014).

"A Return for Rothko's Harvard Murals" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2015-06-11 . Retrieved 2016-07-15 .

^ "Exhibitions, Mark Rothko's Harvard Murals" .

Harvard Art Museums .

Archived from the original on 2016-07-16 . Retrieved 2016-07-15 .

^ Stenger, J., Khandekar, N., Raskar, R., Cuellar, S., Mohan, A. and Gschwind, R., ‘Conservation of a room: a treatment proposal for Mark Rothko’s Harvard Murals,’ Studies in Conservation, 61(6), 2016, 348–361 ^ Stenger, J., Khandekar, N., Wilker, A., Kallsen, K., Kirby, D.P. and Eremin, K., ‘The making of Mark Rothko’s Harvard Murals,’ Studies in Conservation, 61(6), 2016, 331–347.

^ "Scenes from Harvard's new Smith Campus Center" . 25 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ "Holyoke Center to Become New Social Hub" .

Harvard Magazine . November–December 2013.

^ "Scenes from Harvard's new Smith Campus Center" .

Harvard Gazette . 2018-09-25 . Retrieved 2022-03-18 .

v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Smith_Campus_Center&oldid=1226310303 " Categories : Harvard University buildings Harvard Square Brutalist architecture in Massachusetts Buildings and structures completed in 1966 Skyscrapers in Massachusetts Skyscraper office buildings in Massachusetts Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from March 2022 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 29 May 2024, at 20:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Smith Campus Center 1 language Add topic

